Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. No. 3-96]
This book shall be known as "The Revised General Ordinances of the
Borough of South Bound Brook (1993)," and may be cited as "The Code" or
"The Code of the Borough of South Bound Brook."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS.1 [Ord. No. 3-96]
For the purpose of this revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of South Bound Brook in the County
of Somerset and State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the governing body of
the Borough, constituted and elected pursuant to law.
CLERK OR BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the Borough
government established or designated by ordinance or this revision as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Borough
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Borough Council.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
1. N.J.S.A. 40:49-1 "Ordinance" and "resolution" defined. The term "ordinance" when used in
this subtitle means and includes any act or regulation of the governing body of any
municipality required to be reduced to writing and read at more than one meeting thereof
and published. The term "resolution" when used in this subtitle means and includes any
act or regulation of the governing body of any municipality required to be reduced to
writing, but which may be finally passed at the meeting at which it is introduced.
AO:1
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases, the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL —
Shall be construed as if the words "of the Borough of South Bound Brook"
followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Code, so long as it shall have been
adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so
long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — Shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or
of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the Borough.
RESOLUTION — Shall mean and include any act or regulation of the
Borough Council required to be reduced to writing, but which may be finally
passed at the meeting at which it is introduced.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, side-walk and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or lands, either
alone or with others.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 1-3
AO:2
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. No. 3-96]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, or a legal
holiday, that day shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the revision, identified by
an Arabic number and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter and/or Arabic number.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 3-96]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this revision.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-5.1
AO:3
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [N.J.S.A. 40:49-5; New; Ord. No. 2002-06]
Any person who shall violate any provision of the Code or other ordinance
of the Borough, where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section
violated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of
the following: A fine not exceeding $1,250 or imprisonment for a period of
90 days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days at the
direction of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The Borough Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed
at an amount not exceeding $100. The Court before which any person is
convicted of violating any ordinance or Code provision shall have power to
impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community service not
less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or
such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the Court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
If the Borough Council chooses not to impose an additional fine upon a
person for a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance, the Borough
Council may waive the additional fine by ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the Court by which he/she was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County jail or place of detention provided by the Borough for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 1-5.6
AO:4
§ 1-5.6. Application. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-6. MAINTENANCE AND SALE OF CODE.
§ 1-6.1. Amendments to Code. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Borough
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of South
Bound Brook" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6.2. Code Book to Be Kept Up-to-Date. [Ord. No. 3-96]
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk, or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Clerk for the
use of the public. All changes in the Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code, when finally adopted, shall be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to the Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-6.3. Sale of Code Book; Periodic Supplementation. [Ord. No.
3-96]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Borough Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Borough Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-6.4. Altering or Tampering with Code; Penalties for Violation.
[Ord. No. 3-96]
It shall be unlawful to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with this
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Council to
be misrepresented thereby.
Chapter 2
§ 1-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-6.4
AO:5
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-6.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 1-6.4
AO:6
ARTICLE I
The Mayor and Borough Council
§ 2-1. BOROUGH COUNCIL.2
§ 2-1.1. Organization of Borough Council. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The Council shall consist of the Mayor and six Council members elected
at large in the Borough, all of whom shall be elected and take office in
the manner provided by law. The terms of office of the Mayor and Council
members shall commence on January 1 next following their election.
§ 2-1.2. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Borough Council for
any reason other than the expiration of the term of office, the vacancy shall
be filled pursuant to State Statutes.
§ 2-1.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Every person appointed by the Borough Council or by the Governor to
fill a vacancy, either for the unexpired term or temporarily, shall have the
qualifications required by Statute to permit the appointee to qualify for
election to the office, and if the previous incumbent had been elected to
office as the nominee of a political party, the person so appointed shall be of
the same political party.
§ 2-2. MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. Organizational and Regular Meetings of Council;
Compliance with the Sunshine Act. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The Borough Council shall meet for organization within the first seven
days in January following each general election. Thereafter, the Borough
Council shall meet regularly within the Borough at such times and places
as provided by resolution. The Mayor shall, when necessary, call Special
Meetings of the Council. In case of his/her neglect or refusal, any four
members of the Council may call such meetings at such time and place in
the Borough as they may designate and, in all cases of Special Meetings,
notice shall be given to all members of the Council or left at their places
2. South Bound Brook is governed under the Borough form of government outlined in
Chapter 60 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated. The Administrative chapter
has been drafted in conformity with the Borough law and in many instances provisions
have been restated. Other enabling laws relevant to this chapter are N.J.S.A. 2A:9-7 et
seq., Municipal Court; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, Zoning Board of Adjustment; N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23, Planning Board; N.J.S.A. 26:3-1, Board of Health; N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, Police
Department; and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-78, Fire Department. For salary grades and ranges,
wages, compensation and fees of all officers and employees of the Borough, see annual
salary ordinances of the Borough. Such ordinances are not included in these Revised
General Ordinances, but are saved from repeal. See the Adopting Ordinance printed in the
foreword of the Code.
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.1
AO:7
of residence. Notice of all meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, C. 231, P.L. 1975.
§ 2-2.2. Bylaws and Rules of Order of the Council. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The Council meeting shall be conducted in accordance with the Bylaws and
Rules of Council.
§ 2-3. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Council but shall not
vote except to give the deciding vote in case of a tie. Except as otherwise
provided by the statute or specific ordinance, the Mayor shall nominate
and, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint all officers in
the Borough, and the chairman and members of all Standing Committees.
No appointments requiring Council confirmation shall be made except by
a majority vote of the Council members present at the meeting, provided
that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the
Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie. Vacancies in
appointive offices shall be filled by appointment in the same manner for the
unexpired term only. The Mayor shall make such nomination to fill a vacancy
within 30 days after the appointive office becomes vacant. If the Mayor fails
to nominate within 30 days or the Council fails to confirm any nomination
made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of 30 days, the Council shall
appoint the officer.
The Mayor shall see that the laws of the State and the ordinances of the
Borough are faithfully executed, and shall recommend to the Council such
measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
Borough. He shall maintain peace and good order and have the power to
suppress all riots and tumultuous assemblies in the Borough.
The Mayor shall supervise the conduct and acts of all officers in the Borough
and shall execute all contracts made on behalf of the Council.
§ 2-4. PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. [Ord. No. 3-96]
At the organizational meeting the Borough Council, by a majority vote, shall
elect from their number a President of the Council who shall preside at
all of its meetings when the Mayor does not preside. The President of the
Council shall hold office for one year and until the next annual meeting.
He/she shall have the right to debate and vote on all questions before the
Council. If the Council at its annual meetings fails to elect a President, the
Mayor shall appoint the President from the Council and, in that case, no
confirmation by the Council shall be necessary. If the Mayor is absent from
the Borough for a period of three days or for any reason is unable to act,
the President of the Council shall perform all the duties of the Mayor during
his/her absence or inability. The Mayor, in case of his/her intended absence
from the Borough for more than three days at any one time, shall notify the
President in writing of his/her intended absence, whereupon the President
§ 2-2.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-4
AO:8
shall be and become acting Mayor from the receipt of notice and continue
to act until the Mayor's return.
§ 2-5. through § 2-6. (RESERVED)
§ 2-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5
AO:9

ARTICLE II
Municipal Officials and Employees
§ 2-7. TAX COLLECTOR.
§ 2-7.1. Established; Appointment. [Ord. #4-80, § 1]
There shall be a Municipal Tax Collector, appointed by the Borough Council,
who shall hold office for a term of four years from the first day of January
next following his/her appointment.
§ 2-7.2. Reappointment; Removal from Office. [Ord. #4-80, § 1]
The Tax Collector, upon reappointment subsequent to having served as
Tax Collector or performed the duties of collector for not less than four
consecutive years immediately prior to such reappointment, and who meets
the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-144, shall hold his/her position during
good behavior and efficiency and he/she shall not be removed therefrom for
political reasons but only for good cause shown and after a proper hearing
before the Director of the Division of Local Government Services or his/her
designee after due notice.
§ 2-7.3. Vacancy. [Ord. #4-80, § 1]
Vacancies other than due to expiration of term shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term or until the appointment of a successor. In the case
of vacancy occurring when the previous Tax Collector held tenure in office,
the "unexpired term" shall extend to December 30, in the next fourth year
following the appointment which established the tenure.
§ 2-7.4. Duties. [Ord. #4-80, § 1]
The Tax Collector shall perform the functions and duties of the office under
the Laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-8. TAX ASSESSOR.
§ 2-8.1. Established; Appointment. [Ord. #12-79, § 1]
There shall be one Tax Assessor in and for the Borough of South Bound
Brook. Such Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council and
shall hold office for four years as provided by law (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148).
§ 2-9. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER/TREASURER.
§ 2-9.1. Position Established. [Ord. #1-89]
There shall be a Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer of the Borough appointed
by the Borough Council who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The
Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer may, but need not, be a person who is also
employed by the Borough in another capacity.
§ 2-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.2
AO:11
§ 2-9.2. Duties of the Chief Financial Officer/ Treasurer. [Ord.
#1-89]
The Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall carry out the responsibilities set
forth under P.L. 1947 C. 151 (N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.).
§ 2-9.3. Compensation. [Ord. #1-89]
Compensation for the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall be established
by Ordinance.
§ 2-10. PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-10.1. Office Created; Duties. [Ord. #16-97 § 1]
§ 2-10.2. Application Fees for Public Defender. [Ord. #16-97 § 2]
§ 2-11. BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-11.1. Creation of Office. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
There is hereby created the office of Borough Administrator in and for the
Borough of South Bound Brook. If the holder of such office is also the
Municipal Clerk of the Borough, he shall be known as the Borough Clerk-
Administrator, but the offices of Borough Clerk and Borough Administrator
shall remain distinct and separate.
§ 2-11.2. Appointment; Vacancy. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-137, to serve for the calendar year in which he is appointed
a. Office Created. There is hereby created the office of Public Defender for
the South Bound Brook Municipal Court which office shall be filled by
appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council for a yearly term commencing on January 1 and ending
December 31. The appointee shall continue in office until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified. Any appointment to fill a vacancy
shall be for the unexpired term only.
b. Duties. The Duty of the Public Defender shall be to represent any
indigent defendants which the Municipal Court may determine as
qualified for such services.
a. Any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender shall pay an application fee of $200.
b. The Municipal Court may waive the application fee in whole or in part if
the Court determines, in its discretion, that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden upon the person seeking
representation.
§ 2-9.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-11.2
AO:12
and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy shall be
filled in the manner of the original appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 2-11.3. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
It shall be the duty of the Borough Administrator, under the supervision and
control of the Mayor and Borough Council and to the extent not prohibited
by law:
§ 2-11.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
The Borough Administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be
prescribed by the Salary Ordinance of the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 2-12. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-12.1. Established. [Ord. No. 2006-02]
There shall be a Superintendent of the Public Works appointed by the
Borough Council, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough Council.
a. To act as liaison between the Borough Council and all boards and
departments of the Borough government.
b. To act as agent for the Mayor and Borough Council as the
administrative officer of the Borough government.
c. To be responsible for the maintenance of sound personnel policies and
administrative practices and to study and make recommendations in
respect to the personnel organization and policies of the Borough and
any of its departments after consultation with department heads.
d. To aid in the preparation of the budget; alert department heads to the
submission of their portion thereof; and to assist individual Council
members in contributing their share of the responsibility for the
municipal budget.
e. To advise the Mayor and Borough Council on all background material as
an aid to the establishment of policy.
f. To study and oversee the financial procedure and policy of the Borough
and its departments after consultation with department heads.
g. To edit and compile public information releases upon instruction from
the Mayor and/or Borough Council and to advise the Mayor and
Borough Council on matters affecting public relations.
h. To attend all public and executive meetings of the Borough Council.
i. To perform such other duties as may be from time to time specifically
assigned to him by the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 2-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-12.2
AO:13
§ 2-12.2. Duties of the Superintendent of Public Works. [Ord. No.
2006-02]
The Superintendent of the South Bound Brook Public Works duties shall
include supervising the care and maintenance of streets, roads, avenues,
public buildings, public places, sewers, parks and motor vehicles of the
Borough.
§ 2-12.3. Tenure of Office. [Ord. No. 2006-02]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.5 and 40A:9-154.6, the position of
Superintendent of Public Works, also known as "Principal Public Works
Manager," is hereby granted tenure. Pursuant to the definition of
"Municipal Superintendent of Public Works" provided in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-154.5, a person holding office, position or employment as the fulltime
Municipal Superintendent of Public Works who has held the office,
position or employment continuously for five years or more, shall continue
to hold the office, position or employment, notwithstanding he is serving for
a fixed term, during good behavior and efficiency and shall not be removed
therefrom for political or other reasons except for good cause, upon written
charges filed with the Municipal Clerk and after a public, fair and impartial
hearing.
§ 2-13. through § 2-21. (RESERVED)
§ 2-12.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-13
AO:14
ARTICLE III
Departments Established
§ 2-22. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-22.1. Creation of Department, Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 7/
13/82, Art. I, §§ 1—2]
a. Statutory Authorization. A Police Department as heretofore established
is hereby continued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, which states: "The
governing body of any municipality, by ordinance, may create and
establish a police department and force and provide for the
maintenance, regulation and control thereof, and except as otherwise
provided by law, appoint such members, officers and personnel as shall
be deemed necessary, determine their terms of office, fix their
compensation and prescribe their powers, functions and duties and
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
department and force and for the discipline of its members."
b. General Duties. The Police Department shall:
1. Preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders against the penal laws and ordinances effective within
the Borough, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections, disperse
unlawful or dangerous assemblages and preserve order at all
elections and public meetings and assemblages.
2. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the use of streets by vehicles and persons, and make
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the Charter, ordinance
and general law, for such purpose.
3. Remove all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other public
places; inspect and observe all places of public amusement or
assemblage and all places of business requiring any state or
municipal license or permit.
4. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
5. Enforce the laws and ordinances in effect within the Borough and
prevent the violation of them by any person; apprehend and arrest
all persons legally charged with the violation of any law or
ordinance.
6. Provide for the attendance of its police officers or civilian
employees in court as necessary for the prosecution and trial of
persons charged with crimes and other violations of the law, and
cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting
authorities of Federal, State and County governments.
§ 2-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.1
AO:15
§ 2-22.2. Powers of the Police Committee. [Ord. 7/13/82, Art. II, § 1;
amended 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-006]
Members of the Borough Council are to be appointed to the Police
Committee, which will serve as a liaison to the Borough Council.
§ 2-22.3. Chief of Police; Powers and Duties. [Ord. 7/13/82, Art. III,
§ 1; amended 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-006]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 or as subsequently revised or
amended, the Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and
direct the administration and operation of the Police Department. The Chief
of Police shall be directly responsible to the Borough Administrator for its
efficiency and day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the
Borough Administrator, the Chief of Police shall:
7. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
c. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A: 14-118, the Borough Administrator is hereby
designated as the "appropriate authority." The Borough Administrator
shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Police
Department and provide for its maintenance, regulation and control.
The Borough Administrator shall adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department and for the
discipline of its members. The Department Rules and Regulations are
contained in a manual known as the "Police Department Rules and
Regulations," and the rules and regulations are hereby adopted as
contained in the manual as though same were fully set forth herein. A
certified copy of the manual shall be kept in the office of the Borough
Clerk. The Department Rules and Regulations may be amended and
supplemented by resolution duly adopted by the Mayor and Council.
[Added 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-006]
a. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the disposition and
discipline of the Department and its members and officers;
b. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department;
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
d. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and control; and
e. Report at least monthly to the Borough Administrator in such form and
at such times as shall be prescribed by the Borough Administrator
regarding the operation of the Police Department during the preceding
month and make such other reports as may be requested by the
Borough Administrator or Manager.
§ 2-22.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-22.4
AO:16
§ 2-22.4. Order of Rank. [Ord. 7/13/82, Art. IV, § 1]
§ 2-22.5. Appointments and Promotions. [Ord. 6/7/82, § 1-7; Ord. 7/
13/82, Art. V, § 1; Ord. #6-89; Ord. #1-90, § 1; Ord. No. 3-96]
a. Rank Established. Rank in the South Bound Brook Police Department as
established by Municipal Ordinance shall descend in the following
order:
1. Chief of Police.
2. Lieutenant.
3. Sergeant.
4. Patrolman.
b. Rank and Seniority. When officers are of the same grade, they shall rank
according to their seniority determined by time in rank. When two or
more officers are appointed to the same grade on the same day, each
shall rank according to his/her respective position on the eligibility list
which determines the order of his/her appointment to that grade.
a. Appointments. All appointments to the Police Department shall be made
only after written examination, psychological or psychiatric
examination and physical examination by a medical doctor. A physical is
required by the State of New Jersey by N.J.A.C. 13:1-8 (a) 3, to obtain
medical clearance for participation in a basic course for police officers.
The requirements of the physical are mandated to the physician. The
Borough shall require a drug screen be given by the examining
physician. The provisions of this subsection can be waived by the Mayor
and Council when the appointee is a New Jersey certified Police Officer
who meets the requirements of the State of New Jersey and Police
Training Commission, provided that the appointee shows proof of
accreditation and passes a physical and psychiatric examination. The
Borough shall require a drug screen be given within 30 days of
appointment. Those candidates who successfully complete all
examinations and fulfill all other requirements shall be placed on a list
of eligible applicants to be compiled by the Chief of Police. Any
candidates not immediately appointed as probationary patrolmen shall
be kept on the eligibility list for a period of two years from the date of
the examination. Should a vacancy occur in the Department within such
two year period, the vacancy shall be filled from the eligibility list then
in effect. Appointment of a patrolman to the Police Department is for a
probationary period of one year. During or at the termination of the
probationary period, if the conduct or capacity of the probationer as to
job performance has not been satisfactory, he/she shall be notified in
writing by the Chief of Police that his/her services are terminated by the
Mayor and Council without any trial/hearing.
b. Promotions; Chief of Police. Appointment to the office of Chief of Police
shall be made and chosen from a list of eligible candidates who shall be
§ 2-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.5
AO:17
interviewed by a committee consisting of the three member Police
Committee and Chief of Police. The Committee shall then recommend
to the Mayor and Council, in order of preference, the names of the
candidates for the position of Chief of Police. The committee
recommendations shall be based on the general qualifications, service
record, seniority, appearance and speaking ability, interest in law
enforcement, and evidence of supervisory and administrative ability.
The Mayor and Council shall appoint the Chief of Police after due
review and consideration. This appointment shall be by a majority vote
of the Mayor and Council. There shall be no probationary period for
Chief of Police.
c. Promotions; Sergeant and Lieutenant. Any vacancy in the positions of
Sergeant or Lieutenant shall be filled by recommendation of the Chief
of Police, based upon general qualifications and service record. The
promotions shall be made with the advice and consent of the Mayor and
Council and by majority vote. There shall be no probationary period for
the rank of Lieutenant. Promotion of a patrolman to Sergeant is for a
probationary period of three months. When job performance is not
satisfactory, that promotion shall be deleted and he/she will be reduced
in rank back to patrolman. (N.J.S.A. 11:22.6)
d. Designation of Detective. The provisions of Subsection c shall not apply
as a condition precedent to the designation of any Department member
to serve in the capacity of Detective. This appointment is made under
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 by Chief of Police and Police Commissioner
approval.
e. Eligibility for Rank Higher than Sergeant. Only members of the
Department holding the rank of Sergeant or a higher rank shall be
eligible for promotion to a rank within the Department above that of
Sergeant; provided, however, that any patrolman having at least 10
years of service with the South Bound Brook Police Department shall be
eligible for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant.
f. Promotion of Sergeant to Higher Rank. Each Sergeant shall be eligible
for any higher rank within the Department after he/she shall have
completed a three month probationary period of service as a
Probationary Sergeant; provided, however, no such Sergeant shall be
eligible for promotion to any higher rank within the Department until
he/she shall have served in that capacity for at least one full year
following the completion of his/her probationary period of service.
g. Eligibility for Rank of Sergeant. Each member of the Department shall
become eligible for rank of Sergeant within the Department after he/
she shall have served in the capacity of Police Officer, Detective or some
other rank below the rank of Sergeant for a combined period of at least
two years exclusive of his/her initial probationary period; provided,
however, he/she shall not become eligible for promotion until after he/
she shall have served in such capacity for a combined period of at least
three years exclusive of his/her initial probationary period.
§ 2-22.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-22.6
AO:18
§ 2-22.6. Special Police Officers. [Ord. 7/13/82, Art. VI, § 1; Ord.
#1-90, § 1]
Special Police Officers may be appointed by majority vote of the Borough
Council, for a term not exceeding one year. Such appointment may be
revoked at any time without cause or hearing. All Special Police Officers
appointed shall be classified as Class One or Class Two Officers. Class One
appointments shall perform routine traffic details, spectator control and
other similar duties. The use of firearms by an Officer of Class One shall
be strictly prohibited. Appointment of any Special Officer shall be governed
by the laws of the State of New Jersey in procedures outlined by the N.J.
Department of Criminal Justice and Police Training Commission. Special
Police Officers shall be under the direct control of the Chief of Police.
§ 2-22A. EMPLOYMENT OF OFF-DUTY POLICE OFFICERS.
§ 2-22A.1. Requirements. [Ord. #15-97]
Prior to any Borough Police Officer being employed by another
governmental unit, commercial enterprise and other third parties for traffic
control, security or other police related functions, the following procedures
apply:
§ 2-22A.2. Rate of Compensation for Officers Assigned Outside
Employment. [Ord. #15-97]
Any officer assigned to outside employment will be compensated at a rate
of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the normal hourly rate. The Borough shall
be paid directly from the individual, corporation or entity requesting the
services and from such funds will compensate the officers for the time
expended. The Borough shall also be entitled to collect an administrative
fee of 10% of any total bill for the processing of these payments.
§ 2-22A.3. Billing. [Ord. #15-97]
The officer employed off-duty shall record said employment time on a
designated form established by the Chief of Police or his designated officer
a. All requests for such employment of off-duty police officers shall be
directed to and handled by the Chief of Police or his designated officer;
b. The Chief of Police or his designated officer shall satisfy himself that the
request is appropriate and reasonable;
c. The Chief of Police or his designated officer must approve all requests
for employment of off-duty municipal police officers covered under this
policy;
d. The Chief of Police or his designated officer shall approve each
individual officer's request to be assigned for off-duty employment and
satisfy himself that the assignment would not jeopardize the proper and
efficient operations of the department.
§ 2-22.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22A.3
AO:19
immediately upon completion of the detail and will have the Shift
Supervisor verify his attendance.
The Borough Clerk shall invoice the requesting agency or entity for the
services rendered within 10 days. Invoices shall indicate payment is due
upon presentation. Interest at the rate of one and one-half (1.5%) percent
per month will be charged on all balances unpaid within 15 days of the
invoice date.
§ 2-22A.4. Agreement. [Ord. #15-97]
The requesting agency or entity shall receive a copy of this section and shall
execute an agreement3 with the Borough of South Bound Brook prior to the
assignment of any off-duty officer to the agency or entity.
§ 2-22A.5. General Policy. [Ord. #15-97]
Any police officer employed off-duty shall be bound to follow all rules,
regulations, procedures, orders, directives or their equivalent of the Police
Department. This includes but is not limited to, the use of deadly force,
pursuits, reporting of injuries, reporting of property damages, property
conduct, etc.
It is the intention of this policy to set forth the requirements for all parties
involved in the hiring of off-duty municipal police officers. The Borough of
South Bound Brook views such work as a necessary and logical extension of
the law enforcement officer's job and is, therefore, deemed in the public's
best interest. At all times, the officer shall be subject to the same rules of
conduct and performance as if performing his regular duty assignment. (It
is the intention of this policy to clearly establish that insurance coverage
shall apply in all employment covered under this policy; however, the
Borough makes no representation that insurance coverage will apply, since
this matter must be determined by the particular factual situation involved.)
This policy is not applicable to outside employment in a field unrelated
to police work, such as landscaping, carpentry, electrical, radio repair,
umpiring, consulting, etc., where the employee's law enforcement skills will
not be required.
It is the intention of the Borough to provide insurance coverage, including
worker's compensation coverage, to officers accepting off-duty employment
under this policy to the full extent permissible under the relevant statutes
and ordinances consistent with the applicable policies of insurance which
are in force. The Borough reserves the right to seek indemnification from
any third party tort feasor or reimbursement from the officer for any sums
he or she receives from a third party tort feasor in accordance with
applicable law.
3. Editor's Note: The Police Services Agreement can be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 2-22A.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-22A.5
AO:20
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as affecting or changing the
provisions of any mutual aid agreements between the Borough and any
other municipality.
§ 2-23. FIRE DEPARTMENT.4
§ 2-23.1. Qualifications for Membership. [Ord. #10-99]
No person shall hereafter become a member of the Fire Department of
the Borough of South Bound Brook, or any unit thereof, who is under the
age of 18 as per the New Jersey State Fireman's Association guidelines
for age, who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of South
Bound Brook or bordering boroughs or townships, and not in good physical
condition to perform the duties of a fireman in accordance with a medical
certificate to that effect, made and signed by a licensed practicing physician
in the state of New Jersey.
§ 2-23.2. Minimum Required Duty. [Ord. #10-99]
Every member of the Fire Department shall perform at least 60% of all
duties which include cleanups, drills, and actual attendance at fire calls.
Each member must also successfully complete any and all mandated
training as required by the South Bound Brook Fire Department.
§ 2-23.3. Application; Approval.
a. Every person seeking to join the Fire Department shall make
application to the Company. All applications must be notarized and
include a satisfactory medical certificate made and signed by a licensed
practicing physician of the State of New Jersey. The investigation
committee shall review all applications to the company. Applications
approved by the committee shall then be submitted to the Fire Chief
and The Mayor and Council. A fee will apply to cover costs of
investigation and background checks.
b. All New and Transferred Applicants. Upon acceptance to the Fire
Department, the applicant shall be placed on probation for a period of
no less than six months or a time deemed appropriate by the Board of
Engineers. A probationary fireman's performance will be reviewed
every six months at which time the Board of Engineers shall
recommend to the Fire Company whether the applicant has satisfied all
probationary requirements in accordance with Subsection 2-23.2. If a
probationary fireman fails to satisfy all probationary requirements
within 24 months from the date of approval by the Fire Chief and Mayor
and Council, his probationary status may be extended by the Board of
Engineers, or terminated, at which time he shall no longer be a member
of the Fire Department.
4. Editor's Note: Section 2-23 was amended in entirety by Ordinance No. 10-99. Prior
ordinances codified herein included Ordinance Nos. 12/6/50, 10/13/64, 4/10/73 and 4-88.
§ 2-22A.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-23.4
AO:21
§ 2-23.4. Exemption Certificate. [Ord. #10-99]
Upon completion of the time required by law to become exempt, such
member shall apply to the Secretary of the Fire Department requesting
that certification thereof be made to the Borough Clerk, in writing, after a
qualifying certificate has been submitted to the New Jersey State Fireman's
Association. The certification shall then be submitted to the Borough Clerk,
Mayor, and the Fire Chief for their approval.
§ 2-23.5. Composition. [Ord. #10-99]
The Fire Department shall consist of a Chief, a First and Second Assistant
Chief, Captain, a First and Second Lieutenant, a Chief Engineer, a First and
Second Assistant Engineer, the present members of the Fire Department,
and such other members as may hereafter be elected. There shall be a
Board of Engineers within the department composed of the Chief, the
Assistant Chiefs, the Captain, the Lieutenants, the Chief Engineer, and the
Assistant Engineers.
§ 2-23.6. Election; Terms. [Ord. #10-99]
The Chief, the First and Second Assistant Chiefs, the Captain, the First and
Second Lieutenants, the Chief Engineer, and the First and Second Assistant
Engineers shall be elected by a majority vote of all active firemen, and shall
hold office for one year or until a successor has been elected. No person
shall be eligible to election of Chief unless he has served one or more years
as First Assistant Chief. No person shall be eligible for election to First
Assistant Chief unless he has served one or more years as Second Assistant
Chief. No person shall be eligible for election to Second Assistant Chief
unless he has served one year as Captain. No person shall be eligible for
election to Captain unless he has been an active fireman for at least three
years.
§ 2-23.7. Annual Meeting. [Ord. #10-99]
The annual meeting of all firemen shall be held on the first Friday of
December, at 8:00 p.m. at the firehouse on Edgewood Terrace. It shall be
the duty of the Chief to notify the Secretary to send a five day notice to
all firemen of the meeting. At the time specified, a majority vote of all
active firemen voting shall elect a Chief, a First and Second Assistant Chief,
a Captain, a First and Second Lieutenant, a Chief Engineer, and a First
and Second Assistant Engineer. The Secretary shall notify the Mayor and
Council of the results of the election before the organization meeting in
January.
§ 2-23.8. Authority and Duties of the Chief. [Ord. #10-99]
a. The Chief in all cases of fire shall have sole control over all members of
the Fire Department and all apparatus belonging thereto. Any member
who shall refuse any lawful order of the Chief shall be expelled. In the
§ 2-23.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-23.8
AO:22
§ 2-23.9. Chief and his Assistants to take Charge at Fires. [Ord.
#10-99]
The Chief and his Assistants shall attend all fires in the Borough and
are hereby empowered to take charge of any building or buildings which
may be on fire, to admit only such persons to the building as they may
think necessary to the extinguishment of the fire and the preservation of
endangered property.
§ 2-23.10. Violations of Fire Ordinances. [Ord. #10-99]
It shall be the duty of the Chief and his Assistants to report to the Fire
Committee any and all violations of Fire Ordinances, giving the name of the
officer in charge and the names of any others involved.
§ 2-23.11. Board of Engineers to Hold Monthly Meetings. [Ord.
#10-99]
The Board of Engineers shall hold monthly meetings for the purpose of
conducting discussions and making recommendations for the betterment of
the Fire Department.
§ 2-23.12. Inventory Conducted by the Captain. [Ord. #10-99]
It shall be the duty of the Captain on November 15 of each year to deliver
to the Chief a correct inventory of apparatus equipment and fixtures related
to maintenance of the Fire Department. The failure of the Captain to make
such inventory, or any errors herein, shall be reported by the Fire Chief to
Chief's absence, the next ranking officer of the Board of Engineers shall
act as Chief and shall have the power and authority of the Chief.
b. It shall be the duty of the Chief to examine monthly the fire apparatus,
the buildings used for housing same, and the fire hydrants, and to
report the condition thereof to the Borough Fire Committee.
c. He shall also report each month the number of fires the Department
responded to together with the cause of the fires if known, and such
other information as he may deem proper.
d. He shall recommend to the Fire Committee, with the approval of the
Board of Engineers, any repairs to be made to the apparatus.
e. He shall in all cases of fire, take prompt and efficient measures to
extinguish the fire, and have sole and absolute control over all fire
apparatus and all members of the Fire Department, and over all
apparatus and persons aiding and assisting the Department.
f. At least once a year the Chief shall order a public inspection of the
whole Fire Department, at which every member of the Department shall
be present, and a willful disregard of this requirement shall render the
offender or offenders liable to be suspended from the Department.
§ 2-23.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-23.12
AO:23
the Fire Committee, and it shall be the duty of the Chief to submit such
report before the first regular meeting in January of each year.
§ 2-23.13. Duty of the Captain. [Ord. #10-99]
It shall be the duty of the Captain, in January of each year, to furnish the
Mayor and Council with the names of all active firefighters.
§ 2-23.14. Grievances; Hearings. [Ord. #10-99]
§ 2-23.15. Expelled Persons Prohibited from Re-Election. [Ord.
#10-99]
No person expelled from the Fire Department shall be eligible for reelection
as a member of the Fire Department.
§ 2-23.16. Fire Department Equipment. [Ord. #10-99]
a. Filing a Grievance. If any officer or member of the Fire Department
shall feel aggrieved or dissatisfied with any ruling, order, or penalty,
given or imposed on them, they shall give notice in writing within 18
hours, setting forth the grounds for their grievance, whereupon and
upon the filing of such notice in detail with the Chief of the Fire
Department they shall convene the Board of Engineers to hear and
determine the grievance.
b. Hearing. Two weeks notice of the hearing shall be given by the Chief, by
registered mail, to all parties in interest, and sent to the last known
place of residence of the parties, setting forth the time and place of
hearing.
c. Representation at Hearing. Any member claiming to be aggrieved shall
be entitled to be represented by counsel, and the Board of Engineers
may select some person to present the case.
d. Majority Vote Shall be Final. The decision of all matters in controversy
before such Board of Engineers shall be a majority vote of the members
and shall be final.
a. Use of Fire Apparatus. The Fire Apparatus shall at no time be driven
faster than the posted speed limit nor shall the officer in charge allow
anyone to ride upon any apparatus, or to assist when going to a fire or
on duty, unless such persons are members of the Department. Only
members of the Fire Department and members deputized at the fire
scene by the commanding officer shall participate in any aspect of fire
fighting.
b. Interfering with or Obstructing Fire Apparatus. Any owner or operator
of any vehicle passing, or attempting to pass, challenging to race,
obstructing or in any way attempting to interfere with the progress of
any fire apparatus on its way to or from a fire, shall, if found guilty of
§ 2-23.12 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-23.16
AO:24
§ 2-23.17. Apparatus Must Respond to All Alarms. [Ord. #10-99]
All apparatus must respond to all alarms. If the Engineers are not present
within a reasonable amount of time to drive any vehicle, the highest ranking
officer then present may appoint a competent person, who has a valid
driver's license, to drive any apparatus to the scene, but must rescind their
appointment immediately after an Engineer arrives. The Captain shall notify
the Chief Officer at the first opportunity if an Engineer is not operating any
apparatus.
§ 2-23.18. Destruction of Equipment or Apparatus. [Ord. #10-99]
Any person who shall at any time drive or cause to be driven any motor
vehicle or other object likely to cause the destruction of hose or of any fire
apparatus shall, if found guilty of violating the provisions of this subsection,
be liable to the penalties prescribed in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 2-23.19. Members of the Fire Department. [Ord. #10-99]
violating the provisions of this section, be liable to the penalties
prescribed in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
c. Fire Apparatus Shall Remain within the Borough Limits; Exception. The
Fire Department, without the permission of the Fire Committee, shall
not take any fire apparatus in their charge beyond the corporate limits
of the Borough for any purpose whatsoever, except to attend a fire, in
which case permission may be granted by the Chief, or next ranking
officer.
d. Mayor and Council May Take Possession. The Mayor and Council may,
at any time after consulting the Board of Engineers of the Fire
Department, demand and take into their possession all such fire
apparatus and equipment purchased by the Borough.
a. Number of Members. The Fire Department shall consist of as many
active members as the Board of Engineers may recommend to the
Mayor and Council.
b. Active Member Quota. The Fire Department shall have members within
a quota as provided by the New Jersey State Fireman's Association
eligible to the benefits of the general relief fund.
c. Physical Exam for Applicants. The Borough shall pay for physical
examinations for applicants. This exam shall include a respiratory
exam, medical exam, and EKG.
d. Workman's Compensation. All members of the Fire Department shall be
covered by appropriate Workman's Compensation and Liability
Insurance at the expense of the Borough, according to the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 2-23.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-23.20
AO:25
§ 2-23.20. Suspension and/or Expulsion. [Ord. #10-99]
If any member engages in any conduct unbecoming a fireman or in violation
of the rules and regulations of the Fire Department he shall be subject to
suspension, expulsion or any other penalty deemed appropriate, under the
Department guidelines, by the Board of Engineers. The Mayor and Council
shall be notified in writing of any suspension or expulsion.
§ 2-23.21. Driver/Operator Qualifications. [Ord. #10-99]
To be a qualified apparatus driver, a member must complete their
probationary period and possess a valid Driver's License. They must also
complete a driver/operator course and be approved by the Chief Engineer
and Chief. The Chief Engineer shall notify the Board of Engineers of the
approval of any qualified driver/operator. Any person qualified to drive the
apparatus shall submit to a hearing and eye exam as per the medical policy
adopted by the Borough of South Bound Brook and the Fire Department.
§ 2-23.22. Fire Police, Safety Officer. [Ord. #10-99]
§ 2-23.23. Purchasing Committee. [Ord. #10-99]
The Purchasing Committee shall consist of the Fire Chief, the Captain,
and the Chief Engineer. The Captain shall purchase all equipment with
the consent of the Purchasing Committee after the Fire Committee has
authorized it.
§ 2-23.24. Chief Engineer. [Ord. #10-99]
a. Chief to Appoint Members to Fire Police. The Chief of the Fire
Department, with the consent of the Mayor and Council, shall appoint
members to act as Fire Police. They are to attend an approved New
Jersey State Fire Police Training Course. They are to be properly sworn
in to act as Fire Police officers in case of fire, and are to be provided by
the Borough with a suitable badge. Fire Police are held responsible for
all equipment issued to them and when retiring from office must
surrender to the Chief all equipment issued to them.
b. Fire Police Under Orders to the Chief. The Fire Police shall at all times
be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief and in his absence at the scene
of the fire, they shall be under the supervision of the next ranking
officer.
c. Fire Chief to Appoint a Safety Officer. The Chief of the Fire Department,
with the consent of the Mayor and Council, shall appoint a Safety
Officer. He is to attend any and all necessary training classes as
maintained by the State of New Jersey. He is to be properly sworn in
and to act as Safety Officer in case of fire.
§ 2-23.20 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-23.24
AO:26
§ 2-23.25. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #10-99]
The Fire Chief is hereby authorized to make and establish General
Operating Procedures for the proper government of the Fire Department.
§ 2-23.26. Obstruction of Fire House Prohibited. [Ord. #10-99]
Signs Reading "Do Not Park Here" or words to that effect shall be placed in
front of the firehouse or at such distance on each side thereof, as will assure
the unobstructed egress or ingress of fire apparatus. Persons found guilty
of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be liable to the penalty
prescribed in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 2-23.27. Radio Pager Test. [Ord. #10-99]
The Fire Department's radio paging system shall be tested daily by
Somerset County Communications.
§ 2-23.28. Lost Time Due To Court Appearance. [Ord. #10-99]
Any member who shall be ordered to court and caused to lose time from
work shall be reimbursed by the Borough as determined by the Board of
Engineers and approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-23.29. Clothing.
§ 2-23.30. Chief's Salary. [Ord. #10-99]
The Chief shall receive a salary of $550 per year to cover costs of supplies
and maintenance.
§ 2-23.31. Captain's Salary. [Ord. #10-99]
The Captain shall receive a salary of $150 to cover administrative costs.
a. Chief Engineer to Recommend Repairs. It shall be the duty of the Chief
Engineer to recommend to the Fire Committee all repairs to the fire
apparatus and equipment.
b. Chief Engineer's Annual Salary; Duty. The Chief Engineer shall receive
a salary of $300 per year, for care and maintenance of the fire
apparatus.
a. Any new member who successfully completes his/her probationary
period shall be entitled to a dress uniform, and proper protective
equipment to be supplied by the Borough.
b. Any damaged personal clothing lost due to fire department activity shall
be replaced by the Borough at no cost to the member.
§ 2-23.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-23.31
AO:27

ARTICLE IV
Establishment of the Municipal Court
§ 2-24. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-24.1. Establishment. [Ord. 12/1/48, § 1]
There is hereby established in the Borough of South Bound Brook, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1, as amended and supplemented, a Municipal Court which
shall be entitled the "Municipal Court of the Borough of South Bound
Brook."
§ 2-24.2. Seal of the Court. [Ord. 12/1/48, § 2]
The Municipal Court of the Borough of South Bound Brook shall have a seal
which shall bear the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 2-24.3. Judge of the Municipal Court. [Ord. 12/1/48, § 3-6]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by Council. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of his/her appointment and until his/
her successor is appointed and qualified. Any appointment to fill a vacancy
caused other than by expiration of term shall be made for the unexpired
term only.
§ 2-24.4. Functions, Powers, Duties and Jurisdiction. [Ord. 12/1/48,
§ 8]
The Municipal Court shall have, possess and exercise all the functions,
powers, duties and jurisdiction, both territorial and subject matter, in such
matters as conferred upon the Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented, and by any other Acts of the State Legislature.
§ 2-24.5. Compensation. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The salary of the Municipal Court Judge shall be an annual salary as
established by the Borough Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-24.6. Municipal Court Administrator and Personnel. [Ord. No.
3-96]
The Mayor and Council shall provide for a Court Administrator, and any
other necessary clerical and other assistants as may be required for the
Municipal Court. Compensation for the Municipal Court Administrator and
other Court personnel shall be established by the Borough Salary
Ordinance.
§ 2-25. through § 2-29. (RESERVED)
§ 2-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-25
AO:29

ARTICLE V
Commissions and Committees
§ 2-30. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-30.1. Creation of Commission. [Ord. 7/10/73, § 1]
There is hereby created an Environmental Commission for the protection,
development, or use of the natural resources located within the territorial
limits of the Borough pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 245 of the Laws
of New Jersey, 1968 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
§ 2-30.2. Members; Vacancies. [Ord. 7/10/73, § 2]
The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Mayor, one of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board
and all of whom shall be residents of the Borough. The members shall
serve without compensation. The Commission shall name from its members
a succeeding Chairman. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of
three years and until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 2-30.3. Powers of Commission. [Ord. 7/10/73, § 3]
The Commission is established for the protection, development or use of
natural resources, including water resources, located within the territorial
limits of the Borough. The Commission shall have power to conduct
research into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the Borough
and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for
its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly and privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to
obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may recommend
to the Planning Board, plans and programs for inclusion in the Master Plan
and the development and use of such areas.
§ 2-30.4. Acquisition by Commission. [Ord. 7/10/73, § 4]
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Borough Council, acquire property, both real and personal, in the
name of the Borough by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease
for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes
subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may
be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions) as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
§ 2-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30.4
AO:31
use or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land
and water areas in the Borough.
§ 2-30.5. Records and Annual Report. [Ord. 7/10/73, § 5]
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report to the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 2-31. RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-31.1. Committee Created. [Ord. 8/12/75, § 2]
There is hereby created a Recreation Advisory Committee of the Borough of
South Bound Brook.
§ 2-31.2. Membership. [Ord. 8/12/75, § 3]
The Recreation Advisory Committee of the Borough of South Bound Brook
shall be composed of 21 members appointed by the Council for the following
terms:
§ 2-31.3. Vacancies. [Ord. 8/12/75, § 4]
In the event that any member of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall
resign or be unable to serve for any reason as a member of the Committee,
the vacancy created thereby shall be filled for the remainder of his/her term
in the manner provided for appointments under Subsection 2-31.2.
§ 2-31.4. Duties and Powers. [Ord. 8/12/75, § 5]
a. One third (1/3) of the members initially appointed shall be appointed for
a term to expire December 31, 1977, one third (1/3) of the members
initially appointed shall be appointed for a term to expire December 31,
1976, and one third (1/3) of the members initially appointed shall be
appointed for a term to expire December 31, 1975. All appointments
thereafter shall be for a three (3) year term.
All members shall be residents of the Borough.
The Parks, Buildings and Grounds Committee of the Borough Council
shall have the power to divide the Recreation Advisory Committee into
three (3) Subcommittees, each such Subcommittee to have jurisdiction
over one of the following age groups:
1. Preschool through age 14.
2. Older teen and young adult.
3. Adult.
a. It shall be the duty of the Recreation Advisory Committee to:
§ 2-30.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-31.4
AO:32
§ 2-31.5. Expenditures. [Ord. 8/12/75, § 6]
The Recreation Advisory Committee shall have no authority to expend any
money nor incur any expense, nor commit the Borough to the expenditure of
any money unless and until the same shall have been specifically authorized
and approved by the Borough Council. Under no circumstances shall the
Recreation Advisory Committee maintain, receive or dispense funds.
§ 2-31.6. Meetings, Officers, and Bylaws. [Ord. 8/12/75, § 7]
1. Make studies, surveys, and recommendations to the Mayor and
Council with respect to recreation programs and the planning,
development, construction, and maintenance of the recreation
facilities of the Borough.
2. To recommend to the Mayor and Council the fees, if any, to be
charged for use of the recreation facilities.
3. To recommend to the Mayor and Council rules and regulations to
be adopted with respect to the use of the Borough recreation
facilities.
4. To recommend to the Mayor and Council the initiation and method
of coordination of recreation programs and activities for the
citizens of the Borough.
5. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council on any
matters which may be referred to the Recreation Advisory
Committee by the Borough Council.
b. Any and all studies, surveys, reports, and recommendations of the
Recreation Advisory Committee shall be presented to that member of
the Borough Council designated as the Chairman of the Parks,
Buildings, and Grounds Committee, who shall then present same to the
Mayor and Council.
c. The Recreation Advisory Committee herein established shall not be or
be deemed to be a Recreation Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-1
et seq., and shall not have the power or authority to purchase land or
hold title for any real property.
d. The Recreation Advisory Committee shall have no powers other than
those set forth herein and shall not commit the Borough to the
commission or omission of any act or thing, nor shall it establish any
policy of the Borough, nor shall it waive any policy, rule, regulation, or
ordinance established by the Borough.
a. Meetings shall be held at such time and place as shall be determined
annually by Resolution of the Recreation Advisory Committee, but there
shall be an annual meeting for Committee organization, to be held
during January of each year.
§ 2-31.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-31.6
AO:33
§ 2-32. HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMISSION.
See Chapter 17, Historic Preservation, for the establishment and duties of
the Historic Preservation Advisory Commission.
§ 2-33. RARITAN AND MILLSTONE RIVERS FLOOD CONTROL
COMMISSION.
§ 2-33.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 2011-07]
There exists along the Raritan and Millstone Rivers and their tributaries
certain problems of flooding and flood prevention which concern several
municipalities and Somerset County, as well as other governmental bodies.
The various governmental units affected by such drainage basin recognize
the need for cooperation efforts to prevent future floods and to alleviate
flooding and flood hazards.
N.J.S.A. 40:14-16, et seq., authorizes the establishment of a joint Flood
Control Commission and provides that the participating municipalities and
counties may enter into such a Commission and may define and limit
the areas of responsibility and authority of such a Commission, and may
set forth the terms under which appropriations shall be made by the
participating municipalities and counties.
§ 2-33.2. Participation in Commission; Responsibilities; Voting;
Budget. [Ord. No. 2011-07]
The Borough of South Bound Brook in the County of Somerset, State of
New Jersey, agrees to participate in the creation of and operations of
the Raritan and Millstone Rivers Flood Control Commission, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:14-16, et seq., as follows:
b. There shall be elected at the organization meeting each year by a
majority vote of the Committee, a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and
Secretary, each of whom shall hold office for one (1) year.
c. The Secretary shall take minutes of each meeting and present the
minutes to the Recreation Commission on the Borough Council. The
Secretary shall receive an annual salary to be consistent with the
annual Salary and Wage Ordinance.
d. The Parks, Buildings, and Grounds Committee of the Borough Council
shall prepare bylaws for the Recreation Advisory Committee which
shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council. Any
amendment to bylaws shall also be subject to the approval of the
Borough Council.
a. The municipalities and counties invited to participate in the
Commission are: Bridgewater Township, Franklin Township,
Hillsborough Township, the Borough of Manville, the Borough of
Millstone, Montgomery Township, the Borough of Rocky Hill, the
§ 2-31.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-33.2
AO:34
Borough of Somerville, the Borough of South Bound Brook and the
County of Somerset.
b. The Raritan and Millstone Rivers Flood Control Commission shall be
established in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:14-16, et seq.
c. The Raritan and Millstone Rivers Flood Control Commission shall:
1. Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area;
2. Make such data and studies available to the participating members,
to the Division of Water Policy and Supply, the Army Corps of
Engineers, local and county planning boards and officials
concerned with subdivisions and development of properties within
the floodway and drainage areas;
3. Keep itself informed as to the availability of state and federal funds
and grants, and the procedures for applying therefore, and shall
make such information available to participating members;
4. Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, brook cleaning and the like;
5. Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and lowlying
areas by appropriate county park commissions, counties or
participating municipalities;
6. Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention;
7. Encourage its participating members and others to adopt
appropriate ordinances and regulations relating to flood control;
8. Encourage its participating members to support other programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding;
9. Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by the members, subject to the
limitations in this agreement and subject to the limitations as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:14-16, et seq.
d. Appropriations.
1. The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission,
affecting the Commission as a whole, shall be funded among the
members as follows:
(a) $2,500.00 from the County of Somerset; and
(b) $250.00 from each municipal member.
2. Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken, involving less than
the interest of all of the participating members, or of special benefit
to less than all of the participating members, the apportionment of
§ 2-33.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.2
AO:35
§ 2-33.3. Appointment of Borough Representatives. [Ord. No.
2011-07]
the costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the participating
members specially benefited thereby in advance of authorization of
such project.
3. The initial funding requirements set forth herein may be changed
by agreement among the participating municipalities and Somerset
County, which additional funding is subject to the consent of the
governing body of each participating municipal member and the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of Somerset County.
e. Budget. The tentative annual budget for the Commission shall be
adopted by the Commission no later than January 15 of each year and
such adoption shall be by a vote of a Somerset County representative
and a representative from each municipality. A copy of such tentative
budget shall be sent to the governing body of each of the county and
municipalities within one (1) week of the adoption thereof. Such notice
shall include notification of the date fixed by the Commission for final
adoption of such budget, which shall be at least three (3) weeks after
the date of tentative adoption by the Commission.
Expenditures outside the regular budget for special projects involving
Somerset County or the participating municipalities (but less than the
entire Commission) shall be negotiated and arranged separately among
the involved participating members and the Commission.
f. Quorum. Any number of members of the Commission shall have the
right to meet at regularly scheduled meetings. Any action taken
involving the expenditure of funds, other than clerical and mailing
connected with the usual business of the Commission, shall be adopted
only at a meeting at which there are at least one (1) county
representative and at least nine (9) municipal representatives
(regardless of the total number of municipalities represented thereby).
g. Withdrawal. Each member municipality and the county reserves the
right, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-17(d), to withdraw from the
Commission provided, however, that at least ninety (90) days notice of
such intention is given to the Commission, and provided further, that
such withdrawal after the adoption of the Commission budget for a
given year shall not abrogate the responsibility of the municipality or
county to meet its obligations under the budget for such year.
a. The Borough Council shall appoint two (2) representatives to the
Commission; either or both of the representatives may be a member of
the Borough Council or hold other elective or appointive office in the
Borough.
b. In addition to such representatives, the Borough Council may appoint
two (2) alternate representatives to the Commission, who shall serve
§ 2-33.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-33.3
AO:36
§ 2-34. through § 2-40. (RESERVED)
for the terms of one (1) year each, or until the appointment and
qualification of their successors. Such alternates shall have the right to
attend all meetings of the Commission and take part in all discussions.
The alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second
alternate and in such order may represent the Borough and vote in
the event or the absence or disability of one (1) or both of the regular
representatives.
c. Each regular representative shall serve for a term of five (5) years, or
until his successor has been appointed and has qualified, except that
any appointed representative who holds another elected or appointed
public office shall serve as such representative for the term of his
elected or appointed office and only so long as he shall hold such
elected or appointed public office, notwithstanding his term of
appointment as such representative. Appointments to vacancies caused
by the death, resignation or other inability to serve of a representative
shall be filled for the balance of the term only. No alternate
representative shall automatically succeed to a regular representative
position upon a vacancy occurring in a regular position.
§ 2-33.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-34
AO:37

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Policies and Procedures
§ 2-41. APPROVAL AND PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-41.1. Purpose. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure to be followed by
all officials and authorized employees of the Borough for the purchasing
of goods and services and for the approval and payment of claims in
accordance with New Jersey Statutes N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.
§ 2-41.2. Bill of Demand. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 2]
Any person claiming payment from the Borough for goods or services
rendered shall present a detailed bill of demand to the Borough Clerk, duly
certified with the following statement:
"I do solemnly declare and certify under the penalties of the Law that
the within bill is correct in all its particulars; that the articles have been
furnished or services rendered as stated therein; that no bonus has been
given or received by any person or persons within the knowledge of this
claimant in connection with the above claim; that the amount therein stated
is justly due and owing; and that the amount charged is a reasonable one."
§ 2-41.3. Payment Date. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 3]
All bills must be received on or before the last Friday of each month for
payment at the following month's Borough Council meeting.
§ 2-41.4. Vouchers. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 4]
No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment unless the voucher
has attached to it or includes a certification from a designated Borough
employee or officer that the materials and supplies have been received or
the services rendered, and that certification is based on signed delivery
slips or other reasonable procedures.
§ 2-41.5. Claims to Be Approved. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 5]
Claims shall then be presented to the chairman of the committee
responsible for the placing of the order who, if satisfied that the claims are
reasonable and proper, shall approve the same. Following such approval,
the chairman shall then file the claims with the Borough Clerk who shall
then present these claims to the Finance Committee of the Borough Council
for preliminary approval and then to the governing body for formal approval
at a regular Council meeting. The governing body shall either approve a
claim or disapprove a claim. Any disapproved claim shall be referred back
to the Borough Clerk with such instructions as the governing body may give
at the time of disapproval.
§ 2-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-41.6
AO:39
§ 2-41.6. Borough Clerk to Keep Records. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 6]
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes indicating that the governing body has by formal action approved
the same, with appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected.
§ 2-41.7. Approval of Claim to Be Noted. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 7]
It shall be the duty of the Mayor and Borough Clerk or such other officer
designated by resolution of the governing body to indicate on the claims
that they have been approved for payment with the date of approval thereof
noted on the claim.
§ 2-41.8. Claims Shall Be Returned to Borough Chief Financial
Officer/Treasurer. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 8]
Following the approval, the Borough Clerk shall turn claims over to the
Borough Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer, who shall forthwith prepare the
necessary checks for the payment thereof, which checks shall be signed
by the Mayor and the Borough Clerk and thereafter countersigned by the
Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer. After preparing checks for the payment
of claims, the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall record them in proper
books of account and thereafter mail or otherwise distribute the checks to
the claimants.
§ 2-41.9. Employee Payrolls. [Ord. 6/14/77, § 9]
In the case of payrolls, the Payroll Clerk shall prepare the necessary
payrolls for the employees, which payrolls shall be duly certified by the
person authorized to certify that the services have been rendered and the
amount specified is in fact due and owing to the employee or employees.
The payroll shall then be approved by the department head responsible
therefor and presented to the governing body for approval and, after the
approval, shall be paid in due course.
§ 2-42. PROCEDURES FOR PAYMENT OF SALARIES.
§ 2-42.1. Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer; Duties. [Ord. 6/7/44, § 1]
The Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall present monthly to the Borough
Council for approval warrants drawn to the order of the Borough payroll
account as follows:
a. In advance for all employees whose salaries are on an annual or weekly
basis, when such salaries are due and payable prior to the next regular
meeting of the Borough Council.
b. In advance for all employees whose compensation is on an hourly basis,
when the compensation has been approved by the chairman of the
appropriate committee and has been certified to the Chief Financial
Officer/ Treasurer.
§ 2-41.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-42.2
AO:40
§ 2-42.2. Payroll Account. [Ord. 6/7/44, § 1]
§ 2-42.3. Payroll to Be Approved at Regular Meetings. [Ord. 6/7/44,
§ 1]
At each regular meeting of the Borough Council, the Chief Financial Officer/
Treasurer shall submit for the approval or ratification, as the case may
be, the necessary payrolls for the amount due the several officers and
employees for compensation. The payroll shall be considered by the
Borough Council in due course and approved if found to be correct.
§ 2-42.4. Error to Payroll; Adjustments. [Ord. 6/7/44, § 1]
In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Chief Financial Officer/
Treasurer shall, and it shall be his duty to see that such error or adjustment
is properly corrected and appropriate record made thereof.
§ 2-42.5. Authorized Signatures. [Ord. 6/7/44, § 1]
Such officers as may be designated by the Borough Council are hereby
authorized to sign warrants drawn in favor of the payroll account upon
due notice that the appropriate payrolls have been approved by the proper
committees and by the proper certifying authorities, which certifying
authorities and committees shall be those designated herein.
§ 2-43. TAX ABATEMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-43.1. Preamble; Purpose. [Ord. #1-80, Preamble]
P.L. 1975, c. 104, as amended supplementing Chapter 4 of Title 54 of
the Revised Statutes (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 et seq.) enables "qualified
municipalities" to exempt from taxation the first $4,000.00 or $10,000.00 of
improvements per unit on housing 20 years old or older for a period of five
years.
A "qualified municipality" means any municipality in which residential
neighborhoods have been declared to be in need of rehabilitation, such
determination being made by the County Planning Board, or on its failure
to make such determination, by the Department of Community Affairs; and
the Borough has dwellings twenty (20) years old or older in the vicinity of
fifty-five (55%) percent of its total housing stock; and proper application
was made to the Somerset County Planning Board by the Borough for a
a. In January of each year, there shall be approved an account to be
designated the Borough payroll account. The Chief Financial Officer/
Treasurer upon receipt of a warrant for the amount due such payroll
account, shall deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account
charging the appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.
b. The Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall thereafter draw checks on
the payroll account to the employees entitled to payment.
§ 2-42.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-43.1
AO:41
determination that the residential neighborhoods of the Borough are in
need of rehabilitation; and the Somerset County Planning Board endorsed
the application; and the greater interest of the Borough is served by
encouraging to the fullest extent, the maintenance and preservation of its
older buildings.
§ 2-43.2. Program Adopted. [Ord. #1-80, § 1]
There is adopted and provided in the Borough a tax abatement program
pursuant to P.L. 1975 c. 104, as amended. This program shall apply
throughout the Borough and provide for the abatement from real property
taxation of the aggregate first ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars in
Assessor's full and true value of home improvements for each dwelling
unit primarily and directly affected by a home improvement in any single
or multiple-dwelling property more than twenty (20) years old, as not
increasing the value of such property for a period of five (5) years,
notwithstanding that the value of the dwelling to which such improvements
are made is increased thereby. Provided, however, that during the period,
the assessment on the dwelling shall in no case, except that of damage
through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction, be less
than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to such home
improvements and provided further that the aggregate amount of any claim
for any dwelling unit shall not be in excess of the maximum sum of ten
thousand ($10,000.00) dollars.
§ 2-43.3. Definitions. [Ord. #1-80, § 2]
As used in this section:
ACT — Shall mean P.L. 1975, c. 104 and all amendments and supplements
thereto.
APPLICATION — Shall mean a written request for the exemption filed with
the local Tax Assessor on forms devised by the Director of the Division of
Taxation.
ASSESSOR — Shall mean the Assessor, Board of Assessors or any other
official or body of a taxing district charged with the duty of assessing real
property for the purpose of general taxation.
ASSESSOR'S FULL AND TRUE VALUE — Shall mean that portion of any
increased assessed value of real property which directly resulted from
improvements made thereon.
COMPLETION — Shall mean substantially ready for the use for which it was
intended.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Department of Community Affairs.
DWELLING — Shall mean any building or part of a building used, to be
used or held for use, as a home or residence, including accessory buildings
located on the same premises, together with the land upon which such
building or buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair
enjoyment thereof.
§ 2-43.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-43.3
AO:42
EXEMPTION — Shall mean that amount to be deducted from the "Assessor's
full and true value of home improvements."
HOME IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean the improvement of a dwelling which
does not change its permitted use, and shall include the modernization,
rehabilitation, renovation, alteration or repair of a dwelling.
§ 2-43.4. Eligible Real Property. [Ord. #1-80, § 2]
§ 2-43.5. Application Procedures. [Ord. #1-80, § 2]
§ 2-43.6. Procedures upon Allowance of Exemption. [Ord. 3/11/80,
§ 2]
a. Real property must meet the following qualifications in order to gain
the exemption:
1. It must contain a building which was constructed more than twenty
(20) years prior to the time of application for the exemption and is
used or being held for use, in whole or part, as a home or
residential dwelling, which is a constituent part of the real
property.
2. This application must be filed with the Assessor within thirty (30)
days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion of
the improvements.
a. The following conditions shall apply to all claims for the exemption at
the time of application:
1. Claims for the exemption shall be in writing upon forms prescribed
by the Director of the Division of Taxation and must be filed with
the local Tax Assessor within thirty (30) days following completion
of the home improvement.
2. When required by the Assessor, claimants for the exemption must
submit such data in support of their claim as he might request.
3. Additional claims for the exemption may be submitted and
approved with regard to dwellings with respect to which a previous
home improvement exemption was granted in an amount less than
ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars provided; however, the total
aggregate amount of any claims for any dwelling unit for so long as
this ordinance shall apply shall not be in excess of the maximum
sum of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars.
a. The following procedures shall be followed upon allowance of
exemption:
1. Every application for exemption of one (1) or more improvements
which qualify shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor, but in
no case may the exemption exceed the maximum per dwelling unit.
§ 2-43.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-43.6
AO:43
§ 2-44. ELECTION DISTRICTS.
§ 2-44.1. Election Districts Named. [Ord. 2/28/63, § 1]
The Election District of the Borough be and the same is hereby subdivided,
and redistricted into three (3) Election Districts to be known respectively
as the First Election District of the Borough of South Bound Brook, the
Second Election District of the Borough of South Bound Brook, and the
Third Election District of the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 2-44.2. First District. [Ord. 2/28/63, § 2]
The First Election District shall include all the territory and inhabitants
thereof contained in that portion of the said Borough included within the
following boundaries, to wit:
Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center lines of
Edgewood Terrace and Cedar Street and from the beginning point running
thence a. along the center line of Cedar Street in a northeasterly direction
to the center line of Main Street; thence b. along the center line of Main
Street in a northerly direction to the center of the Raritan River and the
2. Claim for the exemption, once filed on the prescribed form and
allowed by the Assessor, shall continue in force for a period of five
(5) years following January 1 of the year in which the exemption
was allowed.
3. The law requires that the granting of any exemption pursuant to
the Act shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official
tax record. Accordingly, the Assessor shall designate the exemption
by the symbol "H" under "Specific exemptions" on the real property
tax list.
4. The law provides that in applying the exemption the Assessor may
regard the improvements "...as not increasing the value of such
property for a period of five (5) years notwithstanding that the
value of the dwelling to which such improvements are made is
increased thereby..." Accordingly, the provisions of N.J.S.A.
54:4-63.1 to 63.11, the Added and Omitted Assessment Laws, shall
not apply to the allowable increase in the amount of assessed
valuation in the year in which the improvements qualify for the
exemption.
5. The law provides that every application for exemption of one (1) or
more improvements which qualify as improvements shall be
approved and allowed by the Assessor. Where application for
exemption is made however, with respect to improvement or
improvements which do not qualify, the Assessor should notify
claimant of the disallowance of the claim in writing upon form
H.I.E.-2 within twenty (20) days after disallowance and properly
note thereon the specific reasons for the disallowance.
§ 2-43.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-44.2
AO:44
division line between South Bound Brook and Bound Brook; thence c. up
the center of the Raritan River in a westerly direction to the center line of
Edgewood Terrace if the same were produced to the center of the Raritan
River; thence d. along the center line of Edgewood Terrace in a general
easterly direction to the center line of Cedar Street aforesaid and the point
of beginning.
§ 2-44.3. Second District. [Ord. 2/28/63, § 3]
The Second Election District shall include all the territory and inhabitants
thereof contained in that portion of the said Borough included within the
following boundaries, to wit:
Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center lines of
Edgewood Terrace and Cedar Street and from said beginning point running
thence a. along the center line of Cedar Street in a northeasterly direction
of the center line of Main Street; thence b. along the center line of Main
Street in a northerly direction to the center of the Raritan River; thence c.
down the Raritan River in a general southerly direction to the boundary line
between the Borough of South Bound Brook and the Township of Franklin;
thence d. along the division line between the two (2) municipalities in a
northwesterly direction to the center line of Main Street; thence e. along the
center line of Main Street in a northerly direction to the center line of Reed
Street; thence f. along the center line of Reed Street in a westerly direction
to the center line of Armstrong Street; thence g. along the center line of
Armstrong Street in a northerly direction to the center line of Edgewood
Terrace; thence h. along the center line of Edgewood Terrace in a general
westerly direction to the center line of Cedar Street and the point and place
of beginning.
§ 2-44.4. Third District. [Ord. 2/28/63, § 4]
The Third Election District shall include all the territory and inhabitants
thereof contained in that portion of the said Borough included within the
following boundaries, to wit:
Beginning in the center line of the Raritan River where the same is
intersected by the division line between the Borough of South Bound Brook
and the Township of Franklin and from the beginning point running thence
a. along the division line between the Borough of South Bound Brook and
the Township of Franklin in a southeasterly direction to the center line of
Main Street; thence b. along the center line of Main Street in a northerly
direction to the center line of Reed Street; thence c. along the center line of
Reed Street in a westerly direction to the center line of Armstrong Street;
thence d. along the center line of Armstrong Street in a northerly direction
to the center line of Edgewood Terrace; thence e. along the center line
of Edgewood Terrace in a general westerly direction to the center line of
the Raritan River where the same intersects the division line between the
Borough of South Bound Brook and the Township of Franklin, the same
being the point and place of beginning.
§ 2-44.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-44.5
AO:45
§ 2-44.5. Readjustment of Districts to Be Filed. [Ord. 2/28/63, § 5]
The Borough Clerk shall cause a description of the boundaries of the
readjusted districts to be filed as required by law.
§ 2-45. TAX LIENS ON FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTY.
§ 2-45.1. Restrictions on Payment of Certain Claims. [Ord. #4-99
§ 1]
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay to a claimant any claim in excess of two
thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars for fire damages on any real
property located within the Borough of South Bound Brook pursuant to any
fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption of this section
with the State Commissioner of Insurance until such time as:
§ 2-45.2. Resolution for Installment Payment of Tax Sale Lien. [Ord.
#4-99 § 2]
§ 2-45.3. Payments to Insured Mortgagee; Limits. [Ord. #4-99 § 3]
Notwithstanding the provision of Subsection 2-45.1, an insurance company
may pay proceeds of a fire insurance policy to a mortgagee of fire-damaged
a. All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due
and payable appearing on the official certificate of search for municipal
liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 shall have been paid either by the
owner of such real property or by the insurance company; or
b. The municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution adopted pursuant to Subsection 2-45.2; provided, however,
that if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other
than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold seventy-five
(75%) percent of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested
pending termination of all proceedings.
a. The Borough Council of South Bound Brook may by resolution enter
into an agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property
situated in the Borough of South Bound Brook to pay in full all
delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the redemption of a tax sale lien by
installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey if the Borough Council is satisfied
that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the
fire-damaged property.
b. In the event of such a resolution, a certified copy of said resolution shall
be sent to the insurance company, authorizing the insurance company
to make full payment on the claim to the insured.
§ 2-44.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-45.3
AO:46
real property where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed
the mortgagee as a named insured; provided said payment may not be in
an amount which exceeds that due and payable to the mortgagee under the
mortgage contract.
§ 2-46. TAX ABATEMENT FOR PROPERTY IN AREAS IN NEED OF
REHABILITATION OR REDEVELOPMENT.
§ 2-46.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-05 § 1]
The definitions contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3 are incorporated herein by
reference as if set forth at length, except as modified or supplemented
herein. As used in this section, words shall have the meanings as so defined
unless a different meaning is expressed.
COMPLETION — Shall mean the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy, continuing certificate of occupancy, final certificate of
occupancy for the improvement in question or other determination of
completion by the Borough consistent with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3(e).
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure with its primary use
being the retail sales of goods and services for commercial purposes.
§ 2-46.2. Tax Exemptions and Abatements Authorized. [Ord. No.
2014-05 § 2]
The Borough hereby authorizes the utilization of tax exemption and
abatement in accordance with Article VIII, Section I, Paragraph 6, of the
New Jersey Constitution and establishes the eligibility of commercial
structures for five-year tax exemptions and abatements as authorized by
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., located on Lot 1.02 as set forth herein, provided
that the property is not ineligible pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
2-46.13.
§ 2-46.3. Improvements to Commercial Structures. [Ord. No.
2014-05 § 3]
Improvements to commercial structures on Lot 1.02 in the ANR are eligible
for tax exemption for a period of up to five (5) years commencing with the
completion of an improvement. Land shall be assessed at full true market
value at all times. Upon approval in accordance with the provisions of this
section, the Assessor's full and true assessed value of the improvements
shall be regarded as not increasing the value of the property
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvement
is made is increased thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment
on the property shall not be less than the assessment existing thereon
immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is damage to the
structure through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
Any such exemption and abatement shall be subject to the owner and
Borough entering into a tax agreement as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10.
The tax agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to the Borough in
§ 2-45.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-46.3
AO:47
lieu of full property tax payments an amount annually to be computed by
one, but in no case a combination, of the three formulas set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:21-10, viz., the "Cost," "Gross Revenue" or "Tax phase-in" basis.
§ 2-46.4. Construction of Commercial Structures. [Ord. No. 2014-05
§ 4]
Construction of new commercial structures on Lot 1.02 shall be eligible for
tax exemption or exemption and abatement commencing with completion of
the project. Upon approval in accordance with the provisions of this section,
any such exemption and abatement shall be subject to the owner and
Borough entering into a tax agreement as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10.
For year one of the exemption period, the improvements shall be assessed at
zero percent (0%) of their true market value. For year two of the exemption
period, the improvements shall be assessed at twenty-five percent (25%)
of their true market value. For year three of the exemption period, the
improvements shall be assessed at fifty percent (50%) of their true market
value. For year four of the exemption period, the improvements shall be
assessed at seventy-five percent (75%) of their true market value. For year
five of the exemption period, the improvements shall be assessed at one
hundred percent (100%) of their true market value.
§ 2-46.5. Application. [Ord. No. 2014-05 § 5]
a. The applicant shall furnish to the municipality all the information
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9. In addition, every applicant shall file the
application form prescribed by the Director of the New Jersey Division
of Taxation in the Department of Treasury, with the Tax Assessor, as a
condition to approval, within thirty (30) days, including Saturdays and
Sundays, following the completion of the improvement. The application
for exemption or exemption and abatement so filed shall be approved
and allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the application is
consistent with the provisions of this section, provided that the
improvement, conversion, alteration or construction for which the
application is made qualifies as an improvement, a conversion
alteration or construction pursuant to the provisions of this act and the
tax agreement, if any. The granting of an exemption or exemption and
abatement and tax agreement, if appropriate, shall be recorded and
made a permanent part of the official tax records of the taxing district,
which record shall contain a notice of termination date thereof.
b. The Borough Council determines and finds that all new commercial
structures and improvements on Lot 1.02 in the ANR are eligible for a
five year tax abatement upon filing an application with the Assessor in
accordance with Subsection a above. No other tax exemption shall be
granted unless approved in accordance with law by the Borough
Council on an individual basis after review, evaluation and approval of
each application for compliance with the terms of this section and the
underlying statute, rules and regulations except as set forth in
Subsection 2-46.3.
§ 2-46.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-46.5
AO:48
§ 2-46.6. Applicability of Statutory Regulatory Provisions. [Ord. No.
2014-05 § 6]
Every application for exemption or abatement and every exemption and
abatement granted shall be subject to all the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1,
et seq., and all rules and regulations issued thereunder.
§ 2-46.7. Applicability of Federal, State and Local Laws. [Ord. No.
2014-05 § 7]
All tax abatement and exemption agreements shall provide that the
applicant is subject to all federal, state and local laws and regulations.
§ 2-46.8. Equalization. [Ord. No. 2014-05 § 8]
The percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes bears to the property
taxes which would have been paid had an abatement not been granted for
the property under the agreement shall be applied to the valuation of the
property to determine the reduced valuation of the property to be included
in the valuation of the municipality for determining equalization for county
apportionment and school aid during the term of the tax abatement
agreement covering the property.
§ 2-46.9. Cessation or Disposition of Property. [Ord. No. 2014-05
§ 9]
If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax abatement or
exemption agreement, the applicant ceases to operate or disposes of the
property or otherwise fails to meet the conditions of eligibility, after thirty
days' notice and opportunity to cure, the tax otherwise due if there had
been no abatement or exemption shall become due and payable by the
property owner. The Tax Assessor shall notify the property owner and
the Tax Collector forthwith and the Tax Collector shall within fifteen (15)
days thereof notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes due.
However, with respect to sale or other disposal of the property which it
is determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use
the property pursuant to the conditions which were set forth in the tax
abatement or exemption agreement, the exemption or abatement shall
continue.
c. The tax agreement for new construction shall provide for the applicant
to pay to the Borough in lieu of full property tax payments an amount
annually to be computed by the "tax phase-in" basis formula set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10 (c) and as set forth in Subsection 2-46.4.
d. The tax agreement for all other improvements shall provide for the
applicant to pay to the Borough in lieu of full property tax payments an
amount annually to be computed by one, but in no case a combination,
of the three formulas set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10, viz, the "Cost,"
"Gross revenue" or "Tax phase-in" basis.
§ 2-46.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-46.10
AO:49
§ 2-46.10. Default in Tax Payments. [Ord. No. 2014-5 § 10]
In the event of default by the applicant, including but not limited to the
failure to make timely tax or in lieu of tax payments to the municipality,
the municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, of said default. The
applicant shall have thirty days to cure any default. Following the thirty day
cure period, the municipality shall have the right to proceed against the
property pursuant to the In Rem Tax Foreclosure Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-1, et seq.
and/or may cancel the Financial Agreement upon thirty days' notice to the
applicant.
§ 2-46.11. Taxes upon Termination. [Ord. No. 2014-05 § 11]
At the termination of a tax abatement or exemption agreement, a project
shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by state law
and local ordinance.
§ 2-46.12. Ordinance Sent to Department of Community Affairs.
[Ord. No. 2014-05 § 12]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to forward a certified
copy of this Ordinance to the State of New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 2-46.13. Ineligibility. [Ord. No. 2014-05 § 13]
No exemption or abatements shall be granted in the following
circumstances:
a. No exemptions or abatement shall be granted for any property for
which property taxes or any other municipal charges are delinquent or
remain unpaid or for which penalties for nonpayment are due for a
period of at least one year, or for any property not being used in
conformance with local, state or federal ordinance, regulation or
statute. In addition, one and two family structures which contain home
based businesses are ineligible for the tax exemption or abatement
programs described herein.
b. No exemption or abatement shall be granted for any property being
converted from single family use to a multiple family use.
c. No exemption or abatement shall be granted for any property the
improvements to which will increase the density, as that term is defined
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, beyond that permitted by the applicable zone
regulations notwithstanding that a variance may have been granted for
such increase.
d. No exemption or abatement shall be granted for any property that
presently constitutes a valid non-conforming use or structure unless the
improvement eliminates the nonconformity.
§ 2-46.10 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-46.13
AO:50
§ 2-46.14. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2014-05 § 14]
The grant or denial of application for a tax exemption or abatement
pursuant to this section shall be made in the sound discretion of the
Borough Council, unless an application may be processed by the assessor
pursuant to Subsection 2-46.5b. In making its determination Council shall
consider the cost and benefits of the improvements to the Borough as
a whole including its location, financial impacts, effect on the zone plan
and master plan, consistency with the development goals of the Borough,
fiscal determinations with respect to the Borough budget and other factors
deemed relevant by Council. Appeal of any determination made by the
municipality under the terms of this section shall be made to the Somerset
County Board of Taxation.
§ 2-47. through § 2-50. (RESERVED)
e. No exemption or abatement shall be granted unless the improvement is
reasonably estimated by the assessor to result in an increase in
assessed value of the property, if fully taxed, equal to or greater than
ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars.
§ 2-46.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-47
AO:51

ARTICLE VII
Contracts and Agreements.
§ 2-51. INTERMUNICIPAL POLICE ASSISTANCE. [Ord. #8-93]
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.2 et seq., (hereinafter the "statute") allows
municipalities to provide emergency intermunicipal police assistance to
other municipalities which adopt similar reciprocal ordinances.
The Borough Council of the Borough of South Bound Brook deems it to be
in the best interests of the residents of the Borough to enact an ordinance
pursuant to the statute in order to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Borough.
The Borough hereby cooperates with all other municipalities which adopt
a similar reciprocal ordinance providing for the intermunicipal police
assistance in times of emergency.
This intermunicipal assistance will be provided if and when the Borough
of South Bound Brook has an emergency within its boundaries requiring
additional police assistance to protect life and property, or to assist in
suppressing a riot or disorder; and whenever another municipality, which
has enacted a similar reciprocal ordinance, may experience a similar
emergency requiring additional police assistance.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of South Bound Brook or the highest
ranking officer on duty at the time, is hereby authorized to request
assistance from the Chief or the highest ranking officer on duty of the police
departments of the other municipalities for intermunicipal police assistance
during and/or after an emergency situation.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of South Bound Brook or the highest
ranking officer on duty at the time, shall provide assistance to another
municipality or municipalities making a valid request to supply such
personnel and equipment, to the extent possible without endangering
person or property within the Borough of South Bound Brook.
Members of the South Bound Brook Police Department supplying
emergency assistance to another municipality shall have the same powers
and authority, as have the members of the Police Department of the
municipality in which said assistance is being rendered. Additionally, said
members shall also have, while so acting, said rights and immunities as they
may otherwise enjoy in the performance of their normal duties within the
Borough of South Bound Brook.
The Borough of South Bound Brook shall, upon providing assistance to
another municipality which has enacted a similar Intermunicipal Assistant
ordinance, assume the cost and expense of providing said personnel and
equipment to the requesting municipality; excepting such instances when
the requesting municipality receives State or Federal aid as reimbursement
therefore. In this event, the cost incurred by the Borough shall be submitted
to the municipality which requested assistance, for reimbursement.
§ 2-51 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-51
AO:53
At such times that an emergency may occur and intermunicipal police aid is
requested, the Chief of Police of the municipality wherein said emergency
situation exits, shall be the senior ranking officer of all members of any
police department rendering assistance within the boundaries of said
municipality.
In the event any member of a police force summoned pursuant to an
agreement to render assistance, suffer injury or death in the performance
of his or her duties, he/she or his/her designee or legal representative shall
be entitled to such salary, pension rights, workman's compensation or other
benefits as would have accrued, if such injury or death had occurred in the
performance of his or her normal duties.
A copy of this section shall be transmitted to the Municipal Clerk of each
municipality within Somerset and Middlesex Counties no later than five (5)
business days following its adoption. The Clerk of the Borough of South
Bound Brook shall maintain a record of all such similar ordinances adopted
by other municipalities.
The provisions of this section are deemed severable and in the event any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase herein shall be declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, said
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases of the section and said section shall remain in
full force and effect.
§ 2-52. through § 2-59. (RESERVED)
§ 2-51 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 2-52
AO:54
ARTICLE VIII
Administrative Fees
§ 2-60. FEES FOR GOVERNMENT RECORDS.
§ 2-60.1. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 2001-01; Ord. No. 2003-05; Ord.
No. 2012-01]
a. The fees for copies of Government Records shall be as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.b.
b. The fee assessed for the duplication of a government record embodied
in the form of printed matter shall be $0.05 per letter size page or
smaller and $0.07 per legal size page or larger.
c. If a public agency can demonstrate that its actual costs for duplication
of a government record exceed the foregoing rates, the public agency
shall be permitted to charge the actual cost of duplicating the record.
§ 2-60 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-60.1
AO:55
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
[Editor's Note: Regulations concerning noise are found in Chapter
34, Zoning.]
§ 3-1. LOITERING.
§ 3-1.1. Definition. [Ord. 12/10/74, § 1]
As used in this section:
LOITERING — Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and
shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about
aimlessly.
§ 3-1.2. Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited. [Ord. 12/10/74, § 2]
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 3-1.3. Discretion of Police Officer. [Ord. 12/10/74, § 3]
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or
is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection 3-1.2, he
may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of public peace and safety,
order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave
after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
§ 3-2. PARKING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES.5
§ 3-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
As used in this section:
a. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
b. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
This paragraph shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an
offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
5. Editor's Note: Prior history includes Ord. No. 6-88 §§ 13, 15, 16.
§ 2-60.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-2.1
AO:56
ABANDONED, PARKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLE — Shall mean any
vehicle which is continually present upon property longer than the time
limitations outlined in this section.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle which cannot be started
upon request of the enforcement officer of this section, or for any other
reason will not run, e.g., no battery, flat tires, no wheels, or which displays
extensive body damage or deterioration. A vehicle shall also be considered
inoperable if the owner refuses to start it, or if it is not validly registered
with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-1,
et seq. or if such registration has expired.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any machine propelled other than by human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides, and includes without limitation automobile, truck trailer, motorcycle,
tractor.
§ 3-2.2. Parking of Vehicles on Lawns in Residential Zones
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
No person shall, park or permit the parking of any vehicle on his or her
residential lawn.
§ 3-2.3. Storage on Public Lands Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
No person shall park, leave or store any inoperable motor vehicle on any
public lands or premises except in case of emergency and then for a period
of not more than 24 hours.
§ 3-2.4. Storage on Private Lands Limited. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
No person shall park, leave, store or maintain any inoperable motor vehicle
for a period of more than 30 days upon any private lands or premises.
§ 3-2.5. Duty of Private Landowners. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
No owner or occupier of any private lands or premises shall permit or suffer
any inoperable motor vehicle to be parked, left, stored or maintained on his
or her lands or premises for more than 30 days.
§ 3-2.6. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle that is:
a. Located or stored on the lands and premises of a duly licensed car
dealer or service station; or
b. Located or stored in an enclosed garage or other enclosed building; or
§ 3-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.6
AO:57
§ 3-2.7. Non-Applicability. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
This section shall not apply to lawfully operated junkyards or towing
services, or to vehicles located or stored inside garages or other buildings,
to businesses lawfully engaged in the repair and/or sale of motor vehicles,
or to motor vehicles under the control of the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 3-2.8. Enforcement Officers and Procedure. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
§ 3-2.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-02]
§ 3-3. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
c. On the premises and associated with the lawful operation or a
commercial garage; or
d. Any motor vehicle which has current "Antique Motor Vehicle" license
plate issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles; or
e. Located on premises owned or occupied by the owner of the inoperable
vehicle where such vehicle is actually in the process of being repaired,
but in no event shall repair continue for a period of more than 30 days
and provided, further, that no more than one such vehicle, in the
process of being repaired, shall be located on any lot at one time.
a. The officers of the Borough of South Bound Brook which shall be
charged with the enforcement of this section are Borough of South
Bound Brook Building Inspector or his designated representative or the
Borough Police Department.
b. Any vehicle determined by one of the officers listed in paragraph a to be
in violation of this section may be taken into possession and removed to
a storage place designated by any of the officers listed in paragraph a.
c. Upon the taking into possession of any vehicle, it shall be disposed of by
following the procedures established by N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1, et seq. for
the disposition of such vehicles, including payment to the Borough of all
of its costs for removal and storage of such vehicle.
a. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days, or both.
b. The imposition of a penalty or penalties for any violation of this section
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within a
reasonable time. If said violations are not corrected within a reasonable
time as shall be determined at the trial for the first offense, then each
10 days thereafter that the prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense hereunder.
§ 3-2.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-3.1
AO:58
§ 3-3.1. Responsibility for Removal. [Ord. 4/5/61, § 2; Ord. 5/31/61,
§ 1]
The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering upon
any street in the Borough shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalks of such streets, or in the case of ice which may be so frozen
as to make removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly
covered with sand, ashes or equivalent material suitable for rendering such
sidewalks safe for travel, within 12 hours after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon.
§ 3-3.2. Snow and Ice Shall Not Be Thrown Upon Streets or
Sidewalks. [Ord. 4/5/61, § 3]
No person, firm or corporation, the owner, tenant or occupant of any
premises abutting on any street shall throw, place or deposit any snow or
ice into or upon any street in the Borough, it being the intent and purpose
of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting, placing or
depositing snow and ice, which accumulated within the private property
belonging to the person, upon the sidewalks or streets of the Borough.
§ 3-3.3. Action Taken for Failure to Remove Ice and Snow. [Ord. 4/5/
61, § 4]
In case such snow or ice shall not be removed from such sidewalks or shall
be cast, deposited thereon or placed upon the sidewalks or the street by
the owner or owners, tenant or tenants, occupant or occupants of any of
the premises as provided in subsections 3-3.1 and 3-3.2 hereof the same
shall be removed forthwith and under the direction of the Superintendent
of Streets of the Borough and the cost of such removal as nearly as can
be ascertained shall be certified by the Superintendent of Streets to the
Borough Council. The Borough Council shall examine such certification and
if found to be correct shall cause such cost to be charged against such real
estate so abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks and the amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien and a tax upon such real estate or
land and be added to, recorded and collected in the same way and manner
as the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon such premises and shall
bear interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine or fines
imposed by the provisions of this section shall not constitute any bar to the
right of the Borough to collect the cost as certified for the removal of the
snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.
§ 3-4. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
PLACES.
§ 3-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.1
AO:59
§ 3-4.1. Consumption of Alcohol on Public Property. [Ord. 12/10/74,
§ 4]
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption, alcoholic
beverages in, on or upon any public street, sidewalk, park, playground or
in, on or upon any land owned or occupied by any Federal, State, County or
municipal government.
§ 3-4.2. Consumption Permitted in Licensed Premises Only. [Ord.
12/10/74, § 5]
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or offer to another for
consumption, any alcoholic beverages in, on or upon any place to which the
public at large is invited, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages within
the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption liquor licensee, or
temporary licensee.
§ 3-4.3. Possession of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places. [Ord.
12/10/74, § 6]
No person shall have in his possession or possess any alcoholic beverages
in, on or upon any public street, sidewalk, park, playground or in, on
or upon any land owned or occupied by any Federal, State, County or
municipal government unless the same is contained within a closed or
sealed container.
§ 3-4.4. Possession of Alcoholic Beverages in Sealed Containers.
[Ord. 12/10/74, § 8]
No person shall have in his possession or possess an alcoholic beverage in,
on or upon any place to which the public at large is invited unless the same
is contained within a closed or sealed container, provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption
liquor licensee, or temporary licensee.
§ 3-4.5. Exception; Permission by Resolution for Consumption at
Parks and Picnic Areas. [Ord. 12/10/74, § 9]
None of the foregoing provisions shall apply to any public park or public
picnic area where the consumption of alcoholic beverages at occasions
or events held by bona fide nonprofit organizations or other groups is
specifically permitted by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 3-5. LITTERING.
§ 3-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. #6-88, § 1]
As used in this section:
§ 3-4.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-5.1
AO:60
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and
all other waste material which, if thrown, deposited or stored as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited
or vacant, and includes any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps or
vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or
other structure.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as papers, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery, building materials and similar materials.
§ 3-5.2. Littering Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places Prohibited.
[Ord. #6-88, § 2]
No person shall throw, put or place, or cause or permit to be thrown, put or
placed into, upon or within any public sidewalk, street or public place any
rubbish, refuse, garbage, ashes, paper, dirt, cinders, substance, matter or
thing, or otherwise litter the public sidewalk, street or public place.
§ 3-5.3. Littering Occupied Private Property Prohibited. [Ord.
#6-88, § 7]
No person shall throw, deposit or store litter on any occupied private
property within the Borough, whether owned by such person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection and removal of same in such
manner that they shall not be unsightly and detrimental to the surrounding
neighborhood.
§ 3-5.4. Littering Vacant Lots Prohibited. [Ord. #6-88, § 10]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Borough, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 3-5.5. Dumping on Property of Others Prohibited. [Ord. #6-88,
§ 11]
No person or persons shall throw, dump or place any garbage, trash, debris
or other waste material on any private property not his own within the limits
of the Borough.
§ 3-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.6
AO:61
§ 3-5.6. Filling Gutters with Dirt or Other Material Prohibited. [Ord.
#6-88, § 3]
The filling of gutters along any public street with dirt, fill, earth or other
materials is hereby prohibited irrespective of the manner or distance by
which the dirt, fill, earth or other materials shall travel before reaching the
public street.
§ 3-5.7. Obstructing Drains Prohibited. [Ord. #6-88, § 4]
The obstruction of drains to any public street in the Borough of South Bound
Brook by the spilling, filling, flowing or throwing of stones, dirt, earth or
other materials thereon is hereby prohibited.
§ 3-5.8. Accumulation of Dirt, Silt or Earth. [Ord. #6-88, § 5]
No person, firm or corporation shall do or cause to be done any act,
including the construction of buildings, grading, landscaping or otherwise,
which shall cause or result in the accumulation of dirt, silt, earth or other
materials upon any public street, storm drain, gutter or culvert in the
Borough.
§ 3-5.9. Accumulation of Debris on or Around Construction Sites.
[Ord. #6-88, § 18]
No person, firm or corporation shall accumulate debris on or around
construction sites or permit its storage in such a manner that it is likely
to be removed by natural forces onto adjacent property, or any public
sidewalk, street or public place.
§ 3-5.10. Littering from Uncovered Vehicles. [Ord. #6-88, § 17]
No person shall cause or permit a vehicle to be so loaded or operate a
vehicle so loaded that the contents or any part thereof may be scattered
on any street. Whenever the load of any vehicle is susceptible to scattering
on a street and such load extends above the height of the sides or tailgate
or rear of the body of the vehicle, the load shall be securely covered by a
tarpaulin or other cover.
§ 3-5.11. Maintenance of Premises Free of Litter. [Ord. #6-88, § 9]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter.
§ 3-5.12. Duty of Owners of Vacant Lots; Failure to Comply. [Ord.
#6-88, § 19]
Owners of vacant lots must keep such lots free of rubbish. If the owner
of a vacant lot shall fail or neglect to comply with this provision, then
the Borough, its agents or servants, under the direction of the Borough
Sanitarian, may enter upon the premises in order to remove such rubbish,
§ 3-5.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-5.12
AO:62
and the costs paid and incurred for removing the same shall be certified
by the Borough Sanitarian to the Council, which shall examine such
certification and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown in the
certification to be charged against the lands, and the amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands and be added to and become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands, the
same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes, and shall be collected
and enforced according to law and remain a lien until paid.
§ 3-5.13. Storage of Items Regulated in Residential Zones. [Ord.
#6-88, §§ 12, 14]
§ 3-5.14. Litter Receptacles Required. [Ord. #6-88, §§ 6, 8]
a. Storage of Bulky Household Items in Residential Zones. No person shall
store in areas zoned residential any bulky household items including
but not limited to appliances, furniture or mattresses, except in a fully
enclosed structure or during days designated for the collection of bulky
items.
b. Storage of Tires in Residential Zones. No person shall store tires in
areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed structure or on days
designated for the collection of tires.
a. Placement of Litter Receptacles. Litter receptacles shall be located and
regularly serviced at the following public places within the corporate
limits of the Borough:
1. Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercial-zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear
quarter mile without a receptacle;
2. All buildings held out for use by the public including but not limited
to schools, government buildings, bus stations, parks, drive-in
restaurants, self-service refreshment areas, construction sites,
gasoline service station islands, shopping centers and parking lots;
3. At all special events to which the public is invited, including but not
limited to sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals.
The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events
shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles
such that adequate containerization is available.
b. Use of Receptacles. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to
prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place.
§ 3-5.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.15
AO:63
§ 3-5.15. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #6-88, § 20]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day such violation is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such.
§ 3-5.16. Littering Prohibited on Public or Private Property;
Littering from Vehicles and Boats Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2007-04]
a. Purpose. An ordinance to establish requirements to control littering in
Borough of South Bound Brook, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
1. LITTER – Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste
material which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum,
glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material,
or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to, any
bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar
or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or
glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other
packaging or construction material, but does not include the waste
of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes,
logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
2. LITTER RECEPTACLE – Shall mean a container suitable for the
depositing of litter.
3. PERSON – Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
c. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or
otherwise place any litter of any nature upon public or private
property other than in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to
allow such litter to remain.
§ 3-5.15 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-5.16
AO:64
§ 3-6. GAMES OF CHANCE ON SUNDAYS.
§ 3-6.1. License Required. [Ord. 12/14/65, § 1]
Games of chance are authorized to be conducted in accordance with the
terms of the "Bingo Licensing Law," within the Borough on the first day of
each week, commonly known as Sunday, by a licensee granted a license for
such day by the Borough Council.
§ 3-6.2. Sunday Hours. [Ord. 12/14/65, § 2]
No license issued by the Borough Council shall permit games of chance to
be conducted by a licensee on the first day of the week, commonly known
as Sunday, except between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.
§ 3-7. TOWING.
§ 3-7.1. Title. [Ord. #6-91, § I]
This section shall be known as the "Towing Ordinance of the Borough of
South Bound Brook."
§ 3-7.2. Purpose and Scope. [Ord. #6-91, § II]
2. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this ordinance, the operator or owner,
or both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have
violated this subsection.
d. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Police
Department and/or other Municipal Official of Borough of South Bound
Brook.
e. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
a. The purpose of this section is to establish towing and storage fee
schedules pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:33B-47 for the reimbursement of
towing charges and storage charges for all private passenger
automobiles that are Police impounded, damaged in accidents, or are
recovered after being stolen.
b. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons who provide
towing and storage services for the Borough for private passenger
automobiles that are Police impounded, damaged in accidents, or are
recovered after being stolen.
c. In order to protect persons who operate motor vehicles inside the
Borough, it is desirable and necessary to adopt this section to ensure
proper licensing, storage, availability and other controls over persons
and firms licensed to provide wrecker service.
§ 3-5.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-7.3
AO:65
§ 3-7.3. Application for Contract. [Ord. #6-91, § III]
Any person desiring to perform towing work at Police request shall submit
an application for a wrecker service license, in duplicate, to the license
officer. These forms shall include the name of the owner; home and business
address, home phone number, and name under which the person does
or will trade; the location, size and security features of the storage lot
on which towed vehicles will be stored; the location to which the public
must come to claim stored vehicles; a statement of willingness to provide
wrecker service on a continuous 24 hour a day basis each day of the year;
a complete listing of the insurance policies, carriers and agents the owner
would place into effect upon license approval; a statement that the wrecker
owner will indemnify and hold harmless the Borough in the event that any
claim or recovery is made against the Borough arising out of the towing
service or storage of vehicles, along with a description of the place to
be used to adequately protect the property left towed or stored vehicles;
and a description of communications to be used on each wrecker and a
description of the type of communications system utilized at the office
where calls are received.
§ 3-7.4. Licensing. [Ord. #6-91, § IV]
All applicants for a license shall obtain an application for a wrecker service
license and shall forward the application to the Chief of Police for
investigation of the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein.
Upon completion of his investigation, the Chief of Police shall forward
a copy of the application to the Borough Council, along with a
recommendation for approval or disapproval of the license and the reasons,
if any, for disapproval. Upon receiving the application for wrecker service
license, the Borough Council shall determine whether or not the applicant
has complied with the necessary standards and criteria. If the applicant is
found to be qualified, then, upon the payment of an annual license fee of
$50, a license shall be issued to the applicant and the applicant's name
placed at the end of the towing list. All licenses shall expire on December
31 annually.
§ 3-7.5. Insurance. [Ord. #6-91, § V; Ord. #5-92, § 1]
a. No wrecker license shall be issued until the applicant has deposited
with the Borough Clerk or Chief of Police a garage liability policy
covering the operation of the owner's business, equipment, or other
vehicles for any bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall be in
the minimum amount of $500,000 for any one person injured or killed
and a minimum of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for more than one
person killed or injured in any accident and an additional $50,000 for
property damage.
b. Each policy must contain an endorsement by the carrier providing 90
days notice to both the Borough and the insured in the event of any
change in coverage under the policy.
§ 3-7.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-7.6
AO:66
§ 3-7.6. Responsibilities of Owners. [Ord. #6-91, § VI]
The owner shall provide continuous 24 hours a day service each day of the
year and shall provide an attendant or answering service for the purpose
of receiving calls for service. The owner shall be available to release stored
vehicles during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. each day except Sunday
and holidays. The owner shall assume all liability and shall indemnify and
save the Borough harmless from such liability for damages sustained by
vehicles while being towed or stored and for all personal injuries occurring
to any of the firm's employees or other persons and shall maintain the
required insurance policies. The wrecker owner shall not release any
vehicle directly impounded by the Borough without authorization by the
Police Department.
§ 3-7.7. Minimum Equipment Required. [Ord. #6-91, § VII]
§ 3-7.8. Costs; Records. [Ord. #6-91, § VIII]
All costs incident to towing and storage shall be paid by the owner or person
in charge or possession of the towed and stored vehicle to the owner of the
wrecker company and a receipt for payment shall be issued to the person.
The Borough shall assume no liability or responsibility for any vehicle
removed from any place without the authority of the Chief of Police. The
wrecker owner shall maintain approved records and claim check system to
assure release of vehicles to the rightful owner or authorized person. Such
records shall be open to the Police Department for investigation of specific
complaints and for compiling surveys under this subsection. The owner of
any wrecker service shall permit any person appointed by the Chief of Police
to inspect his wreckers, vault, security form or storage area at such times
as the Chief of Police shall deem appropriate.
§ 3-7.9. Rotation; Exception. [Ord. #6-91, § IX]
a. Minimum equipment to be maintained or available for service shall
include:
1. Two tow vehicles with dolly equipment; or
2. One tow vehicle and one flatbed truck including dolly equipment;
and
3. All units must have a fire extinguisher of ABC type, safety chains,
stiff push broom, slings, warning lights (with permits), and the
necessary equipment to provide a complete service to tow vehicles
below three-quarter (3/4) ton capacity with two axles.
a. Towing services shall rotate on a weekly basis. The week will start at
8:00 a.m. on the first of the week and will conclude at 7:59 a.m. on the
first day of the following week. During the week that the towing service
is assigned, all calls for service requested through the Police
Department will be accepted. Refusal or inability to respond will
§ 3-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-7.9
AO:67
§ 3-7.10. Impounded Vehicles; Storage; Release. [Ord. #6-91, § X]
A covered facility shall be provided for security of autos impounded by the
Police for death by auto or crime incidents. The covered facility must be
on the grounds of the towing service or meet the approval of the Police
Department. No one shall release an impounded vehicle without permission
of a Police Department representative.
§ 3-7.11. Definitions. [Ord. #6-91, § XI]
As used in this section:
AUTOMOBILE — Shall mean a private passenger automobile or a private
or station wagon type that is owned or hired and is neither used as a
public or livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a drive;
and a motor vehicle with a pick-up body, or delivery sedan, a van, or a
panel truck or a camper type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned
by an individual or by husband and wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the insured other than farming or ranching. An automobile owned by a
farm family copartners or corporations, which is principally garaged on a
farm or ranch and otherwise meets the definitions contained in this section,
shall be considered a private passenger automobile owned by two or more
relatives resident in the same household.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean the removal and transportation of
an automobile from a highway, street, or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
automatically result in the next wrecker on the list being summoned.
Response time must be reasonable [20 minutes], and Police officers
may cancel and reassign the call when response time is unreasonably
long. The Chief of Police shall not call or cause to be called any wrecker
not licensed with the Borough unless all such wreckers are unavailable.
It is specifically permitted for the Chief of Police to call a wrecker out
of sequence where proximity to the wreck and estimated response time
make it more practical to do so. Failure to comply with this section will
result in removal from the list by decision of the Borough Committee,
after a full disclosure of the facts by all parties involved.
b. A wrecker company that cannot respond when called, shall not have
any other wrecker company, whether on the rotation list or not, respond
in their place. The next wrecker called shall be at the charge officer's
discretion.
c. Any wrecker company unable to respond four or more Police requests
per month will be subject to removal from the approved list for the next
rotation week of being on service. The Police desk shall allow the phone
to ring 10 times on any call before going to the next service on the list.
Any wrecker company using a paging system will be granted a five
minute wait period to respond before Police call the next wrecker
company on the list.
§ 3-7.9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-7.11
AO:68
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Shall mean the Chief of the Police Department of the
Borough of South Bound Brook or anyone designated by him.
INSIDE BUILDING — Shall mean a vehicle storage facility that is
completely indoors, having one or more openings in the walls for storage
and removal of vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each
opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — Shall mean an occurrence in which a
private passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for
which the private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for
placement in a storage facility. This includes all situations, even if they were
caused by the intentional acts of a perpetrator.
OUTSIDE SECURED — Shall mean an automobile storage facility that is not
indoors and is secured by a fence, wall, or other man-made barrier that is
at least six (6') feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a
similar on-site security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — Shall mean an automobile storage facility that is
not indoors and is not secured by another man-made barrier, and all other
storage facilities not defined above as inside building or outside secured.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
STORAGE CHARGES FOR 24 HOUR PERIOD — Shall mean the maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a 24 hour period or
fraction thereof. A new 24 hour period begins at 12:01 a.m.
TOWING LIST — Shall mean a list maintained by the Police Department
containing the names of those wreckers licensed by the Borough to respond
to requests for the towing of vehicles made by the Police Department.
TOW VEHICLE — Shall mean only those vehicles equipped with a broom
or brooms, winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts, or under-reach equipment
specifically designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of
private passenger automobiles.
TOW VEHICLES BASE OR SERVICE — Shall mean the towing operator's
principal place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in
use.
WRECKER — Shall mean a specially adapted vehicle used to remove motor
vehicles from one place to another; tow vehicle.
§ 3-7.12. Application of Storage and Towing Fee Schedule. [Ord.
#6-91, § XII]
a. The fees set forth on the schedule for towing rates are the maximum
charges that shall apply to a private passenger automobile (for basic
towing services) rendered as a result of police request, an accident, or
§ 3-7.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-7.12
AO:69
§ 3-7.13. Availability of Towing Rates. [Ord. #6-91, § XIII]
Wrecker services are required to have copies of established rates available
for the vehicle owner or driver at the time of tow.
§ 3-7.14. Summoning Other Tow Operators. [Ord. #6-91, § XIV]
This section in no way denies the right of a motorist to request or summon
a tow operator of his/her own choosing, providing the officer at the scene
determines that the tow operator to be summoned can arrive at the scene in
a time limit as specified herein, has the proper equipment to clear the scene
and the safety of persons or motorists will not be jeopardized by the time
involved. No officer will be required to accept a towing service unknown to
him when the safety of the public is potentially threatened by a disabled or
wrecked vehicle.
§ 3-7.15. Grievances and Complaints. [Ord. #6-91, § XV]
All grievances by licensees or the public shall be brought to the attention of
the Police Department and the Borough Clerk. Complaints of any violation
of this section may result in the suspension of the wrecker service by the
Chief of Police until a hearing can be arranged by the Borough Clerk. If it is
found that a violation of this agreement does exist, the Borough Council may
theft recovery. There shall be no additional charges other than those
provided in N.J.A.C. 11:3(36)38.6, including, but not limited to,
flatbedding (when requested), waiting time, winching, cleanup cost,
and additional labor, when only basic towing services as defined are
provided.
1. The towing rates shall be calculated based on the total distance
traveled from the tow vehicle's base of service to the job site and
return, by way of the shortest available route. Fractions shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole mile.
2. Tow vehicles transporting multiple passenger cars at one time shall
receive the applicable fees for each vehicle transported.
3. When towing services are required, the day rate shall apply when
the vehicle is transported (pickup to delivery) entirely between
8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except New
Jersey state holidays. The night, weekend, and holiday rate shall
apply otherwise.
4. The fees set forth on the schedule for storage fees are the
maximum storage charges per 24 hour period that shall apply to a
private passenger automobile that is stored by a person.
5. The responding tow operator or licensee shall be responsible for
cleaning the scene of an accident of broken glass, metal, or debris
by sweeping the road surface to the satisfaction of the officer in
charge of the scene.
§ 3-7.12 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-7.15
AO:70
terminate the wrecker service's license. All decisions made by the Borough
Council shall be considered final.
§ 3-7.16. Towing and Storage Fee Schedules. [Ord. #6-91, § XVI;
Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 3-7.17. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #6-91, § XVII]
Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section
may, in addition to being removed from the towing list, be liable to a fine or
not more than $500.
§ 3-8. CURFEW.
a. The following is the fee schedule for towing services:
1. Days.
First mile or less $50.00
Each additional mile $2.00
2. Nights, Weekends, and Holidays.
First mile or less $60.00
Each additional mile $2.00
b. The following is the fee schedule for storage services:
1. Inside Building.
Storage Facility Capacity Fee
21 or more spaces $20.00
10-20 spaces $25.00
Less than 10 spaces $30.00
2. Outside Secured.
Storage Facility Capacity Fee
21 or more spaces $15.00
10-20 spaces $18.00
Less than 10 spaces $20.00
3. Outside Unsecured.
Storage Facility Capacity Fee
21 or more spaces $10.00
10-20 spaces $15.00
Less than 10 spaces $18.00
§ 3-7.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-8.1
AO:71
§ 3-8.1. Regulations of Public Places by Minors. [Ord. #2-93, § I]
The Borough Council, by reason of conditions which exist and of
circumstances that have occurred within the Borough which have been a
source of annoyance and public concerns to the Borough residents and
to other lawfully using public and quasi-public streets and places in the
Borough, deems it necessary, proper, advisable and in the best interests of
the public to regulate the use of public and quasi-public streets and places
within the Borough by any juvenile not attaining the age of 18 years and by
others for the maintenance of good order and the protection of persons and
property and for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of
the Borough and its residents and other lawfully using the public and quasipublic
streets and places in the Borough.
§ 3-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2-93, § II]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person 18 years of age or older, other than a
parent, to whom legal custody of the juvenile has been given by court order
or who is acting in the place of the parent or is responsible for the care and
welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — Shall mean an individual under the age of 18 years.
LOITERING — Shall mean and be defined as set forth in the Borough
ordinance. "An Ordinance to prohibit loitering and the consumption of
alcoholic beverages in public in the Borough of South Bound Brook and
providing penalties for the violation thereof" adopted December 10, 1974.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean every civic and publicly owned building, park,
playground and other places of general public gathering or congregation;
any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk including the front of any shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business as well as parking lots.
PUBLIC STREET — Shall mean every highway, road, trail, alley, fire lane or
other way that is open to the use of the public for vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
QUASI-PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean every privately owned building or
other place of public accommodation or use or building or other structure
open to the general public and all vacant lots or other unsupervised areas
within the Borough not readily under the control or supervision of the
owner. It shall also include the front of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or
other place of business, and public grounds, areas, parks as well as parking
lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of
the person charged with violating this section; or, in the case of a juvenile,
not owned or under the control of his/her parent or guardian.
QUASI-PUBLIC STREET — Shall mean every highway, road, trail, fire lane,
alley or other way dedicated to the public use, but which is unopened or
unaccepted by the Borough.
§ 3-8.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-8.3
AO:72
§ 3-8.3. Curfew Established; Exceptions. [Ord. #2-93, § III]
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under the age of 18 years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll or play in or remain in or be upon the public streets,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public
places and public buildings, places or amusement and entertainment,
vacant lots or other public places within the confines of the Borough
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any juvenile under 18 years of
age accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other person having the
care of custody of the juvenile, or where the juvenile is upon an emergency
errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent or guardian or
other adult person having the care or custody of the juvenile.
§ 3-8.4. Responsibility of Parents and Guardians. [Ord. #2-93, § IV]
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the care or custody of a juvenile under 18 years of age to allow or permit or
suffer the juvenile to go or be upon any public street, alley, highway, park,
playground or other public places or public grounds in the Borough set forth
in subsection 3-8.2 during the restricted time period of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. of the following day in violation of the provisions of subsection 3-8.3,
except as therein provided.
§ 3-8.5. Detention of Violators; Notice of Charges; Copy to Court.
[Ord. #2-93, § V]
Whenever a juvenile shall be arrested or taken into custody or detained for
willfully violating the provisions of subsection 3-8.3, the parents or legal
guardians or legal guardian of such juvenile or any person who has assumed
the responsibility of the natural parents of the juvenile shall be notified of
such detention by the arresting police officer or any authorized member of
the South Bound Brook Police Department.
a. The authorized police officer shall serve written notice upon such
parent or legal guardian or the person responsible for such juvenile
setting forth the facts and charges of the violation, which notice shall
contain a warning that upon a second arrest or detention within 180
days and conviction of the juvenile on charges of violating this section, a
formal complaint may be filed against the parent or legal guardian or
other person responsible for the care and custody of the juvenile for
lack of supervision and permitting the juvenile to violate the provisions
of subsection 3-8.3.
b. A copy of the notice and warning mentioned in paragraph a and the
facts and circumstances of the prior arrest or detention shall be served
upon the Administrator of the Borough of South Bound Brook Municipal
Court, which notices shall be evidence of parental or guardian neglect
of supervision in any complaint with charges filed against the parent or
legal guardian or other person responsible for the care and custody of
§ 3-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-8.5
AO:73
§ 3-8.6. Nonapplicability. [Ord. #2-93, § VI]
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a juvenile under the
age of 18 years or to a parent or legal guardian or other person responsible
for the care and custody of the juvenile during the time necessarily required
for such juvenile to travel from a place of employment, at which such
juvenile may be gainfully employed; or from school or place of instruction,
at which such juvenile may be in a bona fide attendance; or from a place
at which a function may be held that shall be or had been sponsored
by a religious, school, civic or properly supervised event or program, or
gathering or assemblage had taken place, to his or her residence; nor in the
event of an emergency involving the danger to life or property which shall
require the juvenile to be out of his/her home and in the prohibited area.
§ 3-8.7. Power to Enforce Section. [Ord. #2-93, § VII]
All officers or officials charged with law enforcement within the Borough
are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce the provisions
of this section.
§ 3-8.8. Penalties. [Ord. #2-93, § VIII]
§ 3-9. DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
§ 3-9.1. Indecent Acts or Language. [Ord. 8/5/31, § 9]
No person while upon, about or in the waters of or bounding the Borough
shall commit any lewd, immoral or indecent act or utter loud or offensive
or indecent language or by hilarity disturb the peace and quiet in the
neighborhood.
§ 3-9.2. Unlawful Assembly. [Ord. 8/5/31, § 10]
No person shall participate in any riot or unlawful assembly of persons,
or disturb any neighborhood, family or person within the Borough by any
loud or unnecessary noise with kettles, belts, drums, or other articles, or
by shouting, or by using any profane, indecent or obscene language or by
any indecent conduct whatever, or by quarreling, assaulting or fighting or
by otherwise disturbing the public peace.
the juvenile charged with the violation of subsection 3-8.4 in allowing
the juvenile to violate subsection 3-8.3.
a. Any juvenile apprehended pursuant to this section and held in violation
thereof, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth within the power of
the Juvenile Court of the County of Somerset and State of New Jersey.
b. Any adult violator of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
penalty of up to $1,000 and a term of community service, which shall be
served together by the juvenile and parent/guardian in the event both
violate the section.
§ 3-8.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-9.3
AO:74
§ 3-9.3. Throwing Dangerous Objects. [Ord. 8/5/31, § 11]
No person shall throw stones, sticks or any hard or dangerous or offensive
substances in or into any street or byway or public place, or at any person,
car, domestic animal, vehicle, house, building, or fence within the Borough
limits or waters within or bounding the Borough.
§ 3-9.4. Distribution of Papers and Circulars Regulated. [Ord. 8/5/
31, § 12]
No person shall distribute, strew about or place in any street or public
place, areaway or yard, or upon the steps or porch of any building or cause
to be so distributed, strewn about or placed, any papers, circulars, cards or
pamphlets unless securely attached to the building except such papers or
other matter as may be ordered or subscribed for by the occupants of the
premises. Newspaper deliveries are an exception.
§ 3-9.5. Obstruction of Streets and Sidewalks. [Ord. 8/5/31, § 17]
No person shall obstruct the streets, sidewalks, byways or public places of
the Borough with any kind of vehicles, boxes, lumber, wood or any other
thing.
§ 3-9.6. Interference with Borough Officials. [Ord. 8/5/31, § 18]
No person shall interfere with, obstruct or hinder any Police Officer in the
performance of his duty, or willfully refuse or neglect to assist any Police
Officer when lawfully required to do so by him in the execution of any
process in the suppression of a breach of the peace or in the case of an
escape, or when he is resisted in the discharge of his duty.
§ 3-9.7. Damaging Fire Alarm Boxes and Street Lights. [Ord. 8/5/31,
§ 20]
No person shall intentionally break, or injure, or cause to be broken or
injured, any fire alarm box, owned by the Borough or any street lights used
or lighted by, or rented to the Borough.
§ 3-9.8. Fleeing from Police Officer. [Ord. #7-79, § 1; Ord. #10-91,
§ I]
Any person who flees or attempts to elude, on foot or by any other means,
any police or law enforcement officer after having received any signal from
such officer to halt or bring his/her vehicle to a full stop, is in violation of
this section.
§ 3-9.9. Parking in Streets for Sale of Vehicle Prohibited. [Ord. 9/11/
62, § 7]
No person shall at any time park a vehicle on any street for the purpose of
sale or exchange of vehicle.
§ 3-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-10
AO:75
§ 3-10. DRUG FREE ZONES.6
§ 3-10.1. Maps Adopted.7 [Ord. No. 2008-10 § 1]
The maps as adopted as Schedule A, entitled Drug Free School Zone, 1,000
foot radius; and as Schedule B, entitled Drug Free Public Park Zone, 500
foot radius; prepared by Maser Consulting dated August 4, 2008, are hereby
adopted by the Governing Body pursuant to and for the purposes set forth
in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and 2C:35-7.1.
§ 3-10.2. Map to Constitute Official Finding and Record. [Ord. No.
2008-10 § 2]
§ 3-10.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2008-10 § 3]
The purpose of this section is to implement the enhanced penalties provided
in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 for manufacturing, distributing,
dispensing or possessing controlled dangerous substances or analogs
thereof, under the circumstances set forth in the above referenced statutes.
§ 3-11. DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.
§ 3-11.1. Display of Obscene Material Regulated. [Ord. #10-97 § I]
No person who operates a store, newsstand, booth, concession, or similar
business with unimpeded access for persons under 18 years of age or
who is in business of making sales of periodicals or other publications
a. Schedule A is hereby approved by the Governing Body as an official
finding and record of the location and boundaries of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of the school listed below.
No. School Name
1. Robert Morris School
b. Schedule B is hereby approved by the Governing Body as an official
finding and record of the location and boundaries of the areas within
500 feet of the public parks listed below.
No. Park Name
1. Memorial Park
2. Maple Avenue Park
3. Warren Street Park
4. Staats House Park
5. Delaware & Raritan Canal Park
6. Editor's Note: Prior history includes Ord. No. 2001-04; Ord. No. 2002-01.
7. Editor's Note: The maps may be found in the Borough offices.
§ 3-10 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-11.1
AO:76
at retail containing pictures, drawings or photographs, shall display or
permit to be displayed at his business premises any obscene material at a
height of less than five feet and without a blinder or other covering placed
or printed on the material displayed. The public display of the obscene
material shall constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly
made or permitted this display.
§ 3-11.2. Definitions. [Ord. #10-97 § I]
As used in this section:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Shall mean any description, narrative account,
display or depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area contained in,
or consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound
recording, live performance or film, which by means of posing, composition,
format, or animated sensual details:
§ 3-11.3. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. #10-97 § II]
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be charged with
a petty disorderly person offense.
§ 3-12. POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY BY PERSONS UNDER THE
LEGAL AGE PROHIBITED.
§ 3-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2011-05]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or Court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underaged person's grandparent, aunt or
uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
UNDERAGE OR UNDERAGED PERSON — Shall mean the state of being,
or an individual, under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages as
provided in N.J.S.A. 9:17B-1.
Depict or describe in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, excretory
functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals.
a.
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value when taken
as a whole.
b.
Is a part of a work, which to the average person applying contemporary
community standards, has dominant theme taken as a whole, which
appeals to the prurient interest.
c.
§ 3-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-12.2
AO:77
§ 3-12.2. Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2011-05]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age and without legal
authority, knowingly to possess or knowingly to consume an alcoholic
beverage on private property.
§ 3-12.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2011-05]
This section shall not prohibit an underaged person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance,
ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who
has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
This section shall not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment by
a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while
actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary
arts or hotel management program at a county vocational school or post
secondary educational institution; however, this ordinance shall not be
construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty hereunder, or under
N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises licensed
for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-12.4. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2011-05]
Upon conviction for violation of any provision of this section, the penalty for
a first offense shall be a fine of $250 for a first offense and a fine of $350 for
any subsequent offense.
§ 3-12.5. Additional Authorized Penalty. [Ord. No. 2011-05]
The Court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend
or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the defendant. Upon
the conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement of that
person's driver's license, the Court shall forward a report to the Motor
Vehicle Commission stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the Court pursuant to this section. If
a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, is less than 17
years of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension
or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of
six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years.
If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the Court shall immediately collect the license
and forward it to the Commission along with the report. If for any reason
the license cannot be collected, the Court shall include in the report the
complete name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex of the person, as
§ 3-12.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 3-12.5
AO:78
well as the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by
the Court.
The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt
of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not be a
defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
If the person convicted under such an ordinance is not a New Jersey
resident, the Court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Commission the required report. The Court shall not collect
the license of a non-resident convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a
report by the Court, the Commission shall notify the appropriate officials in
the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT GAMES.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #7-88, § 1]
As used in this section:
AISLES — Shall mean a space provided in a building or structure between
objects resting on the floor or between such object or objects and a wall
petition, column or other fixed part of the building or structure, designed
to permit persons on foot to walk or move from one place to another in the
building. For purposes of this section such aisle need only be three (3') feet
in width between such objects or between an object and a fixed part of the
building or structure. Any additional space actually provided in a building
or structure is not to be considered as part of the aisle and need not be
deducted from the gross floor area to determine net floor area.
AMUSEMENT GAMES OR DEVICES — Shall mean any machine,
contrivance or device which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disc, key, or similar instrument into a slot, crevice or other opening in the
machine or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score and - shall include without limitation, and not
be limited to such devices as marble machines, pin ball machines, skill
ball, mechanical games, video games, electronic games or operations or
transactions similar thereto by whatever names they may be called.
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm,
association, corporation or any other business entity which leases, rents
§ 3-12.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.1
AO:79
or places under any kind of arrangement within the Borough one or more
amusement games or devices in premises or in locations owned or
controlled by another.
LICENSED PREMISES — Shall mean the entire premises including without
limitation the interior and exterior of all buildings, auxiliary buildings,
structures or appurtenant structures, walks, alleys, drives and/or parking
facilities owned or controlled by the operator and or owner operator.
NET FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the gross floor area of the licensee's
premises less deductions for counter space areas, storage areas, display
cases, the amusement devices themselves, shelving areas, aisles,
bathrooms, office space, stairwells and stairs and other areas which are not
intended or held out for public use. The building inspector - shall determine
the amount of net floor area in square feet in each prospective licensed
premises subject to this section.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm,
association, corporation, or any other business entity which owns or
controls premises or locations within the Borough in which any amusement
or entertainment machine or device is displayed for public patronage, or is
placed or kept for the public.
§ 4-1.2. License Required. [Ord. #7-88, § 2]
No natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or any other
business entity which owns or controls premises or locations within the
Borough shall install, maintain, operate, or possess in any store, premises,
location, or building where any business of any nature or character is
conducted or any other place wherein the public may enter, any amusement
games or devices as defined herein without having first obtained a license
to so install, maintain, operate or possess from the Borough after written
application therefor, in accordance with the terms of this section for each
such machine, game or device.
§ 4-1.3. Requirements for Issuing Licenses. [Ord. #7-88, § 3]
a. An application properly completed with all information required by this
section supplied.
b. The licensing fee paid in advance by cash or certified check.
c. Compliance of the premises sought to be licensed with the
requirements of this section for such premises.
d. Continued compliance with all requirements of this section.
e. Certification by the Police Chief or his designated representative that
he has made an investigation of the applicant and premises sought to be
licensed by the applicant, and finds compliance with this section and all
ordinances and laws required to be enforced by him and that there is no
evidence that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving
§ 4-1.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-1.3
AO:80
§ 4-1.4. Physical Requirements for Licensed Premises. [Ord. #7-88,
§ 4; Ord. #11-99 § A]
§ 4-1.5. Duties of Borough Officials. [Ord. #7-88, § 5]
moral turpitude, sale or possession of a controlled dangerous substance
or gambling related offenses.
f. Certification by the Fire Chief or his designated representative that he
has made a thorough inspection of the premises and finds compliance
with this section and all ordinances and laws required to be enforced by
him.
g. Certification by the Construction Official or his designated
representative that he has made a thorough inspection of the premises
and finds compliance with this section and all ordinance and laws
required to be enforced by him.
h. Adoption by the Borough Council of a resolution granting such license
upon compliance with this section and the aforesaid requirements.
a. Each premises shall comply with all requirements of the BOCA Basic
Building Code and any and all other code requirements imposed by the
State of New Jersey. The Construction Official shall determine the
number of square feet of the net floor area in each prospective licensed
premises which is subject to this section and certify to the Borough
Council the net floor area available for such machines and the
maximum number permitted.
b. (Reserved)
c. Particular emphasis shall be placed upon obstruction to exits and free
flow of pedestrian traffic to, by, through and around said machines or
devices. Locations in accordance with the above criteria shall be
subject to specific approval by the appropriate fire prevention
authorities of the Borough and the specific approval of the Police
Department of the Borough.
d. There shall be at least six (6") inches of open space between each
machine and an adjacent wall or partition.
e. (Reserved)
f. There shall be adequate ventilation and bathroom facilities provided for
the expected number of patrons and observers of the machines.
a. At the time of the initial application or annual renewal thereof, the Chief
of Police or his designated representative shall make or cause to be
made an inspection of the premises described in the application and the
type of machine applied for, shall attach to the application upon
completion of his inspection and investigation his report in writing
which shall state the nature and type of machine or device, the place
§ 4-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.5
AO:81
§ 4-1.6. General Conditions and Requirements. [Ord. #7-88, § 6;
Ord. #11-99 § B]
where and when it is operated and maintained, the name of the
proprietor of the store or premises at or in which the machine or device
is to be operated or maintained, the name and address of the owner
of the premises at or in which the machine or device is to be operated
or maintained, the name and address of the owner of the particular
machine or device, the recommendations of the Chief of Police and any
other pertinent information the Chief of Police deems necessary. He
shall file his report with the Borough Clerk and a copy with the Fire
Chief and Construction Official. He shall also determine compliance
with all other applicable laws or ordinances required to be enforced
by him. He shall also cause a review to be made of the applicant's
criminal record, if any, and shall note and report any violation of the
Borough Code or conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, sale
or possession of a controlled dangerous substance or gambling related
offenses.
b. At the time of the initial application or annual renewal thereof, the Chief
of the Fire Department or his designated representative shall make or
cause to be made an inspection of the premises described in the
application, with reference to fire safety generally and the
requirements of subsection 4-1.4. He shall also determine compliance
with all other applicable laws or ordinances required to be enforced by
him. Upon completion of the inspection the Chief of the Fire
Department or his designated representative shall issue a written
report with all findings, violations of laws or ordinances, if any, and his
recommendations and shall file the report with the Borough Clerk and
shall file a copy of the report with the Chief of Police and Construction
Official.
c. At the time of the initial application or annual renewal thereof, the
Construction Official or his designated representative shall inspect the
proposed premises and measure the proposed licensed premises and
determine the net floor area in accordance with this section. Upon
completion of this measurement he shall issue a written report with his
findings which shall include the maximum number of machines for
which this premises may be licensed and shall file the report with the
Borough Clerk, Chief of Police and Chief of the Fire Department. He
shall also determine compliance with subsection 4-1.4 and all other
applicable laws or ordinances required to be enforced by him.
a. The licensee shall not permit any machine to emit loud and disturbing
noises and shall at all times control the sound so as not to cause
disturbance to persons in the vicinity of the machine. The machine shall
not be placed so that the sound is disturbing to the public in the streets,
or to other persons occupying buildings in the immediate vicinity.
b. The person operating the premises where the machine is located shall
be liable and responsible for the proper operation thereof, regardless of
§ 4-1.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-1.6
AO:82
§ 4-1.7. Application for License. [Ord. #7-88 § 7; Ord. #11-99 § C]
Application for a license shall be in writing, addressed to the Borough Clerk
and be filed in duplicate with the Borough Clerk. The application shall set
forth the following information:
whether or not he/she is the actual owner of the machine, or has rented
the same, but this shall not in any way release the actual owner of the
machine or device from liability or responsibility for violation of this
section.
c. The operator shall not permit, suffer or allow any person to bet or
gamble in any form or manner on the licensed premises and shall
prevent any immoral or illegal conduct or activity from occurring.
d. No person on the licensed premises shall have illegally in his possession
or under his control or offer to another any controlled dangerous
substance nor shall the operator and/or owner-operator permit, suffer
or allow such person on the licensed premises.
e. No operator shall permit, suffer or allow the unlawful sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises unless
the premises is properly licensed by the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission.
f. The operator shall at all times maintain good order upon the licensed
premises and shall not permit, suffer or allow any disturbances,
congestion or loitering upon the licensed premises.
g. No person shall by threats, promises or intimidation seek to control or
direct the placement or removal of any machine or device or
amusement or entertainment machine or device from the premises or
location within the Borough, and any such threat, promises or
intimidation shall be reported immediately to the Police Department.
h. No person under the age of 18 years of age, unaccompanied by an
adult, shall be permitted to play or operate any amusement games or
devices:
1. Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any day that the
public schools are in session.
2. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. any day next
preceding a day when the public schools are in session.
3. Between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day next
preceding a day when the public schools are closed.
a. Full name and address of applicant.
b. If applicant is an individual, the age, date, place of birth and social
security number of the applicant.
§ 4-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.7
AO:83
§ 4-1.8. License Fees. [Ord. #7-88, § 8; Ord. #11-99 § D]
The annual fee for an operator of any amusement game, machine or device,
which shall include the premises where the game or games are located,
shall be $200 for the first machine or device licensed and $25 for each
additional machine licensed.
c. If applicant is a firm, partnership or association, the names and
addresses, ages and places of birth of all members of the firm,
partnership or association.
d. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses, ages and
places of birth of all officers and directors and the names and addresses
of all stockholders of the corporation owning 10% or more of all of the
issued and outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
e. Prior criminal record, if any, of each applicant, of any jurisdiction.
f. Full description of all amusement games, coin-operated amusement
games, machines and amusement machines and devices, including
serial number, if any, name of manufacturer, place of manufacture and
year of manufacture.
g. Place where the machines or devices are to be displayed and business is
to be conducted or carried on.
h. Exact location of the machines or devices in the business premises as
indicated on the floor plan, drawn to scale, which shall show all
permanent or semi-permanent fixtures, shelves, etc. as established in
the place of business, and the location of machines or devices shall be
such that it shall not interfere with the safe use of the premises by the
patrons thereof. The application must contain the total number of
square feet to which the applicant customarily invites or permits the
public to occupy and use.
i. The name and address of the registered agent of the applicant or
person upon whom service of process is authorized to be made. The
aforesaid registered agent or person upon whom service of process is
authorized shall be a resident of the State of New Jersey.
j. If the applicant is a corporation, there shall be included a corporate
resolution in proper form authorizing the execution of the license
application on behalf of the corporation.
k. Each applicant shall contain a certification, under oath, made by the
applicant that the information contained in the application and all
attachments thereto is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his
knowledge and belief.
l. Each application shall be accompanied by a deposit in cash or certified
check to cover the annual license fee for one year in the amount
hereinafter provided.
§ 4-1.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-1.9
AO:84
§ 4-1.9. Expiration of Licenses; Renewals. [Ord. #7-88, § 9]
Licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year following the issuance of
any license. Applications for renewal of the license shall be submitted no
later than September 30 of the year in which the existing license expires.
The licensing fee for any license granted after March of any year shall be
prorated according to the number of months remaining before the license
would expire.
§ 4-1.10. Transferability of License. [Ord. #7-88, § 10]
Upon application to the Borough Council, the Council may, in their
discretion, transfer a license from one premises to another or one licensee
to another so long as the applicant has complied with all provisions of this
section.
§ 4-1.11. Revocation of License. [Ord. #7-88, § 11]
Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation by the Borough
Council should the licensee, distributor and/or operator, distribute or
operate any device or any amusement or entertainment machine or device
contrary to the provisions of this section or any other law, ordinance, rule
or regulation or fail to cooperate fully with any enforcement officer or
agency. Any material misstatement or omission in the license application or
in any information submitted therewith or the failure to notify the Borough
Clerk in wiring of any changes by addition or deletion or amendment to the
application or information during the term of any license or renewal shall
constitute sufficient ground for revocation of the license. Such revocation
shall be by the Borough Council after a hearing. The licensee shall be given
10 days notice of the hearing and the notice shall state the grounds therefor.
At such hearing the licensee may submit relevant information in his own
behalf and cross examine witnesses.
§ 4-1.12. Use of Machines for Gambling Prohibited. [Ord. #7-88,
§ 12]
No person shall use or permit to be used any of the machines or devices
licensed under this section for the purpose of gambling.
§ 4-1.13. Seizure of Machines or Devices. [Ord. #7-88, § 13]
If the Chief of Police shall have probable cause to believe any device or any
amusement or entertainment machine or device is used for gambling, such
machine or device may be seized by the Police Department and impounded
and may be considered as contraband by law.
§ 4-1.14. Exempt Groups and Organizations. [Ord. #7-88, § 14]
All the provisions of this section requiring a license shall also apply to any
church, fraternal or veterans' organization or other religious or charitable
nonprofit organization or governmental department or agency which
§ 4-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.14
AO:85
operates any amusement or entertainment machine or device exclusively
for the use of its members and the guests of such members and on premises
owned or controlled by it; provided that upon application to the Borough
Council, the Council by resolution may in its sole discretion waive the whole
or any part of the fees required by this section.
§ 4-1.15. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. #7-88, § 15; Ord. No. 3-96]
Any person violating any provision of this section or failing to comply
therewith shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
the violation or failure to comply occurs or continues.
§ 4-2. JUNKYARDS AND JUNK SHOPS.
§ 4-2.1. License Required. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain, operate
or conduct a junk shop or junkyard, in or upon which junk as hereinafter
described, shall be purchased, sold, stored, repaired, renovated or restored,
within the Borough, without first having obtained a license for such
purpose, as hereinafter provided.
§ 4-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
As used in this section:
GOOD CAUSE — Shall mean the violation of any of the provisions of this
section, or any false statement contained in the application for license, or
failure to pay any license fee when due, or any conviction of the applicant
during the term for which the license was issued for the violation of any
criminal statute or law of the State of New Jersey, or of any State in the
United States, or the United States Government.
JUNK — Shall mean and include rags, scrap, iron, shavings, borings, old
rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, aluminum and other old materials,
automobiles, trucks tractors, trailers, construction equipment and all
manner of vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for sale for use
of transportation, used parts of any of such vehicles or equipment, old
bottles, drums, barrels, glass, lumber, paper, discarded machinery or parts
thereof, old or broken pipe, brick, tubing and any forms of construction
materials, discarded ice-boxes, refrigerators, freezers, washing machines,
water heaters, tubs, bathtubs, water closets, lavatories and other discarded
fixtures, and any other second-hand articles or used materials and
merchandise and such other articles or things as commonly come within the
classification of junk.
JUNK DEALER — Shall mean any person, firm association, partnership,
or corporation which deals in junk for commercial purposes, or who buys
or otherwise acquires or collects or stores junk for commercial purposes
within the Borough, in the manner provided in this section.
§ 4-1.14 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-2.2
AO:86
JUNKYARD — Shall mean any lands or parcels thereof on which junk
is collected or placed or stored for commercial purposes or for any
remuneration whatever.
LICENSED PREMISES — Shall mean any land or building or both whereon
a junkyard is maintained under license hereunder or any junk shop which
is licensed, or any premises for which a license is issued to a junk dealer
under the provisions of this section.
§ 4-2.3. Application for License. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
a. All applicants desiring a license for the maintenance of a junk yard or
junk shop, or as a junk dealer, shall first file a written application signed
by the applicant with the Borough Clerk, containing the following
information.
1. Name and status of applicant: that is whether individual,
corporation, partnership or association. If an applicant is a
corporation, the applicant shall furnish the names and addresses of
all officers and registered agents and shall designate the office of
each; if a partnership or association, the applicant shall state the
names and addresses of all members thereof.
2. Permanent residence address of applicant.
3. The place or places of the permanent residence of the applicant for
each of the preceding three years.
4. A full description of the premises desired to be licensed, including a
metes and bounds description of the lands constituting the
premises, together with a description of any buildings or
improvements thereon, and a sketch, diagram or map of the lands
desired to be licensed.
5. A description of the type and size of any buildings to be maintained
as a junk shop.
6. A description of materials to be purchased or sold or stored in any
junk shop or in any junk yard, or in which any junk dealer intends to
deal.
7. A statement of the number and places of arrests or convictions for
crimes against the applicant and the nature of the offenses on
which such arrests or convictions were made.
8. A statement of the equipment to be used in the operation of the
business and the method of operation.
b. Applications shall be accompanied by payment of the amount of the
license fee for the period involved.
c. An applicant for a license shall cause notice of his application to be
published twice in successive weeks, at least once each week, in a
§ 4-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.3
AO:87
§ 4-2.4. Licensing Procedure. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
newspaper published and circulating within the County of Somerset,
the first of which publication shall be at least 10 days prior to the date
for consideration of the application by the Borough Council; and the
applicant shall also file due proof of publication with the Borough Clerk
prior to the date for consideration of the application.
d. The Borough Clerk shall present any application, together with the fee
accompanying the same and proofs of publication, to the Borough
Council at its next meeting following receipt of proofs of publication
from the applicant. In the event the license applied for shall be denied,
the fee accompanying the license shall be returned, less, however, the
sum of 10% thereof to cover the cost of investigation of the applicant.
e. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to be
conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct of the business
described in the application shall be endorsed in writing on the
application, or otherwise annexed thereto.
a. The Borough Council may consider the application for license at the
meeting for which the application and proofs and fees are presented, or
it may set a date for a hearing to be held on the application at some
reasonable time thereafter, which hearing, however, shall not be later
than one month from the date of the Borough Council meeting
considering the same, and at which hearing any objectors to the license
may be heard and may present evidence as well as the applicant and
those in support of the license.
b. If a date for hearing on the application for license is set, the Borough
Council may investigate the applicant and the matters set forth in the
application through its own officers, employees, or representatives,
and:
1. The Borough Council shall also obtain a report in writing from the
Tax Collector as to whether the applicant is in default in the
payment of any taxes owing the Borough at the time the application
is filed, which report shall be filed with the Borough Clerk at least
five days before the date of hearing set for the application.
2. The Borough Council may investigate and consider as part of its
determination for the issuance of a license any unreasonable
depreciation of surrounding property of adjoining owners which
might ensue from the establishment or maintenance of such a
business at the location designated in the application. The
proximity of schools, churches, public highways, the suitability of
the applicant to receive the license, which shall include his arrest
or conviction for criminal acts, social and aesthetic desirability
shall also be taken into consideration of such application.
§ 4-2.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-2.4
AO:88
§ 4-2.5. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
All licenses granted under this section and all premises licensed thereunder
shall be subject to the following regulations:
c. After considering all the evidence with respect to the application, the
Borough Council may issue, or deny the license to the applicant for
good cause revealed by the facts or evidence, and if any application for
license is denied, the Borough Council shall state in writing the reasons
for the denial forming the good cause found by the Borough Council
denying license to the applicant.
d. The license when issued by the Borough shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place upon the licensed premises at all times.
e. The Borough Council, after investigating and considering an
application for license hereunder, or after hearing the same shall, if the
application subscribes to the provisions of this section, authorize the
Borough Clerk to issue a license to the applicant, which licensee shall
be effective from the date of issuance to midnight of June 30 in the year
following the date of issue.
a. Fence or Enclosure Required; Entrances and Exits Locked When
Unattended.
1. A junkyard shall be completely obstructed from view from the
public road. In obstructing the view of the licensed premises from
the public road, the licensee shall have at the time of the
application, or shall construct within 60 days of the granting of any
license and before storing of any junk, a solid board fence or other
solid material at least seven feet high from the ground and built in
such manner so as to obstruct visibility of the junkyard from any
public street or public property from outside the enclosure. The
said fence or enclosure shall be painted with either a white or dark
green paint and shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
There shall be no advertisement allowed or any description of
writing on the fence except the owner's name and description of
the character of his business, and such description or writing shall
not exceed an area of six square feet.
2. The licensed premises shall be enclosed at the entrances and exits
thereto and therefrom by a gate or gates which shall be securely
closed and locked when unattended so as to preclude any entrance
to the enclosure whenever the enclosures may be unattended.
3. The remaining premises around the junkyard shall be obstructed
from the view of adjoining owners so far as possible by a fence or
shrubbery either seven feet high or of such height as may obstruct
the view from surrounding property as best as may be done.
§ 4-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.5
AO:89
b. No junk or rubbish or salvage material of any type shall be maintained
outside the enclosure surrounding the licensed premises of any
junkyard, nor outside of any junk shop licensed hereunder.
c. No license issued hereunder shall entitle any licensee to operate under
the license at, in, or on any lot, building, or location or any part thereof
other than just specified in the license, and no license shall be
assignable or transferable to any other person or party whatever.
d. There shall be no burning of materials on any licensed premises, and no
open fires shall be permitted, except that this shall not prohibit the
controlled use of acetylene torches in salvaging or repairing, any goods,
motor vehicles, or other chattels on the premises or parts thereof. In
the event that fires of accidental nature occur on the licensed premises
in such numbers or such periods of time as to create a fire hazard to
other properties or inhabitants of the Borough, the Borough Committee
may revoke the license granted after due hearing and notice thereof
because of the hazardous nature or conduct of the business. At all times
adequate access shall be provided for fire fighting equipment.
e. No materials of an explosive nature shall be maintained or demolished
on any licensed premises.
f. No materials shall be kept or maintained on the licensed premises
which shall be of such odorous nature as to be offensive to adjoining
property owners or other inhabitants in the area of the licensed
premises.
g. The licensee shall take all reasonable measures to keep rats or other
vermin from the licensed premises.
h. The licensee shall maintain sufficient fire extinguishers on the licensed
premises at all times and shall also establish fire protection according
to standards recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters
for such premises. The licensee shall also report all fires to the Chief of
the Township Fire Department, furnishing date and extent of fire, and
cause, if known.
i. No licensee hereunder shall purchase any goods, articles, or other
materials whatsoever from any person under the age of 17 years.
j. The business of the licensee shall be operated in such manner as not to
cause unreasonably loud noises that are either so consistent or so
audible as to be a nuisance to other property owners or inhabitants in
the neighborhood.
k. No licensee shall stack or place junk above the level of the height of the
fence enclosing a junkyard or otherwise in such manner as to create a
fire hazard or to create a place for the harboring of rats, mice or
vermin.
§ 4-2.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-2.5
AO:90
§ 4-2.6. Fees; Renewal of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
Any license issued by the Borough may be renewed each year thereafter
without publication of notice of application by furnishing notice of intention
to renew the license in writing with the Borough Clerk at least 30 days prior
to July 1 of the renewal year, and upon payment of the annual license fee
of $1,000. No hearing shall be required for the issuance of any renewal
license unless objections are filed in writing with the Borough Clerk by any
inhabitant or taxpayer of the Borough against the renewal of the license.
In the event a written objection is filed before renewal as herein provided,
the Borough Council shall set a date for hearing and proceed to hear the
objection and all evidence for and against the issuance of such license not
later than 15 days from the beginning of the renewal period, and at the
conclusion of the hearing the Borough Council may then determine whether
to issue a renewal license or to deny the same if the evidence presented
indicates sufficient cause by virtue of prior violations of this section by the
licensee.
The Borough Council may authorize a temporary permit for such licensee
until the hearing has been completed and a determination made so that
the business of a licensee may not be suspended or interfered with
unreasonably by filing of any written objections.
§ 4-2.7. Hours. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
No licensee shall conduct any processing operations or purchases or sales
of materials on the licensed premises after 8:00 p.m. and prior to 8:00 a.m.
of the following day on weekdays.
§ 4-2.8. Revocation of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
§ 4-2.9. Fees. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
l. No licensee shall buy, sell, receive dispose of, conceal or have in his
possession any motor vehicle from which the manufacturer's serial
number or any other number of identification mark has been removed,
defaced, altered, covered, or destroyed with the apparent purpose of
concealing the identity of such vehicle.
a. The Borough Council may revoke any license granted at any time
during the period for which the license was issued on the Borough
Council's own action, or on the objection of any taxpayer or inhabitant
of the Township for good cause shown after a hearing provided to the
licensee following complaint in writing and at least seven days notice to
the licensee setting forth the grounds of complaint.
b. The licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the Fire
Department, Board of Health, and other authorized officials of the
Borough, at any reasonable time of day or night.
§ 4-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.9
AO:91
§ 4-3. LAUNDERETTES, LAUNDRIES AND CAR WASHES.
§ 4-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 1]
As used in this section:
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean the Board of Health of the Borough of
South Bound Brook.
LAUNDERETTE — Shall mean an establishment or place of business
conducted for the purpose of washing, cleaning, drying or laundering
clothes or other washable materials that may be brought to the
establishment or place of business by customers and wherein the work is
done in machines, coin-operated or otherwise, located on the premises, by
the customers themselves or by or under the supervision of the owners
or operators of the establishment or place of business for the customers,
and shall include a "laundromat," "wash-o-mat," and similar names or types
under which laundering of the self-service type is carried on.
§ 4-3.2. License Required. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any launderette within
the Borough without having first obtained a license therefor. Application
for such license shall be filed with the Borough Clerk. The application
shall set forth the name and address of the person who will maintain the
launderette, the exact size thereof, where the launderette will be operated,
and the number and type of machines to be used in the launderette. A
separate application and license shall be required for each establishment.
Each license shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance.
§ 4-3.3. Conditions. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 3]
Before any applicant shall be entitled to a license, the application shall be
reviewed and investigated by:
a. The annual fees for each license issued hereunder shall be the sum of
$1,000 which shall be prorated where the license shall not have been
issued on July 1 of a year, and any period of a month over 15 days shall
constitute a full month, and any period less than 15 days shall
constitute a half month for the purpose of prorating the annual fee.
b. Payment of the fees shall accompany filing of all applications for
licenses or for any intention to renew thereafter. In the event an
application for license is denied or renewal license is denied, the fee
shall be returned, less 10% for the cost of the Township in investigating
the same. In the event that license shall be revoked for good cause
shown or terminated voluntarily by the licensee, there shall be no
refund of any portion of the license fee.
a. The Fire Department so as to determine whether the premises complies
with proper safety standards relative to fire prevention.
§ 4-2.9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-3.3
AO:92
§ 4-3.4. Fees. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 4; Ord. 4/13/65, § 1; Ord. 1/9/65, § 1;
Ord. 3-98, § 1]
The annual license fee for the full year or any portion thereof shall be at
the rate of $50 for each washing machine and $10 for each drying machine
installed.
§ 4-3.5. Maintenance of Premises. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 5]
The entire premises devoted to the operation of the launderette, and all
the machines used in connection therewith, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. The floor shall be kept clean and dry. The premises shall
be adequately ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial
light. The walls of the premises shall be covered with non-absorbent paint,
cement, or other impervious material. All plumbing work shall at all times
be kept in a good condition and state of repair. The premises shall comply
in all respects with the requirements, regulations and provisions of the Fire
Department, Board of Health, Plumbing section, Building Ordinance, and
Fire Prevention chapter of this Code.
§ 4-3.6. Creation of Disturbing Noise. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 6]
No machinery used in the operation of a launderette shall be operated in
such manner as to cause unnecessary or inexcusable noise or vibration
to the annoyance of residents in the surrounding neighborhood, or to the
detriment of the well being of the neighborhood or to the premises in the
neighborhood.
§ 4-3.7. Attendant. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 7]
It shall be unlawful to keep any such launderette open for business between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., prevailing time, unless there is an
adult attendant in charge of the premises during such hours.
§ 4-3.8. Machines. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 8]
Machines used for washing and drying shall be kept thoroughly clean and in
a sanitary condition at all times. All machines shall be kept in working order.
Machines not in working order shall be taken out of service immediately.
b. The Construction Official of the Borough who shall certify that the
location of the proposed licensed premises for the launderette
operations complies with the Zoning chapter and Building Code of the
Borough of South Bound Brook.
c. The Board of Health or its designated official so as to determine
whether the premises and operations carried on therein comply with
proper health standards, who shall certify that the granting of the
license will not violate any statute of the State of New Jersey or
ordinance of the Borough, or other health regulations pertaining to the
health, welfare and safety of the public.
§ 4-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.9
AO:93
§ 4-3.9. Water. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 9]
§ 4-3.10. Detergents. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 10]
Detergents, chemicals or substances that may in any way damage, injure or
corrode such sanitary sewer or in any way interfere with the operation of
such sewer shall not be used in the operation of the launderette.
§ 4-3.11. Nuisances and Abatement Thereof. [Ord. 11/10/64, § 11]
§ 4-4. CAR DEALERS.
§ 4-4.1. Definition. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 1]
As used in this section:
OPEN AIR PARKING STATION FOR THE SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES —
Shall mean any open air plots of ground, lot or land within the Borough
where motor vehicles are exhibited or are stored, parked, kept or located
for sale or exchange.
a. There shall be available an adequate supply of water for flushing and
cleaning purposes. All washing machines shall be furnished with an
ample supply of hot water when the machines are operated for washing
clothes or other washable materials.
b. No water from the operation of the launderette shall be discharged into
the storm sewer of the Borough, but shall be discharged only into the
sanitary sewer of the Borough.
a. A launderette operated, conducted or maintained in violation of any of
the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to public health.
b. Where the Board of Health finds that a launderette is being operated or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this section or any
ordinances of the Borough so as to constitute a nuisance, the Board of
Health shall notify the owner of the premises or the operator of the
launderette, or both, to abate the nuisance at the expense of such
owner or operator. Such notice shall be in writing and shall specify a
time within which such nuisance shall be abated. If such owner or
operator shall not comply with such notice within the time so specified,
the Board may proceed to abate the nuisance at the expense of such
owner or operator, or both, as provided by law.
c. Where the Board of Health finds that continued operation of the
launderette, while a violation exists, constitutes a distinct and
immediate hazard to public health, the Board is hereby authorized to
prohibit the owner or the operator of the launderette, or both, from
operating or permitting the operation of the launderette, until such
time as the violation is corrected and the nuisance abated.
§ 4-3.9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-4.2
AO:94
§ 4-4.2. License Required. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 2]
No person, firm or corporation shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on
the business of an open air parking station for the sale or exchange of motor
vehicles as defined by this section without first having obtained a license.
§ 4-4.3. Application. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 3]
The application for such license for the business of managing, conducting
and carrying on an open air parking station for the sale or exchange of
motor vehicles shall be made to the Borough Clerk and shall accurately
specify the location of the open air parking station, the portion of the lot
to be used and the number of square feet or area occupied thereby. The
application shall be accompanied by a map or sketch showing the exact
location of the proposed parking station and the area proposed to be used.
§ 4-4.4. Annual Fees. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 4]
The annual license fee for such open air parking station for the sale or
exchange of motor vehicles shall be as follows:
§ 4-4.5. Entrance Provisions. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 5]
Within 10 days after any such license is granted hereunder the area
included in the license shall be provided with one entrance to the premises
not exceeding ten (10') feet in width, to permit the entrance and exit to the
premises. There shall be no opening for entrance or exit along the street
line except where the street curb has been lowered in accordance with the
Borough regulations if a Borough street and in accordance with the County
Engineers Office regulations if a County Street.
§ 4-4.6. Hours of Operation. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 6]
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, operate or carry on the
business of an open air parking station for the sale or exchange of motor
vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 4-4.7. Licenses Not Transferable Without Council's Consent. [Ord.
6/24/53, § 8]
The permits or licenses issued hereunder are not transferable or assignable,
except with the consent of the Borough Council and the business or
occupation shall be conducted only at the place therein specified.
a. For any such parking station having a square foot area of not more than
10,000 square feet the sum of $100.
b. For any such parking lot having a square foot area in excess of 10,000
square feet the sum of $200.
Such permit or license shall run for a period of one year from the date
of its issuance.
§ 4-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.8
AO:95
§ 4-4.8. Vehicle Restrictions. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 9]
No motor vehicle or other object shall be exhibited, stored, parked, kept or
located under the license issued thereunder on any street, sidewalk or part
thereof.
§ 4-4.9. Purpose. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 10]
This section is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue and for the
regulation and control of open air parking stations for the sale or exchange
of motor vehicles.
§ 4-4.10. Exceptions. [Ord. 6/24/53, § 11]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be understood to apply to
any lot or plot of land occupied by a public garage building or service station
wherein the business of public automobile repair or storage is maintained or
conducted, but this shall not be construed to exempt any premises adjacent
to any such garage building or service station from the provisions of this
section.
§ 4-5. TAXICABS.
§ 4-5.1. Definition. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 1]
As used in this section:
TAXICAB — Shall mean any automobile engaged in a business of carrying
passengers for hire which does not operate over a fixed route and is not
hired by the day or hour.
§ 4-5.2. License Required. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 2]
No person shall own or operate any taxicab on any of the public streets,
roads, or other public places of the Borough without first obtaining a license
for that purpose from the Borough Clerk issued with the consent and
approval of the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-5.3. Taxicab Owner's License; Requirements and Application.
[Ord. 7/8/69, § 3]
No person shall be granted a taxicab owner's license unless such person
shall be at least 18 years of age and shall have filed an application verified
by oath or affirmation with the Borough Chief of Police upon such forms as
are provided by him and same shall contain the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, its
name, address of its principal place of business and the name and
address of its registered agent.
b. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
violating any criminal or quasi-criminal statute, including traffic laws
§ 4-4.8 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-5.3
AO:96
§ 4-5.4. Approval; Issuance of Owner's License. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 4]
The Mayor and Council shall by resolution grant or deny the application for
a taxicab owner's license. If the application is granted, the Borough Clerk
shall issue the license upon receiving from the applicant proof that he has
complied with the laws of the State of New Jersey relating to the operation
of taxicabs. The license shall state the name and address of the licensee, the
number of vehicles which the licensee is authorized to operate, and the date
of issuance of the license.
§ 4-5.5. Expiration; Renewal. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 5]
A taxicab owner's license shall expire on December 31 of the year of
issuance and shall not be transferable. Application for renewal shall be
made in the same manner as application for an initial license. The renewal
application shall be presented to the Mayor and Council at its first regular
meeting in the month of December of each year. The fee for a taxicab
owner's license shall be seventy-five ($75.00) dollar per year payable upon
the filing of the application for the issuance or renewal of the license. The
fee shall not be prorated.
§ 4-5.6. Maximum Number of Taxicab Owner's Licenses. [Ord. 7/8/
69, § 6]
The number of taxicab owner's licenses outstanding at any one time shall
not exceed six and no person shall operate or control more than two taxicab
owner's licenses at any one time.
§ 4-5.7. Driver's License; Requirements and Application. [Ord. 7/8/
69, § 7]
No person shall be granted a taxicab driver's license unless such person
shall be at least 18 years of age and shall have filed an application verified
by oath or affirmation with the Borough Chief of Police upon such forms as
are provided by him and same shall contain the following information:
and municipal ordinances. If the applicant has been convicted, a
statement as to date and place of conviction and the nature of the
offense and the punishment imposed.
c. The number of vehicles to be operated by the applicant and the make,
model, and type thereof.
d. The previous experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers for hire.
e. Proof that the applicant is insured as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 et
seq.
f. The execution of a power of attorney in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 48:16-5.
§ 4-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.7
AO:97
§ 4-5.8. Approval of Taxicab Driver's License; Issuance. [Ord. 7/8/69,
§ 8]
The Mayor and Council shall by resolution grant or deny the taxicab driver's
license application. If the application is granted, the Borough Clerk shall
immediately issue the applicant a taxicab driver's license. The license shall
contain the licensee's name and address, physical description, signature
and photograph, and same shall be conspicuously displayed in a manner so
that it can be easily seen by all passengers in the taxicab.
§ 4-5.9. Expiration; Renewal. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 9]
An initial license to drive a taxicab shall be valid for the remainder of the
calendar year for which it was issued. A taxicab driver's license may be
renewed annually upon the payment of a twenty-five ($25.00) dollar fee
unless it has been revoked or suspended.
a. Name, address, and age of applicant.
b. Applicant's New Jersey motor vehicle operator's license number.
c. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the
violation of any criminal or quasi-criminal statute, including municipal
ordinances and traffic laws. If the applicant has been convicted, the
date and place of the conviction, the nature of the offense and the
punishment imposed.
d. A list of all the places where the applicant has ever applied for or been
granted a license to drive a taxicab.
e. A statement as to whether the applicant's license to operate a motor
vehicle or his license to drive a taxicab has ever been suspended or
revoked, or his application for the issuance or renewal of either license
denied and, if so, the date and place of the denial, suspension or
revocation and the reasons therefor.
f. The names and addresses of all persons by whom the applicant has
been employed for the past five years, the positions held, and the nature
of the work performed.
g. Three photographs at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") clearly
showing the head and shoulders of the applicant.
h. Appropriate evidence that the applicant is not a narcotics addict,
alcoholic or habitual drunkard, is of good moral character and clean in
dress and person.
i. A physician's certificate certifying that the applicant is not affected by
any condition, illness, or disease which might render him unfit for the
safe operation of a taxicab or motor vehicle.
j. The application shall be accompanied by the yearly fee for the initial
license period.
§ 4-5.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-5.10
AO:98
§ 4-5.10. Investigation. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 10]
All applications for an owner's or driver's taxicab license, either new or
renewal, shall, after being filed with the Chief of Police, be referred to
the Police Committee for investigation and the Committee shall thereupon
investigate the application and report the same to the Mayor and Council
for approval or disapproval of the application.
§ 4-5.11. Maximum Fare Rates. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 11]
The Council shall periodically establish the rate schedule to be in effect
within the Borough. In case of trips not covered by the provisions of this
section, the fare shall be established by agreement between the driver
of the taxicab and his passenger. Such rates as herein enumerated shall
prevail until changed by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-5.12. Display of Rates. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 12]
Every vehicle licensed under this section shall at all times have displayed on
each side thereof a schedule of rates and the number of the current license
under which it is operated.
§ 4-5.13. Taxicabs Subject to Police Restrictions. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 13]
All licensed taxicabs and vehicles shall congregate and solicit passengers at
such place or places as shall be designated by the Police Department of this
Borough.
§ 4-5.14. Minimum Hours of Operation. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 14]
All licensees shall give to the residents of the Borough reasonable service;
and shall give taxi service at least eight hours in each and every day; and,
if unable to do so, shall report the reason for such failure to the Police
Department of the Borough.
§ 4-5.15. Fire Extinguishers; Lights. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 15]
Each vehicle licensed as a taxicab under this section shall carry a fire
extinguisher of the size, design, and type approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department of the Borough; and shall exhibit a dome light lettered "taxi" or
"taxicab" which shall be lit during the hours of darkness.
§ 4-5.16. Lost Property. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 16]
Each taxicab driver at the beginning and end of his tour of duty shall
carefully search the taxicab for any property lost or left therein. Any lost
property not claimed or delivered to the owner within 24 hours shall be
reported in writing to the Chief of Police by the driver or owner of the
taxicab.
§ 4-5.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.17
AO:99
§ 4-5.17. Revocation of License. [Ord. 7/8/69, § 17]
Any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended, or any
application for the issuance or renewal of a license may be denied, by the
Mayor and Council, for any of the following reasons:
§ 4-6. VENDING MACHINES.
§ 4-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. 12/21/64, § 1]
As used in this section:
LICENSED PREMISES — Shall mean the place or premises where the
applicant proposes to keep, maintain, operate or possess the vending
machine as set forth in the application to obtain a license for the operation
of the vending machine.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the corporation, association, organization, firm,
partnership or individual to whom a license has been issued.
VENDING MACHINE — Shall mean any device, machine, or equipment, or
piece of mechanical or electrical equipment which, upon the insertion of a
coin, or a token slug, or article used in lieu of a coin, into a slot or place on
the machine, device or equipment, results in dispensing or making available
to the user or public any food, beverages, service, or any article or product
of any nature whatsoever.
§ 4-6.2. License Required. [Ord. 12/21/64, § 2; Ord. 4/13/65, § 1]
No person shall keep, maintain, operate or possess in any store, building,
premises, structure, lands or other place within the Borough wherein the
public is invited or permitted or where the public may enter, any vending
machine, without first obtaining a license from the Borough Clerk.
a. The violation of any of the rules and regulations respecting the
operation of the licensed vehicle as set forth hereunder.
b. Failure to render prompt, reasonable, safe and adequate taxicab
service.
c. Failure to comply with all applicable laws of the State of New Jersey.
d. Permitting any taxicab owned or driven by the licensee to become
unsafe, unsanitary, or dirty.
There shall be no rebate upon any license being suspended, revoked, or
surrendered.
a. The application for such license shall state the place or premises where
the applicant proposes to keep, maintain, operate or possess the
vending machine or machines, the name and address, including the
post office address, of the owner of the machines, the owner of the
§ 4-5.17 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-6.2
AO:100
§ 4-6.3. Conditions. [Ord. 12/21/64, § 3]
Before any applicant shall be entitled to a license, the application shall be
reviewed and investigated by:
§ 4-6.4. Suspension, Revocation and Expiration. [Ord. 12/21/64, § 4]
premises and the operator of the premises, the type of vending machine
or such further information as may be required in such application.
b. Attached to each application shall be the name, address, and written
consent of the owner of the licensed premises.
c. A separate application and license shall be required for each licensed
premises. Each license shall expire on December 31 following the date
of issuance. The annual license fees for the full year or any portion
thereof are hereby fixed as hereinafter specified: $25 per coin-operated
machine.
d. The foregoing license fee is fixed for the purpose of regulating vending
machines and the licensed place or premises. Said license shall not be
transferable but the licensee may remove a licensed vending machine
from the licensed premises and substitute another vending machine in
lieu thereof.
a. The Sanitary Inspector of the Borough, where the application involves a
vending machine dispensing food or beverage, who shall certify that the
granting of the license will not violate any statute of the State of New
Jersey or ordinance of the Borough of South Bound Brook, or other
health regulations pertaining to food or drink for human consumption,
and will not be inimical to the health, welfare and safety of the public;
b. The Chief of Police shall certify that the location of the proposed
licensed premises will not constitute a traffic hazard or interfere with
the safety or welfare of the public;
c. The Construction Official of the Borough who shall certify that the
location of the proposed licensed premises for the vending machine or
machines, and the vending machines comply with the Zoning chapter
and Building Code of the Borough.
a. The licensee shall cooperate at all times with the Sanitary Inspector,
Chief of Police, Construction Official, Borough Clerk or other Borough
officers or officials, when required or requested so to do, to provide
information or knowledge which will enable them or any of them to
safeguard the health, welfare and safety of the public as the same may
be affected in anywise by the vending machines. For failure to render
such cooperation, or provide information or knowledge, relative to the
vending machines, the Borough Clerk may forthwith temporarily
suspend such licensee's license by mailing written notice of such
suspension to the licensee at the address of such licensee as set forth in
the application. Thereafter written notice of the charges resulting in the
§ 4-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.4
AO:101
§ 4-6.5. Exempt Machines. [Ord. 12/21/64, § 5; Ord. 4/13/65, § 1]
Vending machines kept, maintained, operated, or possessed by any
religious, charitable, benevolent, fraternal, or nonpecuniary association,
or a volunteer fire company, rescue squad, or other similar association
not incorporated or formed for profit, are specifically exempted from the
provisions of this section. Also exempted shall be all vending machines or
automatic amusement devices for which a license is already required under
any other ordinance of the Borough. Also exempted shall be all vending
machines, wherever located in the Borough which dispense United States
postage stamps.
§ 4-7. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 1]
As used in this section:
PEDDLER — Shall mean a person commonly referred to either as a peddler
or hawker, who goes from house to house or place to place and carries with
him goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of selling and delivering
them to purchasers.
PEDDLER'S ASSISTANT — Shall mean and include anyone who engages in
the business of peddler from a licensed vehicle, but who is not the owner
thereof.
temporary suspension of the license shall be preferred by the Borough
Clerk and mailed to the licensee at the address of the licensee set forth
in the application and a hearing shall be held thereon by the Mayor
and Council, not less than 10 days nor more than 15 days, after such
service by the Borough Clerk for the further suspension, restoration, or
permanent revocation of such license.
b. The license may be revoked upon proof of circumstances or conditions
which are inimical to the health, welfare, morals or safety of the people
of the Borough, or the general public, but only after a hearing by the
Borough Council after notice thereof to the licensee as hereinbefore
provided.
c. If a license is not renewed, or if the license is revoked prior to its
expiration date, the licensee shall take all necessary proceedings to
remove said coin operated vending machine or machines as herein
defined, from the Borough within 15 days or in default thereof shall be
presumed to have abandoned the machine or machines to the Borough,
and by the acceptance of the license hereby agrees that under such
circumstances aforesaid the Borough may thereupon cause the
machine or machines to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. The 15
day period above referred to shall run from the expiration date of the
license or from the date when the Borough Council revokes the license.
§ 4-6.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-7.1
AO:102
SOLICITOR — Shall mean a person, commonly referred to either as a
solicitor or canvasser, who goes from house to house or place to place
selling goods by sample or taking orders for future deliveries, with or
without accepting an advance payment for the goods.
§ 4-7.2. License Required; Exceptions. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 2]
§ 4-7.3. Application. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 3]
Applications for licenses shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and
filed with the Borough Clerk; shall state the name, age and permanent home
address of the applicant, his place or places of residence for the preceding
three years, the number and nature of any arrests or convictions, the
purpose for which the license is to be used, the nature of the merchandise
to be sold or offered for sale, and, in the case of a solicitor's license, the
length of time for which the license is desired; shall, in case a vehicle is
to be used in connection with the licensed business, contain a description
of such vehicle; shall list the names of three reputable citizens to whom
reference may be made as to the character and fitness of the applicant;
and shall be accompanied by the licensee fee hereinafter prescribed. If the
merchandise is to be sold or offered for sale on behalf of a person other
than the applicant, the application shall also state the name and address
of such other person and shall be accompanied by a letter from the person
a. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, peddler's assistant or solicitor to
sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise within the
Borough except pursuant to and within the terms of a license first
obtained from the Borough Clerk; provided, however, that this section
shall not apply to:
1. Farmers or gardeners when they are peddling the products of the
farms or gardens owned or occupied by them;
2. Milkmen;
3. Distributors of printed, typed or written matter dealing solely with
religious, political, educational or similar subjects not of a
commercial nature.
b. Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person; and a
separate license shall be obtained for each peddler, peddler's assistant
or solicitor. In case a peddler operates more than one vehicle for
peddling, as provided under this section, a separate license shall be
obtained for each such vehicle; provided, however, that a person upon
or with a licensed vehicle, when he is not the owner thereof, may be
licensed as a peddler's assistant. Not more than two licenses shall be
allowed on any one vehicle. When a peddler ceases to use the vehicle
described in his license application and desires to substitute another
vehicle therefor, he may, upon notice to the Borough Clerk and
furnishing the Clerk with a description of such other vehicle, transfer
his peddler's license plates to the other vehicle.
§ 4-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.3
AO:103
authorizing the applicant to engage in the business of peddler, peddler's
assistant or solicitor on his behalf.
§ 4-7.4. Fingerprinting Required. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 4]
Every applicant for a license under this section shall, before such license is
granted, be fingerprinted.
§ 4-7.5. Approval. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 5]
The Borough Clerk is authorized to grant licenses under the seal of the
Borough, signed by himself or by the Chief of Police, after a determination
that the applicant is of good moral character and has completed with the
provisions of this section, except that applications for solicitor licenses shall
be made to, and the licenses therefor shall be issued by the Chief of Police,
subject to appeal to the Mayor or Chairman of the Police Committee.
§ 4-7.6. Display of Licenses; Information Included in License. [Ord.
7/5/51, § 6]
The Clerk shall issue to every person to whom a license has been granted
a license certificate, which shall state the purpose for which the license
is granted, the name and business address of the licensee, the number
of the license and the date of its expiration; and the certificate shall be
carried upon the person of the licensee or, in case of a peddler with
vehicle, in or upon such vehicle at all times when the licensee or vehicle
is engaged in the business for which the license is granted. In addition to
such certificate every vehicle used by a licensed peddler in connection with
his business shall have displayed on the driver's side of the exterior thereof
in a conspicuous place a metal plate, to be furnished by the Clerk with the
number of the license and the appropriate date inserted.
§ 4-7.7. Annual Fees. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 7; Ord. 7/2/52, § 1]
The annual license fees for peddlers (which shall include one assistant
peddler) and solicitors for the period from January of each year to
December 31 of the same year, both inclusive of any portion of such period
shall be $100.
The daily license fees for peddlers, (which shall include one assistant
peddler) and solicitors shall be $10.
§ 4-7.8. Hours of Operation. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 8]
It shall be unlawful for any peddlers, peddlers' assistants or solicitors to
sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise except on weekdays
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; or to solicit the sale of
merchandise in a noisy, persistent or offensive manner or in such a manner
as to obstruct the passage of vehicles or pedestrians upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place.
§ 4-7.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-7.9
AO:104
§ 4-7.9. Location of Operation; Time Limit. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 9]
No person, whether or not such person is required to obtain a license under
subsection 4-7.2 shall stand or remain upon any sidewalk, street or other
public place for the purpose of selling, soliciting the sale or offering for sale
any goods, wares or merchandise longer than 10 minutes at any one time,
if requested to move from any such place by the owner or occupant of any
premises opposite or adjacent thereto or if ordered to move by any police
officer; but, upon such request or order, shall move with the vehicle and
merchandise to a point at least two hundred fifty (250') feet from the place
from which he was requested or ordered to move.
§ 4-7.10. Sales Near Public Schools Restricted. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 10]
It shall be unlawful to sell, solicit the sale of or offer for sale any
sandwiches, hotdogs, ice cream, drinks or other edibles of similar nature
from a basket, pushcart, motor car or other conveyance or vehicle, or on
foot, within a radius of one thousand (1,000') feet of any public school.
§ 4-7.11. License May Be Revoked. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 11]
Any license issued pursuant to this section may be suspended or revoked by
the Borough Council or the Municipal Judge after reasonable opportunity to
the licensee to be heard, for violation of any of the provisions of this section
or any other ordinance of the Borough. Such suspension or revocation may
be either in addition to or instead of the penalties prescribed by subsection
4-7.12.
§ 4-7.12. Violations. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 12]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Each day such violation shall be continued shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 4-8. NON-SOLICITATION LIST.
§ 4-8.1. Preparation and Maintenance of List. [Ord. No. 2005-13]
The Office of the Borough Clerk shall collect, prepare and maintain a list of
addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has notified
the Borough Clerk that soliciting and canvassing is not permitted on his/
her premises. To be included on the non-solicitation list, residents shall
complete a form. With the adoption of this section, the Office of the Borough
Clerk shall mail the form to all residential property owners or occupants.
Thereafter, the form shall be available in the Municipal Building's general
office during normal business hours, Mondays through Fridays from 8:30
a.m. to 4:30 p.m., except weekends and legal holidays.
§ 4-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.2
AO:105
§ 4-8.2. Distribution of List. [Ord. No. 2005-13]
The Borough Clerk shall submit the non-solicitation list to the Chief of Police
on a quarterly basis which non-solicitation listing shall be distributed to
applicants seeking a license to solicit or canvass pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter. The licensee shall not solicit or canvass at any address on
the non-solicitation list.
§ 4-8.3. Updates to List. [Ord. No. 2005-13]
On or about January 1st, April 1st, July 1st, and October 1st of each year,
the Office of the Borough Clerk shall update the list. The updated list shall
then be forwarded to the Chief of Police for distribution to solicitors and/or
canvassers.
§ 4-8.4. Violations. [Ord. No. 2005-13]
Any solicitor or canvasser violating the provisions of this section shall
be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment as prescribed in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5, et seq., General Penalty of the General Ordinances of the
Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 4-9. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.8
§ 4-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
For the purpose of this section:
MASSAGE — Shall mean the administration by any person or method of
exerting or applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat or cold to the human
body, or the rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding or tapping of the human
body by any physical or mechanical means for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any establishment or operation
wherein a massage is administered or is permitted to be administered, when
such massage is administered for any form of consideration.
MASSAGIST — Shall mean any person, male or female, who administers a
massage for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — Shall mean the same as Massagist.
§ 4-9.2. License Required for Establishments. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any establishment or utilize
any premises in the Borough of South Bound Brook, as or for a massage
establishment unless or until there first has been obtained a license for such
8. Editor's Note: No person shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist, employee or otherwise, unless he or she has a valid and
subsisting massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's license issued to him or her by the
New Jersey Board of Massage and Body Work Therapy, pursuant to the terms and
provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:11-53, et seq.
§ 4-8.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-9.2
AO:106
establishment or premises from the Clerk of the Borough of South Bound
Brook in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section.
§ 4-9.3. Application Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
Each and every applicant for a license, shall set forth the following
information in writing on forms provided by the Borough Clerk.
§ 4-9.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
§ 4-9.5. Public Hearing Notice. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
a. The name and permanent residence address of the applicant and all
former addresses for a period of three years prior to making the
application.
b. The applicant shall provide the full address of the establishment or
premises to be used in the massage business and a full and complete
description of the property, the improvements thereon and the facilities
therein.
c. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any officer, partner,
principal, or director thereof, if a corporation, has ever been convicted
of a crime in this or any other state.
d. A list of license numbers used by any State or governmental entities, or
other documentation that authorizes the applicant to engage in practice
as a massagist along with specifics of said practice under said license;
together with evidence that the license is current or expired in good
standing.
e. If a license issued by another jurisdiction is revoked or suspended, a
written explanation of the reason for the revocation or suspension must
be furnished with all supporting documentation available.
a. The applicant for a license for a massage establishment or premises
shall pay an annual license fee of $500; which license fee shall become
due in full on the first of January in each year.
b. If the massage establishment is located within or as part of a
professional business or practice, including, but not limited to a swim
club, physician's or chiropractor's office, a separate license shall not be
required for the massage establishment. It shall still, however, be
subject to any reasonable inspection conducted by the Borough Police,
or Health Department official even though it is not a separate
establishment devoted solely to the practice of a massage therapist. All
massagists employed therein, however, shall be licensed in accordance
with statutory requirements.
a. When an application is filed for a massage establishment license under
this section, the Board of Health shall fix a time and a place for a public
hearing where the applicant shall present evidence upon the question
§ 4-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.5
AO:107
§ 4-9.6. Issuance of Establishment License: Exceptions. [Ord. No.
2004-02]
§ 4-9.7. Suspension or Revocation of Establishment License.
of his or her qualifications for licensure. Not less than 10 days before
the date of such hearing, the Board Secretary shall cause a notice of
such hearing to be published in an official newspaper of the Borough.
a. The Board of Health shall issue a massage establishment license within
21 days following a hearing if all requirements for a massage
establishment described in this section are met, unless it makes the
following findings upon review.
1. The operation as proposed by the applicant if permitted would not
comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the
Building, Health, Housing, Zoning and Fire Codes of the Borough of
South Bound Brook.
2. That the applicant or any other person who will be directly engaged
in the management or operation of a massage establishment has
been convicted of:
(a) A crime of the first, second, third or fourth degree in the State
of New Jersey, or its equivalent committed elsewhere.
(b) An offense involving sexual conduct with minors.
(c) A crime or criminal offense involving obscenity, keeping or
residing in a house of prostitution, solicitation of a lewd or
unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
3. The license to conduct a massage establishment has been
suspended or revoked by any state or political subdivision thereof,
provided, however, any applicant denied a license on said grounds
shall be entitled to a hearing at which time and place the applicant
can present evidence as to extenuating circumstances that entitle
licensure.
4. Cause for denial of licensure on the basis of the applicants criminal
record is limited to any conviction for any crime of moral turpitude,
whether a crime of the first, second, third or fourth degree, or
misdemeanor in the State of New Jersey, or conviction for an
equivalent crime committed elsewhere.
b. Exceptions. The Board of Health in its discretion may issue a license to
any person convicted of any of the criminal offenses in paragraphs a (1),
(2) or (3) if it is found that such conviction occurred at least three years
prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no
subsequent convictions.
§ 4-9.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 4-9.7
AO:108
§ 4-9.8. Inspection. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
No person engaged or employed in the business of a massagist shall hinder,
stop, or fail to cooperate with any inspection by any Borough agency.
§ 4-9.9. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
§ 4-9.10. Signs. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance to any
building or to the portion of a building used as a massage establishment
identifying the premises as a massage establishment, and recognizable
and legible signs shall be posted in accordance with all existing municipal
ordinances.
§ 4-9.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2004-02]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished either by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
a. Any license for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended
by the Board of Health, after a public hearing before the Board of
Health where it is found that any of the provisions of subsection 4-9.6
are violated or where the licensee, including a massagist or massage
therapist, has been convicted of any offense found in subsection 4-9.7
and the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge of the violation
or conviction or, in any case, where the licensee refuses to permit any
duly authorized police officer or Health Inspector of the Borough of
South Bound Brook to inspect the premises or the operations therein.
b. The Board of Health, before revoking or suspending any license, shall
give the licensee at least 10 days written notice of the charges against
the licensee, and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Board
of Health, at which time the licensee may present evidence bearing
upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in
writing. The revocation hearing shall be scheduled no sooner than 10
days, no later than 30 days after written notice of the charges has been
provided to the licensee who shall be entitled to discovery, and legal
representation at the Revocation Hearing.
a. The requirement for a massage establishment license shall not apply to
massage or physical therapy treatments given.
1. In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical
therapist.
2. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitorium
having a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors
and/or physical therapists.
3. By any licensed physician, chiropractor, or physical therapist in the
residence of his patient.
§ 4-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.11
AO:109
not exceeding 90 days, a fine not exceeding one thousand, two hundred fifty
($1,250.00) dollars and/or by a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. Each day
during which a violation of this section exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 5-1. LICENSING AND CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 5-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 1]
As used in this section:
DOG — Shall mean a dog of either sex if over the age of six months.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a
pet shop.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, group of persons or corporation owning,
keeping, maintaining or harboring a dog.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, group of individuals, firm,
partnership, corporation or association of persons.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized
either under the provisions of this section or otherwise.
RESTRAINT — Shall mean a dog is under restraint if it is on the property
of its owner or is under the immediate and effective control of a responsible
person.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs are received,
housed and distributed without charge.
SPAYED FEMALE DOG — Shall mean any female dog certified by a licensed
veterinarian to have been spayed.
§ 5-1.2. License and Registration Tag. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 2]
Any person who shall own, keep, maintain or harbor a dog of licensing age
shall annually during the month of January, apply for and procure from the
Clerk of the Borough, or other official designated by the governing body,
a license and official registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept,
maintained or harbored, and shall place upon each such dog a collar or
harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 4-9.11 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 5-1.3
AO:110
§ 5-1.3. Fees, Renewals, Late Fees and Expiration. [Ord. 10/13/64,
§ 3; Ord. #10-79, § 1; Ord. #1-81, § 1; Ord. #2-84, § 1; Ord. #8-95;
Ord. No. 2007-11; Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 5-1.4. Time to Apply. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 4]
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age, shall make application for license and registration tag
for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 5-1.5. Applications. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 5]
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which license and registration are sought, and whether it is of a
long or short haired variety; also the name, street and post office address
of the owner and the person who shall keep, maintain or harbor such dog.
The information on the application and the registration number issued for
the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk of
the Borough or other local official designated by the governing body to
license dogs in the Borough. In addition he shall forward similar information
to the State Department of Health each month on forms furnished by
the department. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the
applications.
a. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee
of $13 in 2014, $15 in 2015, and $18 in 2016 and thereafter for each
dog, which fee is hereby established as the annual license and
registration tag fee. In addition thereto, and in accordance with P.L.
1983, Chapter 172, if the dog is nonspayed or nonneutered, an
additional fee shall be paid, making the total annual license and
registration tag fee for any dog that is nonspayed or nonneutered $15 in
2014, $18 in 2015, and $21 in 2016 and thereafter.
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dogs shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
b. The licenses and registration tags for all dogs, and renewals thereof,
shall expire on January 31 in each year. To cover the added costs to the
Borough of enforcement and requiring compliance with this section and
with the laws of New Jersey relating to animal census, each license and
registration tag renewed after March 1 of the current year shall require
payment of an additional $5.
c. Only one license and registration tag shall be required for any dog in
any licensing year, and such license tag issued by any other New Jersey
municipality shall be acceptable by the Borough as evidence of
compliance with this section.
§ 5-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.6
AO:111
§ 5-1.6. Removal of Tags. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 6]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 5-1.7. Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds. [Ord. 10/13/64,
§ 7]
§ 5-1.8. Canvass of Dogs. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 8]
The Chief of Police or any person appointed for this purpose by the
governing body, shall promptly after February 1, annually cause a canvass
to be made of all dogs owned, kept, maintained or harbored within the
limits of the Borough, and shall report on or before May 1 of each year
to the Clerk of the Borough, the Board of Health of the Borough and to
the State Department of Health, the result of the canvass, setting forth in
a. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Borough Clerk for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located, the purpose or purposes for which
it is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by the written approval
of the Health Officer of the Board of Health of the Borough, showing
compliance with the local and State rules and regulations governing
location of and sanitation of such establishments.
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year, and be
subject to revocation by the Borough Council on recommendations of
the State Department of Health or the Board of Health of the Borough
for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the State
Department or the Board of Health of the Borough governing the
same after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State
Department of Health or the Board of Health of the Borough.
Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishments; such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
b. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
less dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs $25. The annual
license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a
shelter or pound.
c. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted
off such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 5-1.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 5-1.8
AO:112
separate columns the names and address of persons owning, keeping or
harboring such dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept, maintained
or harbored by each of the persons, together with the registration numbers
of each of the dogs, and the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept,
maintained or harbored by each of the persons, together with a complete
description of each of the unlicensed dogs, for which the canvass the said
Chief of Police or other person appointed for this purpose by the governing
body, shall be paid the sum of $150.
§ 5-1.9. Restraint. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 9]
A dog owner shall keep his dog under restraint at all times.
§ 5-1.10. Impoundment. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 10]
a. The Chief of Police or any person appointed for this purpose by the
governing body, shall take into custody and impound or cause to be
taken into custody and impounded and thereafter disposed of or
destroyed, as provided herein:
1. Dogs not licensed pursuant to this section;
2. Dogs found not under restraint or abandoned;
3. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person, or
a registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping, maintaining
or harboring the dog is known, the Chief of Police of any person
authorized by him in that behalf, shall within 24 hours, serve on the
person whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or the
person keeping, maintaining or harboring the dog, if known, a
notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be
liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven
days after service of the notice.
b. A notice under this section may be served by delivering it to the person
on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual, or last
known, place of abode, or to the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
c. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been detained for
seven days after seizure, when notice has not been and cannot be given
as above set forth, and if the owner or person keeping, maintaining or
harboring the dog has not claimed the dog and paid all expenses
incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance, and if the
dog be unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person
keeping, maintaining or harboring the dog has not produced a license
and registration tag for the dog, the Chief of Police or any other person
§ 5-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.10
AO:113
§ 5-1.11. Investigation and Interference with Officers. [Ord. 10/13/
64, § 11]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this section is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises where a dog
is kept or maintained or harbored, to inspect conditions under which the
dog is kept, and to require the owner to exhibit a license for the dog, and to
seize for impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize and impound.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this section.
§ 5-1.12. Disturbing Noises. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 12]
No person shall keep, maintain or harbor any dog which habitually barks,
cries, howls or in other ways is a public nuisance.
§ 5-1.13. Destruction of Property. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 13]
No person owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a dog shall permit
or suffer it to do any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery,
flowers, grounds or property.
§ 5-1.14. Property Damage; Public Nuisance. [Ord. 12/13/77, § 1]
authorized by him in that behalf may cause the dog to be disposed of in
one of the following ways:
1. Euthanasia using a method approved by the Humane Society of the
United States.
2. Release for adoption by a new owner who shows evidence of ability
and intention to provide the dog with an appropriate home and
humane care.
An owner redeeming a dog from impoundment shall pay, before release, a
boarding charge of one ($1.00) dollar for each 24 hours or fraction thereof
that the dog has been impounded.
a. No person owning or in charge of any dog shall cause or allow such dog
to soil, defile, defecate on, or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park, or any
place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property
whatsoever or upon any private property, without the permission of the
owner of the property.
b. Any person owning or in charge of any dog which soils, defiles,
defecates on, or commits any nuisance on any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where
people congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or
upon any private property without the permission of the owner of the
§ 5-1.10 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 5-1.14
AO:114
§ 5-1.15. Vicious Dogs. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 14]
No person owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring any dog which has
been known to be vicious by having previously attacked or bitten any person
or persons, shall permit such dog to be upon a public street or highway, or
upon any premises other than those of the person owning such dog or those
of the person who has given permission to the owner to keep or maintain or
harbor such dog on such premises unless such dog wears a muzzle securely
fastened over his jaws in such manner that he cannot bite.
Any dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or has caused any
person to be fearful for his own safety by chasing, worrying or otherwise,
or which has habitually attacked other dogs or domestic animals is hereby
defined to be a vicious dog for the purpose of this section, and upon
complaint reciting such facts being filed in the Municipal Court, the
Municipal Judge upon due notice of the owner or other person having a
property in such dog, if such there be, shall thereupon cause a hearing to
be held to determine whether the dog complained against shall be adjudged
a vicious dog. In the event the Municipal Judge after the hearing shall
determine the dog to be a vicious dog within the meaning of this section
the dog shall thereupon be prohibited from being upon any street, road,
or public place in the Borough unless securely muzzled as hereinbefore set
forth and under leash, or the Municipal Judge shall make such order with
respect to the disposition of the dog as he shall deem consistent with the
provisions of this section and in the best interest of the health and welfare
of the residents of the Borough.
§ 5-1.16. Care of Dogs. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 15]
The owner of a dog shall provide it with humane shelter from heat, cold,
rain, wind and snow, and shall give it food and water adequate to keep
the animal in good health. Dog houses and kennels must be soundly
constructed, dry and provided in cold weather with clean bedding.
§ 5-1.17. Female Dogs. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 16]
The owner of any female dog in heat shall confine any such female dog
within a building in such manner that the dog will not be accessible to other
dogs, and will not attract male dogs, except for planned breeding.
property, shall immediately remove all feces deposited by any such dog,
in a sanitary manner.
c. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning or in charge of any such dog, in a
sealed, non-absorbent, leakproof container.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to blind persons who may
use dogs as guides.
§ 5-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.18
AO:115
§ 5-1.18. Penalty. [Ord. 10/13/64, § 18; Ord. No. 3-96]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with this chapter,
shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $100 for each
and every offense, except that for the first offense or failure to secure a
license, the penalty shall be not less than $5 and not more than $100.
§ 5-2. (RESERVED)9
§ 5-3. KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL FOR DOMESTIC USE.
§ 5-3.1. Chickens, Ducks, Geese and Fowl. [Ord. No. 2010-09]
Chickens, ducks, geese or other fowl shall not be kept for domestic use
unless the following rules and regulations are strictly adhered to:
§ 5-3.2. Animal Shelters. [Ord. No. 2010-09]
a. Such fowl or animal shall not be allowed to fly or run at large, but shall
be confined in a suitable house or coop with an enclosed runway; except
pigeons for which a permit to fly must be obtained from the Borough.
b. No part of such coop, house or runway shall be less than 100 feet from
the doors or windows of any building occupied by human beings,
whether for dwelling or business purpose. In addition to the above
requirements, no person shall keep less than 25 fowl or animals abovereferenced
unless the lot on which such fowl or similar referenced
animals contains at least one acre of land. However, poultry kept
temporarily for markets and educational purposes may be kept under
conditions other than those specified.
c. More than 25 fowl or animals above referred to can be kept at any time,
provided the lot on which such fowl are kept contains at least two acres
of land. This restriction shall not apply, however, if such fowl or animals
are kept not nearer than 300 feet to a dwelling house or occupied
building, exclusive of that of the keeper of such fowl.
d. No person shall keep chickens, ducks, geese or other fowl for
commercial purposes without first obtaining a license to do so.
a. Farm, domestic and wild animals, including but not limited to horses,
cattle, swine, goats, snakes, lions and so forth, shall be kept in an
enclosed area which shall provide appropriate shelter for the animal.
Such enclosed area shall be maintained so as to be nuisance-free. The
keeping of such animals is permitted only in instances where there is
provided sufficient land area in and around the enclosed area, which
shall be at least 100 feet from each lot line or from any part of any
building occupied by human beings, whether for dwelling or business
9. Editor's Note: Former § 5-2, Licensing and Control of Cats, Ord. No. 2-91, as amended, was
repealed 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-005.
§ 5-1.18 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 5-3.2
AO:116
§ 5-3.3. License Fee. [Ord. No. 2010-09]
The license fee for keeping farm, domestic and wild animals shall be $100.
The license shall be renewable annually in January. The late fee for failure
to renew the license within 30 days of the due date shall be $5 per month.
§ 5-3.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-09]
Any person who shall violate any section of this article shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than $250 and not more than $1,250 upon conviction.
Each day or part thereof during which such violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 5-4. PET WASTE.
§ 5-4.1. Immediate Disposal Required. [Ord. No. 2007-04]
purposes. The lot must be of sufficient size to provide at least one acre
of land per animal exclusive of the area occupied by a residential unit.
b. The regulations of this section shall not restrict domestic house pets,
such as dogs, cats, birds, reptiles, fish and other animals commonly
kept caged inside as pets, and the provisions of this section shall not be
construed to permit commercial piggeries, mink farms, fox farms and
other such enterprises.
c. The provisions of this section shall not abrogate or restrict the
provisions of Subsection 5-3.1.
a. Purpose. This section establishes requirements for the proper disposal
of pet solid waste in Borough of South Bound Brook, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure
to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess,
maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet,
whether or not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
§ 5-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.1
AO:117
§ 5-5. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 5-5.1. Feeding of Wildlife on Public Property Prohibited. [Ord. No.
2007-04]
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability
assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the
bowels of the pet; excrement Proper disposal shall mean placement in a
designated waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded
in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the municipality
or some other refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to
convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
c. Requirement for Disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
d. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
e. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Police Department and the Local Board of Health of Borough of South
Bound Brook.
f. Violations and Penalty. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
a. Purpose. An ordinance to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by Borough
of South Bound Brook, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter
any edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing
wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/
or game.
§ 5-4.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 5-5.1
AO:118
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 3-96]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of South Bound Brook in accordance with the
provisions of an Act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled
"An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the
Laws of 1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising
N.J.R.S. 33:1-1 et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 3-96]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [Ord. No. 3-96]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
c. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any
other property owned or operated by Borough of South Bound Brook,
any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined
in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at
environmental education centers, or feral cats as part of an approved
Trap-Neuter-Release program).
d. Enforcement.
1. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or
other Municipal Officials of Borough of South Bound Brook.
2. Any person found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be
ordered to cease the feeding immediately.
e. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
§ 5-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.1
AO:119
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Applicant Subject to Investigation. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 1]
The Borough Council shall refer all applications for licenses to the Police
Committee, which shall investigate the character and fitness of the
applicant and the place for which a license is applied. The Committee shall
report to the Borough Council its findings and recommendations.
§ 6-3.3. Issuing Authority. [Ord. No. 3-96]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Borough Council,
which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Required. [Ord. No. 3-96]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Borough
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.5. License Fees and Number of Licenses. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 3;
Ord. 5/26/64, § 3; Ord. 5/14/74, § 1; Ord. #4-93, § 1; Ord. #4-93, § 1;
Ord. #4-96]
The license to be issued in the Borough of South Bound Brook pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter and the fees for such licenses, which shall be
paid in advance upon presentation of the application for a license, are as
follows:
Class of License Annual License Fee
Number of
Licenses
$864.00 (7/1/96 to 6/
30/97)
$1,014.00 (7/1/97 to 6/
30/98)
$1,164.00 (7/1/98 to 6/
30/99)
3
$1,314.00 (7/1/99 to 6/
30/00)
$1,464.00 (7/1/00 to 6/
30/01)
$1,614.00 (7/1/01 to 6/
30/02)
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$1,764.00 (7/1/02 to 6/
30/03)
§ 6-3.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 6-3.5
AO:120
Class of License Annual License Fee
Number of
Licenses
$1,914.00 (7/1/03 to 6/
30/04)
$2,000.00 (7/1/04 and thereafter unless and
until amended by ordinance by South Bound
Brook Borough)
$604.00 (7/1/96 to 6/
30/97)
$724.00 (7/1/97 to 6/
30/98)
$868.00 (7/1/98 to 6/
30/99)
1
$1,018.00 (7/1/99 to 6/
30/00)
$1,168.00 (7/1/00 to 6/
30/01)
$1,318.00 (7/1/01 to 6/
30/02)
$1,468.00 (7/1/02 to 6/
30/03)
$1,618.00 (7/1/03 to 6/
30/04)
$1,768.00 (7/1/04 to 6/
30/05)
$1,918.00 (7/1/05 to 6/
30/06)
Plenary Retail Distribution
License
$2,000.00 (7/1/06 thereafter unless and until
amended by ordinance by South Bound
Brook Borough)
Club License $150.00 0
§ 6-3.6. Prorated Fees for Club Licenses. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 3; Ord.
#4-93, § 1; Ord. #4-96]
The respective fees for any such license shall be prorated according to the
effective date of such license, and based upon the respective annual or term
fees herein provided.
§ 6-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.7
AO:121
§ 6-3.7. Licenses Presently Issued. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
§ 6-3.8. State Limitation Law. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The provisions of New Jersey's State Limitation Law, as provided in Chapter
72 of the Laws of 1960 and as the same may be hereafter amended, shall
control the number of and the issuance of Plenary Retail Consumption
Licenses and Plenary Retail Distribution Licenses.
§ 6-3.9. Not More Than One License Per Person. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 3]
Not more than one license shall be issued to any person, and the operation
and effect of every such license shall be confined to permit the carrying on
of the business licensed only in the premises designated in the license.
§ 6-3.10. Seasonal Licenses Prohibited. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 4]
No Seasonal Retail Consumption License or Limited Retail Distribution
License shall be granted in the Borough.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 5; Ord. No. 2012-11]
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, served, delivered, or consumed in any
licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday
through Saturday with the exception of retail sale of spirituous liquors in
their original containers which may not be sold before 9:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 6; Ord. No. 2012-11]
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, served, delivered, or consumed in
any licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on
Sundays. Spirituous liquors in their original containers may not be sold
before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Sundays.
§ 6-4.3. (Reserved) [Ord. 4/10/62, § 6; Ord. No. 2012-11]
§ 6-4.4. New Year's Day. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 6; Ord. No. 2012-11]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 and 6-4.2 shall not apply on January 1st.
On that day alcoholic beverages shall not be sold, served, delivered, or
consumed in any licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. However spirituous liquors in their original containers may not be sold
before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. provided January 1st falls on a Monday-
§ 6-3.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 6-4.4
AO:122
Saturday or before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. provided January 1st falls
on a Sunday.
§ 6-4.5. Sales to Certain Persons. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 6]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or persons under the legal age, prostitute, gangster, racketeer,
notorious criminal or other person of ill repute, nor permit the consumption
of alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises by any of the above named
classes or persons, or permit any such persons to congregate in or about
the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.6. House to House or Telephone Prohibited. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 6]
No licensee shall directly or indirectly solicit from house to house personally
or by telephone the purchase of alcoholic beverages nor allow or permit
such solicitation.
§ 6-4.7. Disorderly Conduct on Premises Unlawful. [Ord. 4/10/62,
§ 6]
No licensee shall allow or permit in or upon the licensed premises any
lewdness, immoral activity, or foul, filthy or obscene language or conduct,
or any brawl, act of violence, disturbance or unnecessary noise; nor shall
any licensee allow or permit the licensed place of business to be conducted
in such manner as to become a nuisance.
§ 6-4.8. Gambling Devices on Premises Unlawful. [Ord. 4/10/62, § 6]
No licensee shall possess, allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed
premises any slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine which
may be used for the purpose of playing for money or other valuable thing.
§ 6-4.9. Licenses Shall Be Issued in Compliance with Zoning. [Ord.
4/10/62, § 7]
No license shall be issued contrary to any zoning ordinance of the Borough
now existing or hereafter to be enacted.
§ 6-4.10. Closing Provisions. [Ord. No. 3-96]
During the hours in which sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove
prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no person
shall be admitted or permitted to remain therein except the licensee or bona
fide employees of the licensee.
§ 6-4.11. Sale of Beverages in Original Container. [Ord. No. 3-96]
No licensee shall sell or deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale or delivery
of any alcoholic beverage at retail in its original container for consumption
§ 6-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.11
AO:123
off the licensed premises, or allow, permit, or suffer the removal of any
alcoholic beverage in its original or opened container from retail licensed
premises, on Sunday or before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any other
day of the week.
§ 6-4.12. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Persons Under the Legal
Age. [Ord. No. 3-96]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sales,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages to any person under the legal
age to purchase alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.13. Licensees Not to Allow Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages by Persons Under the Legal Age. [Ord. No. 3-96]
No licensee shall allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverages on the
licensed premises by any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic
beverages.
§ 6-5. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-6. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Presence in Licensed Premises. [Ord. No. 3-96]
No person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
the purpose of purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her, any
alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-6.2. Consumption or Purchase by Persons Under the Legal Age.
[Ord. No. 3-96]
No person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages, or purchase, attempt to purchase or have another
purchase for him any alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.11 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 6-6.3
AO:124
§ 6-6.3. Illegal to Purchase Alcoholic Beverages for Persons Under
the Legal Age. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81]
No person shall enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase alcoholic
beverages, for another person who does not because of his age have the
right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100. In addition, the
court shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for six
months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a motor
vehicle in this State for six months beginning on the date he becomes
eligible to obtain a license or on the date of conviction, whichever is later.
In addition to the general penalty prescribed for an offense, the court may
require any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
who violates this act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment
program authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed
the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [Ord.
No. 3-96]
a. The Mayor or, in his absence, disability or inability to act, the Chief of
Police of the municipality is hereby authorized to provide by regulation
for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he
finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the public
safety, health or welfare.
§ 6-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2
AO:125
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [Ord. No. 3-96; Ord. No. 2005-19]
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 3-96; Ord. No. 2005-19]
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [Ord. No. 3-96]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [Ord. No. 3-96]
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of South Bound Brook are
hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Mayor or Chief of Police and in
accordance with paragraph a above, shall provide for the posting of
proper warning signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof
during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
a. Any vehicle parking in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and
any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
b. Any vehicle improperly parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede
the normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exists, loading zones, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard, may be removed by towing at the owner's expense.
a. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
b. Penalties. Where no other penalty is established by law, any person
found guilty of committing any offense within this Chapter shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250 or a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days or both.
§ 7-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-6
AO:126
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Ord. No.
3-96]
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal on All Municipal Roadways. [Ord. No. 3-96]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on all municipal roadways or portions thereof indicated.
The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parking or standing in violation shall be
deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
Name of Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.4
AO:127
§ 7-7.4. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [Ord. #3-79, § 4; Ord. No. 2001-03]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified
on any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Main Street [Ord. No.
2001-03]
West All 194 Main Street
§ 7-7.5. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. 4/6/60, § 1;
Ord. 12/28/65, § 4; Ord. 9/11/62, § 5; Ord. 7/13/71, § 2; Ord. #3-79,
§§ 2, 3; Ord. #6-92, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-03; Ord. No. 2008-04; Ord.
No. 2008-08]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown at
any time between the hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public
holidays) upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Side Hours
Time
Limit Location
Clinton Street South 9:00
a.m. to
2:00
p.m.
Mon. -
Fri.
10
minutes
For a distance of 70 feet
approximately 104 feet
from the curbside of the
westerly side of Main
Street
Madison Avenue East 15
minutes
From a point 50 feet from
Canal Road southerly to
Edgewood Terrace
Any municipal
street
(See also
Subsection 7-7.9,
Parking Permits)
Both 2:00
a.m. to
6:00
a.m.
30
minutes
Any municipal street in the
Borough upon which
parking would otherwise
be permitted. The purpose
of this section is to
facilitate the cleaning of
streets, the removal of
snow and ice and the
patrolling of streets by the
Police Department
Clinton Street South 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours From Elm Street easterly
to Main Street
§ 7-7.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-7.5
AO:128
Name of Street Side Hours
Time
Limit Location
Elm Street West 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours From its intersection with
Canal Road for a distance
of 75 feet southerly to the
northerly line of the
existing parking lot
Main Street
[Ord. No.
2008-04; Ord.
No. 2008-08]
Both 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours From Cedar Street to
Canal Road
§ 7-7.6. Parking Prohibited for Street Cleaning on All Municipal
Roadways. [Ord. No. 3-96]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
municipal street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides
Hours &
Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-7.7. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord. 9/
11/62, § 3; Ord. 12/28/65, § 1; Ord. 7/13/71, § 1; Ord. 11/13/73; Ord.
4/11/78, § 1; Ord. #3-79, § 1; Ord. #3-87; Ord. No. 2005-11; Ord. No.
2005-19; Ord. No. 2009-01]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
Name of Street Side Location
Armstrong Street West From Edgewood Terrace to center line of
cul-de-sac
Ayres Place Both Up to but not including the cul-de-sac
Cedar Street West From Main Street southerly for a
distance of 200 feet
Cedar Street West From Main Street southerly for a
distance of 100 feet
Cedar Street East From Main Street to the southerly
boundary of the Borough of South Bound
Brook
Clinton Street North From Elm Street to Main Street
DeKalb Place [Ord.
No. 2009-01]
Both Entire length except in designated areas
§ 7-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.7
AO:129
Name of Street Side Location
Edgewood Terrace
[Ord. No. 2005-11]
North Entire length
Elizabeth Avenue
[Ord. No. 2005-19]
West From Edgewood Terrace to High Street
Elm Street East Entire length
Johnson Street Both From Main Street to Canal Street
Liberty Way [Ord.
No. 2009-01]
Both Entire length except in designated areas
Madison Street East From Edgewood Terrace northerly to
Canal Road
Maple Avenue South From Main Street to Franklin Township
Line
Montgomery Street South From Main Street to Canal Street
Patriots Path [Ord.
No. 2009-01]
Both Entire length except in designated areas
Swing Bridge Lane
[Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both Entire length except in designated areas
Tory Jack Terrace
[Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both Entire length except in designated areas
§ 7-7.8. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [Ord. 9/11/62, § 4; Ord. #6-99; Ord. No. 2005-19]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Elizabeth Avenue
[Ord. No. 2005-19]
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. when
school is in
session
From Edgewood
Terrace easterly to
High Street
High Street South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Elizabeth Street
easterly for a distance
of 110 feet
Madison Street
[Ord. No. 2005-19]
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. when
school is in
session
From Edgewood
Terrace to High Street
§ 7-7.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-7.9
AO:130
§ 7-7.9. Parking Permits Required Certain Hours on All Municipal
Roadways. [Ord. #1-84, § 1; Ord. #4-97; Ord. No. 2003-06; Ord. No.
2006-01; Ord. No. 2001-03]
No person shall, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., park a
vehicle for a period longer than 1/2 hour upon any street in the Borough
upon which parking would otherwise be permitted, unless the parked
vehicle shall have displayed on its left rear window a current annual parking
permit.
§ 7-8. VEHICLES IN EXCESS OF DESIGNATED WEIGHT.
§ 7-8.1. Parking of Trucks Weighing in Excess of Thirteen Tons
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2001-03]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, semi-trailer or omnibus having a
registered gross weight in excess of 13 tons in any residential zone.
§ 7-8.2. Parking Time Limited for Trucks Weighing in Excess of
Four Tons. [Ord. #2-80]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
a registered gross weight in excess of four tons upon any street for longer
than the time limit shown.
a. Requirements for Obtaining Permit. Parking permits may be obtained
from the Safety Officer of the Police Department upon application and
proof of the following:
1. Residency of the Borough.
2. Valid driver's license.
3. Current valid automobile registration.
4. Liability insurance card.
5. Necessity for permit.
b. Current Registration and Insurance Coverage Required. Any vehicle
parked on the streets of the Borough shall be operable and have a
current valid registration and liability insurance coverage.
c. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to facilitate the cleaning of
streets, the removal of snow and ice and the patrolling of streets by the
Police Department.
d. Fees. The fee for each parking permit shall be $12 per year. This annual
fee shall be prorated at the rate of one ($1.00) dollar per month in the
event application is made after January 31 of each year.
§ 7-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-8.2
AO:131
Name of Street Side Time Limit
All All 1 hour
§ 7-8.3. Routes for Trucks Over Thirteen Tons. [Ord. No. 2001-03]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets described
are hereby designated as Routes for Vehicles Over Thirteen Tons. All trucks
having a registered gross weight of 13 tons shall be excluded from all
streets, except from those streets listed which form a part of the system of
truck routes. Vehicles will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the
pick up and delivery of materials.
Name of Street Location
Canal Road [Ord. No.
2001-03]
Entire length
Edgewood Terrace [Ord. No.
2001-03]
Entire length
Elizabeth Avenue [Ord. No.
2001-03]
Entire length
Main Street [Ord. No.
2001-03]
Entire length
§ 7-8.4. Trucks Over Designated Weight Excluded from Certain
Streets. [Ord. 4/7/40; Ord. 9/11/62; Ord. #2-85; Ord. No. 2005-19]
Trucks over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Location
Elm Street 4 tons Entire length
Franklin Street 4 tons From Washington Street to
Johnson Street
Jackson Street 4 tons From Main Street to Canal Street
Johnson Street 4 tons From Canal Street to Main Street
Maple Street 4 tons Between Main Street and
Edgewood Terrace
Montgomery Street 4 tons From Main Street to Canal Street
Reid Street 4 tons Between Main Street and
Armstrong Street
Warren Street 4 tons From Main Street to Canal Street
Washington Street 4 tons Entire length
§ 7-8.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-8.4
AO:132
Name of Street Weight Location
Zimmerman Place [Ord.
No. 2005-19]
4 tons Entire length
§ 7-8.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2001-03]
Nothing herein shall prohibit the parking of a commercial vehicle in a
residential zoning district for the purpose of installing, maintaining or
performing public utility services or for the purpose of making pick ups
or deliveries in the regular course of doing business to residents of such
districts.
§ 7-9. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. 10/1/47, § 1; Ord. 6/6/51, § 1; Ord.
9/11/62, § 11; Ord. 3/11/75, § 2; Ord. #12-89, § 1; Ord. #1-93, § 1;
Ord. #1-98; Ord. No. 2001-13; Ord. No. 2005-19]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Clinton Street Eastbound Elizabeth Street
to Main Street.
Right side only
Elm Street
(Emergency vehicles
responding to
emergency are
exempt) [Ord. No.
2001-03]
Southbound Main Street and
Canal Road to
Clinton Street.
Right side only
Johnson Street
[Amended 5-9-2017
by Ord. No.
2017-002]
Westbound Canal Street to
Franklin Street.
No parking
Warren Street Eastbound Main Street
(County Road
527) to Franklin
Street.
Right side only
Zimmerman Place
[Ord. No. 2005-19]
Westbound Entire length. Designated areas
only
§ 7-10. THROUGH STREETS. [Ord. 9/11/62, § 8]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
§ 7-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-10
AO:133
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Cedar Street Between Edgewood Terrace and Main Street and
between Edgewood Terrace and the Borough line at
Franklin Township.
Van Sickle
Boulevard
Between Edgewood Terrace and Canal Road.
§ 7-11. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. 9/11/62, § 9; Ord. No.
2005-19]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Armstrong Street and Baldwin
Street
Baldwin Street
Armstrong Street and Koehler Drive Koehler Drive
Armstrong Street and Latourette
Street
Latourette Street
Bell Street and High Street [Added
11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-008]
Bell Street
Cedar Street and High Street
[Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-006]
Both streets
Charlotte Place and Beck Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-008]
Beck Avenue
Cherry Street and High Street High Street
Clinton Street and Elm Street Elm Street
Cottage Place and Bell Street
[Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-008]
Cottage Place
Elizabeth Avenue and Zimmerman
Place [Ord. No. 2005-19]
Zimmerman Place
Franklin Street and Jackson Street
[Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-008
Franklin Street, both directions
§ 7-10 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-11
AO:134
Intersection Stop Signs On:
Franklin Street and Johnson Street
[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-002]
Johnson Street
Franklin Street and Montgomery
Street [Amended 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-008]
Franklin Street, both directions
Franklin Street and Warren Street Warren Street
High Street and Grant Street Grant Street
High Street and Madison Street Madison Street
Kennedy Avenue and Cedar Street
[Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-008]
Kennedy Avenue
LaTourette Avenue and Baldwin
Avenue [Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-008]
LaTourette Avenue
Lawrence Street and Catherine
Street [Added 11-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-008]
Lawrence Street
Lawrence Street and Stewart Street
[Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-008]
Lawrence Street
Madison Street and Clinton Street Clinton Street
Madison Street and High Street
[Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-006]
Both streets
Madison Street and Prospect Street Prospect Street
Somers Place and Baldwin Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-008]
Somers Place
Washington Street and Franklin
Street
Franklin Street
§ 7-12. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Signs On
Reid Street and Armstrong Street Armstrong Street
§ 7-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:135
§ 7-13. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. #16-91; Ord. #10-98; Ord. No.
2005-19]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Hours
Movement
Prohibited
55 Main Street
&Main Street (C.R.
527) [Added
4-10-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-001]
Left turn All Southbound on Main
Street (C.R. 527)
Elizabeth Street &
Lincoln Street
Right turn 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Eastbound on Lincoln
Street
Elizabeth Street &
Lincoln Street
Right turn 11:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Eastbound on Lincoln
Street
Elizabeth Street &
Lincoln Street
Right turn 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Eastbound on Lincoln
Street
Lincoln Street &
Elizabeth Street
Left turn Southbound on
Elizabeth Street
Lincoln Street &
Elizabeth Street
Left turn 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Southbound on
Elizabeth Street
Lincoln Street &
Elizabeth Street
Left turn 11:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Southbound on
Elizabeth Street
Lincoln Street &
Elizabeth Street
Left turn 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Southbound on
Elizabeth Street
Main Street (C.R.
527) & Clinton
Street
Left turn 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Monday to
Friday
Eastbound on Clinton
Street to northbound
on Main Street (C.R.
527)
Main Street (C.R.
527) & Clinton
Street
Left turn 11:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
Eastbound on Clinton
Street to northbound
on Main Street (C.R.
527)
Main Street (C.R.
527) & Clinton
Street
Left turn 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
Eastbound on Clinton
Street to northbound
on Main Street (C.R.
527)
Zimmerman Place
and Elizabeth
Avenue [Ord. No.
2005-19]
Left turn 7:30 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday
Northbound on
Elizabeth Avenue
from Zimmerman
Place
§ 7-13 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-14
AO:136
§ 7-14. NO TURN ON RED. [Ord. No. 3-96]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
(Reserved)
§ 7-15. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. 6/6/51, § 1]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Street Time Side Location
Montgomery Street 30 minutes North For a distance of 25 feet
from its intersection with
the curbline of Main
Street.
§ 7-16. BUS STOPS. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Street Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-17. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. No. 3-96]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-18. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [Ord. No. 3-96; Ord. No.
2005-19]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Zimmerman Place [Ord. No.
2005-19]
Picking up or discharging
passengers
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-19
AO:137
§ 7-19. SIGNAL-CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. #1-87]
The following described locations are hereby designated as signal
controlled traffic intersections.
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 7-20. HANDICAPPED PARKING. [Ord. No. 3-96]
Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
locations are hereby designated as restricted parking spaces for use by
persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards by the
Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-21. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-21.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [Ord. No.
2005-19; Ord. No. 2009-06A1; Ord. No. 2012-10]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
a. All Borough Parking Lots.
1. All vehicles shall park in designated areas only.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle so as to impede the flow of
traffic lot.
b. Robert Morris School. The purpose of this section is to establish and
enforce parking prohibitions and traffic regulations in the Borough
Parking Lot located at the Robert Morris School.
1. Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas.
2. Handicapped Parking. All stalls must be twelve feet (12') wide and
signed with R 7-8 (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
3. Stop Intersection. The following describes intersections hereby
designated as Stop Intersections. Stop Signs shall be installed as
§ 7-19 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-21.1
AO:138
provided therein. Stop Sign on Exit from Parking Lot and Elizabeth
Avenue Entrance/Exit from Parking Lot.
4. Speed Limits. The speed limit for traffic in the parking lot shall not
exceed five m.p.h. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected
and maintained to effect the above designated speed limits.
5. Safe Operation. No vehicle shall park or stand so as to obstruct or
impede the normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, pedestrian walkway, or be operated in any way so as
to be a safety or traffic hazard. Any vehicle so operated may be
ticketed and, if necessary, the vehicle may be removed by towing
the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
6. Penalties. Unless another penalty expressly provided by New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
subsection or any supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days or both.
c. Commuter Parking Lot — 14 Elm Street.
1. Commuter Lot Usage; Designation of Spaces; Time Limits. The
parking spaces within the commuter lot will be allocated as
needed.
(a) Designated spaces for public parking for a maximum of 3 hours
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Sunday and between 6:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through
Sunday.
(b) Designated spaces for permit commuter parking between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
These spaces shall be numbered.
(c) Designated spaces for permit overnight parking between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. through 7:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday.
These spaces shall be numbered.
2. Parking Permit Required for Certain Spaces; Fees. Persons wishing
to use a numbered space in the commuter lot shall make
application to the Borough Clerk. Permits shall be valid for a period
of thirty days only and shall be granted upon the following
conditions:
(a) Completion of an application in a form prescribed by the
Borough Clerk which will contain the following information:
(1) Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
(2) Make, model, year, color, and license plate number of
applicant's vehicle.
§ 7-21.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-21.1
AO:139
(b) Provision to the Borough Clerk of copies of the applicant's
driver's license together with proof of valid registration, and
insurance for the vehicle to be parked, which shall remain in
effect through the duration of the parking permit.
(c) Payment to the Borough Clerk of the thirty day permit fee;
$25.00 as to numbered commuter spaces, $45.00 as to
numbered overnight spaces.
Upon issuance, the parking permit be non transferable and usable only
by the permittee to which it was issued, and for the vehicle registered.
The permit shall display its expiration date in bold type.
It shall constitute a violation of this subsection for any person to falsely
represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to
furnish any false information in an application to the Borough Clerk in
order to obtain or attempt to obtain a parking permit.
3. Display of Permit Required. Permittees shall display their permits
prominently in their motor vehicle, and shall remove same
promptly after the expiration of the same. It shall constitute a
violation of this subsection for an individual to display a permit on
any vehicle other than for which a permit has been issued.
4. Revocation of Permit. The Borough Clerk is authorized to revoke
the parking permit of any permittee found to be in violation of this
subsection, and upon which notification thereof, the permittee shall
surrender such permit to the Borough Clerk. Failure, when so
requested, to surrender a commuter parking permit so revoked
shall constitute a separate violation of this subsection.
5. Signs. Parking signs shall be erected upon the commuter lot
indicating, the time, locations, and conditions under which parking
may be performed, including permit only parking, and further
indicating that anyone violating said restrictions shall be subject to
a penalty and/or towing of the vehicle at owner or operator
expense.
6. Rules and Regulations. The Borough Police Department is hereby
authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations for the
operation of the commuter lot as it deems necessary for public
safety.
7. Violations and Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be fined $25.00 per
violation. No court appearance is required.
8. Removal of Unlawfully Parked Vehicles; Costs. Any unoccupied
vehicle parked or standing in violation of this subsection shall be
deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation
of the commuter lot and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle, provided that the Police Officer or his or
§ 7-21.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 7-21.1
AO:140
§ 7-22. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. No. 2015-19]
Chapter 8
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS FOR PRIVATE AND SEMI-PRIVATE
PROPERTY
§ 8-1. FINCHLEY GARDENS APARTMENT COMPLEX.
§ 8-1.1. Consent Filed. [Ord. #7-91, preamble]
Finchley Gardens has filed a written consent with the Borough that the
provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
be made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking
lots at Finchley Garden Apartment Complex located in the Borough and the
following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 8-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. #7-91, § I]
The purpose of this section is to establish parking prohibitions and traffic
regulations in certain areas that are on private property which is open to
the public or to which the public is invited.
§ 8-1.3. Parking. [Ord. #7-91, § IIA; Ord. #4-92]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 8-1.4. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. #7-91, § III]
All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide and signed with R7-8 (Reserved
Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the designated parking areas for persons
her designee shall witness the removal of such vehicle and shall
keep a record of the removing agency and the location to which the
vehicle should be taken. The owner shall pay the reasonable cost
of removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits.
Name of Street MPH Limits
Zimmerman Place [Ord.
No. 2015-19]
15 m.p.h. Entire length
§ 7-21.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.4
AO:141
who have been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
§ 8-1.5. Through Streets. [Ord. #7-91, § IV]
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as Through
Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street.
§ 8-1.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. #7-91, § V]
§ 8-1.7. Tow-Away. [Ord. #7-91, § VI]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, blocking entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass
area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard,
may be removed by towing the vehicle at owner's or operator's expense.
§ 8-1.8. Restricted Parking. [Ord. #7-91, § VII]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle anytime upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Main Drive Both All Entire length, except
locations indicated
Roads A, B, C, D, E,
and F Both All Entire length
§ 8-1.9. Signs. [Ord. #7-91, § VIII]
All signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and
paid by Finchley Gardens. Work shall be checked by the Police Department
a. Main Drive: From a point ten (10') feet east of north intersect with Main
Street to a point ten (10') feet east of south intersect with Main Street.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 m.p.h.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Road m.p.h. Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
Roads A, B, C, D, E, and F 15 Entire length
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 8-1.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 8-1.9
AO:142
to insure installations meet State and Federal Specifications, and all signing
shall conform to the current manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 8-1.10. Penalties. [Ord. #7-91, § IX]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 8-2. SOUTH BOUND BROOK PLAZA.
§ 8-2.1. Consent Filed. [Ord. #8-91, preamble]
Bound Brook 82 Associates has filed a written consent with the Borough
that the provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey be made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the South Bound Brook Plaza located in the Borough and the
following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 8-2.2. Purpose. [Ord. #8-91, § I]
The purpose of this section is to establish parking prohibitions and traffic
regulations in certain areas that are on private property which is open to
the public or to which the public is invited.
§ 8-2.3. Parking. [Ord. #8-91, § IIA; Ord. #2-92]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 8-2.4. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. #8-91, § III]
All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide and signed with R7-8 (Reserved
Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the designated parking areas for persons
who have been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
§ 8-2.5. Stop Intersection. [Ord. #8-91, § IV]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Main Drive and Cherry Street Main Drive
§ 8-2.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. #8-91, § V]
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 m.p.h.
§ 8-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-2.6
AO:143
§ 8-2.7. Tow-Away. [Ord. #8-91, § VI]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at owner's or operator's expense.
§ 8-2.8. Signs. [Ord. #8-91, § VII]
All signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and
paid for by South Bound Brook Plaza. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet State and Federal Specifications,
and all signing shall conform to the current manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
§ 8-2.9. Penalties. [Ord. #8-91, § VIII]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 8-3. RITE AID PHARMACY PARKING LOT.
§ 8-3.1. Consent Filed. [Ord. #9-91, preamble]
Rite Aid has filed a written consent with the Borough that the provisions
of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at
Rite Aid Pharmacy located in the Borough and the following regulations
shall be enforceable.
§ 8-3.2. Purpose. [Ord. #9-91, § I]
The purpose of this section is to establish parking prohibitions and traffic
regulations in certain areas that are on private property which is open to
the public or to which the public is invited.
§ 8-3.3. Parking. [Ord. #9-91, § IIA; Ord. #3-92]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Road m.p.h. Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length.
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 8-2.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 8-3.4
AO:144
§ 8-3.4. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. #9-91, § III]
All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide and signed with R7-8 (Reserved
Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the designated parking areas for persons
who have been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
§ 8-3.5. Restricted Parking. [Ord. #9-91, § IV]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle anytime upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Side Location
Main Drive South Along north side of Rite Aid
Building
§ 8-3.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. #9-91, § V]
§ 8-3.7. Tow-Away. [Ord. #9-91, § VI]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at owner's or operator's expense.
§ 8-3.8. Signs. [Ord. #9-91, § VII]
All signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and
paid for by Rite Aid Pharmacy. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet State and Federal Specifications,
and all signing shall conform to the current manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
§ 8-3.9. Penalties. [Ord. #9-91, § VIII]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 m.p.h.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Road m.p.h. Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 8-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4
AO:145
§ 8-4. TOWNE OAKES APARTMENT COMPLEX.
§ 8-4.1. Consent Filed. [Ord. #8-92, preamble]
GMC Realty has filed a written consent with the Borough that the provisions
of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking lots
at the Towne Oakes Apartment Complex located in the Borough and the
following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 8-4.2. Parking. [Ord. #8-92, § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 8-4.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. #8-92, § II]
All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide as shown on the attached site
plan and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in
the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 8-4.4. Stop Intersection. [Ord. #8-92, § III]
The following intersections are hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Road A and Road B Road B
§ 8-4.5. Speed Limits. [Ord. #8-92, § IV]
§ 8-4.6. Tow-Away. [Ord. #8-92, § V]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 m.p.h.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Road m.p.h. Limits
Road A 15 Entire length.
Road B 15 Entire length.
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 8-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 8-4.6
AO:146
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at owner's or operator's expense.
§ 8-4.7. Restricted Parking. [Ord. #8-92, § VI]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
Road B Both All Entire length
§ 8-4.8. Signs. [Ord. #8-92, § VII]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the Towne Oakes Apartment Complex. Work shall be checked by
the Police Department to insure installations meet State and Federal
Specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 8-4.9. Penalties. [Ord. #8-92, § VIII]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 8-5. REFORMED CHURCH PARKING LOT.
§ 8-5.1. Parking Time Limitation in the Reformed Church Parking
Lot. [Ord. No. 2004-06]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour in the Main
Street parking lot, except for those persons present for Reformed Church
business.
Chapter 9
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
[Editor's Note: Regulations regarding the removal of weeds and
obnoxious growths are located in Section 16-2 of Chapter 16,
Property Maintenance.]
§ 9-1. EXCAVATION OF STREETS.
§ 9-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #6-79, § 1]
As used in this section:
§ 8-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.1
AO:147
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of South Bound Brook in the County
of Somerset.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean a condition or circumstance which involves
immediate danger to life or property or both, or which involves a possibility
of interruption or curtailment of any service furnished to the public by a
public utility.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any public utility, as herein defined, individual,
corporation, partnership, or firm, to which a permit shall have been issued
under and pursuant to this section.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Shall mean any public utility, as defined in Section
48:2-13 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
SUPERVISOR OF ROADS — Shall mean the Borough Supervisor of Roads,
or such other officer or person as may be designated by the Borough
Council to issue permits as herein provided for.
§ 9-1.2. Written Permission Required; Permits. [Ord. #6-79, § 2]
No person or public utility shall remove, dig into, disturb, excavate or take
up, or cause or procure to be removed, disturbed, excavated or dug up
the surface of any dedicated or public street, highway, alley, lane, court,
sidewalk or other public place or pavement therein, except streets not
under the jurisdiction of the Borough, without written permission of the
Supervisor of Roads of the Borough or such other officer or person
designated by the Borough Council whose duty it shall be to grant such
permission when all of the requirements of this section for granting the
same shall have been complied with by the applicant. A separate permit will
be required for each opening made in any street or streets.
§ 9-1.3. Application. [Ord. #6-79, § 3]
To obtain such a permit, an application shall be made on a form to be
provided by the Supervisor of Roads. The application shall state the purpose
of the excavation and the name and address of the person, corporation,
partnership or firm who or which will restore the permanent pavement
when the same is not to be done by the Borough or the applicant. The
application shall be accompanied by a diagram indicating the nature and
extent of the excavation to be made and the work to be done, and if during
the course of the work, any major variation is required, the permittee shall
file with the Borough Supervisor of Roads an amended diagram, showing
the manner in which the work actually is being done.
§ 9-1.4. Permit Fee. [Ord. #6-79, § 4]
The fee for each such permit shall be $25, representing processing and
inspection fees. The fee shall be paid with the filing of each application for
a permit, and shall be made payable to the Borough of South Bound Brook.
Application forms shall be available at Borough Hall during regular working
hours.
§ 9-1.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 9-1.5
AO:148
§ 9-1.5. Approval of Permit Application; Emergencies. [Ord. #6-79,
§ 5]
Each application for a permit, other than in an emergency, shall be reviewed
by the Supervisor of Roads and South Bound Brook Police in order to
determine that the application conforms with the provisions of this section.
Upon a determination by the Supervisor of Roads and Police Department
that the application does conform to the provisions of this section, the
application shall be approved and a permit issued.
§ 9-1.6. All Equipment and Machinery to Be Specified on
Application. [Ord. #6-79, § 6]
No mechanical excavating machinery or equipment shall be used unless the
use thereof shall have been set forth specifically in the application.
§ 9-1.7. Tunneling Under Pavements. [Ord. #6-79, § 7]
Tunneling under pavements shall not be done unless authorized in writing
by the Borough Supervisor of Roads.
§ 9-1.8. Sundays Restricted. [Ord. #6-79, § 8]
No excavation shall be made on a Sunday except in case of emergency.
a. The work on any opening to be made under the permit provided for in
this section shall be commenced within 30 days from the date of the
permit and the work prosecuted with due diligence to its completion. If,
for any reason, work is not commenced within the period of 30 days, the
Supervisor of Roads or such other officer or person as the Borough
Council may designate, shall extend it for a like period.
b. In case of emergency, any public utility, corporation, partnership or firm
may make an excavation in, or tear up the surface of any road without
first having obtained from the Borough Supervisor of Roads a permit
therefor, in which case the public utility, corporation, partnership or
firm shall make application for such a permit within two working days
after the occurrence of such emergency; provided, nevertheless, that
any such corporation, partnership or firm other than a public utility
shall first telephone or communicate with the office of the Borough
Supervisor of Roads a statement concerning the emergency in question,
or, in case the Borough Road Supervisor's office is closed, the telephone
call or communication shall be made to the Chairman of Roads, or
Borough Engineer, or Mayor, who may grant oral emergency approval;
further provided, nevertheless, that a public utility in such an
emergency shall notify the South Bound Brook Police Department no
later than the end of the next working day and advise as to the
emergency in question.
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.9
AO:149
§ 9-1.9. Warning Lights and Barricades. [Ord. #6-79, § 9]
The permittee shall properly guard the excavation by the erection of
suitable barricades and also by displaying warning lights at night, or at all
times when visibility is not normal.
§ 9-1.10. Excavations and Traffic. [Ord. #6-79, § 10]
If the excavation is to extend the full width of the road, no more than 1/2
of the road shall be opened at one time, and such half shall be backfilled
before the other half is opened, so as to permit the free flow of traffic.
§ 9-1.11. Backfill. [Ord. #6-79, § 11]
After the underground installation has been completed, the permittee shall
promptly backfill the excavation. The materials for backfill shall be select
backfill or material approved by the Supervisor of Roads or Borough
Engineer. The trench shall be covered with eight (8") inches of roadstone
known as quarry process stone. All excess materials shall be removed from
the road. A temporary pavement consisting of two (2") inches of bituminous
patch material shall then be placed over the excavation area, which shall be
maintained by the permittee for a period up to 180 days to allow for settling.
§ 9-1.12. Permanent Pavement. [Ord. #6-79, § 12]
When final settlement has taken place, the permittee shall replace the
temporary pavement with a permanent pavement which shall be not less
than six (6") inches larger than the length and width of the opening. The
permittee shall cut the existing pavement and dig six and one-half (6 1/
2") inches deep. The permanent pavement shall consist of five (5") inch
bituminous stabilized base and one and one-half (1 1/2") inches FABC-1, or
such other permanent pavement as may be authorized from time to time by
the Borough Engineer. All permittees other than public utilities shall give
the Borough Supervisor of Roads one day written notice previous to the
time when the permanent pavement is to be installed in order to permit an
inspection thereof.
§ 9-1.13. When Permittee Fails to Install the Permanent Pavement.
[Ord. #6-79, § 13]
The permittee may install the permanent pavement with its own forces
or through a contractor whose experience, plan and equipment have been
approved by the Borough Supervisor of Roads, however, this prior approval
by the Borough Supervisor of Roads shall not apply to public utility
companies. If, after a period of 30 days after opening pavement, the
permittee fails to properly replace the pavement, the Borough may with its
own forces replace the pavement, or employ a contractor to replace the
pavement, and the permittee shall be charged therefor at the rates not in
excess of the applicable rates hereinafter set forth, which charges shall be
billed upon the completion of the work and shall be paid within 30 days after
the receipt of the bill therefor.
§ 9-1.9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 9-1.13
AO:150
Borough Rates
Reinforced concrete pavement $25.00 per sq. yd.
All bituminous surface streets $15.00 per sq. yd.
Sidewalks $25.00 per sq. yd.
Curbs $10.00 per linear ft.
Shoulders, grass areas within Borough right-ofway
$5.00 per sq. yd.
§ 9-1.14. Damage. [Ord. #6-79, § 14]
Any damage done to the pavement, sidewalk, curbing or trees as a result
of the negligence of the permittee in installing its equipment shall be
repaired by the permittee. If the permittee shall fail to make such repairs,
the Borough shall give the permittee written notice thereof specifying the
damage to be repaired. If the permittee shall fail to make such repairs
within 30 days after the receipt of such notice, the Borough shall have the
right to make such repairs in which event the permittee shall be charged
for the cost thereof at rates not in excess of the applicable rates set forth in
subsection 9-1.13 which charges shall be billed upon the completion of the
work and shall be paid within 30 days after the receipt of the bill therefor.
§ 9-1.15. Responsibility of Permittee. [Ord. #6-79, § 15]
The permittee, in accepting a permit issued under this section, shall be
deemed to have agreed to indemnify and save harm to the Borough from
and against any and all loss, costs or damages, incurred by reason of any
damages to any property, injury to any person, or any loss of life, resulting
from any negligence of the permittee, its agents or servants, in performing
the work covered by the permit.
§ 9-1.16. Bonds. [Ord. #6-79, § 16]
a. Each public utility desiring to obtain permits pursuant to this section
shall file each year with the Borough Clerk, a bond, which may be the
bond of such corporation solely, in the sum of $15,000, conditioned
upon compliance with the applicable provisions of this section.
b. Every other permittee shall file with the Borough Clerk with respect to
each permit issued pursuant to this section, a cash bond in such sum as
shall be determined by the Supervisor of Roads, but in no case shall it
be less than $250 conditioned upon compliance with the applicable
provisions of this section.
c. Each bond filed pursuant to this section shall be in a form satisfactory
to the Borough Attorney and shall be discharged by resolution or the
Mayor and Council, only after approval of work by the Supervisor of
Roads; provided, however, that no bond shall be returned to the
permittee until 90 days after approval of the work.
§ 9-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.17
AO:151
§ 9-1.17. Insurance. [Ord. #6-79, § 17]
Each and every permittee, including a public utility, shall submit a
Certificate of Insurance with each application form, representing general
liability coverage in the amount of $100,000 for personal injury of one
person and $300,000 for injuries to more than one person involved in any
accident as well as a minimum of $25,000 property damage coverage.
§ 9-1.18. Supervisor of Roads Shall Be Present at Opening and
Closing. [Ord. #6-79, § 18]
The Supervisor of Roads shall be present at the opening and closing of all
roads in order to establish compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 9-1.19. Employees and Agents of Permittee Clarified. [Ord. #6-79,
§ 19]
Neither the Borough, Borough Supervisor, nor any person, corporation,
partnership or firm employed by them, or any one or more of them, to
perform work under or pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be
deemed to be the agent or the servant of the permittee for any of the
purposes of this section.
§ 9-1.20. Enforcement. [Ord. #6-79, § 20]
The Borough Supervisor of Roads shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
§ 9-1.21. Appeals. [Ord. #6-79, § 21]
In any case where the Borough Supervisor of Roads denies an application
for a permit, the applicant may appeal to the Borough Council within 10
days after such denial and shall be accorded a hearing thereon by the
Borough Council, and in its discretion may issue the permit. The Borough
Council likewise reserves the right to revoke any permit issued by the
Borough Supervisor of Roads, and such revocation shall be final and
conclusive unless the applicant requests a hearing before the Borough
Council on the revocation, and the Borough Council may affirm its
revocation or issue the permit in its discretion.
§ 9-1.22. Right to Amend Fee Schedules. [Ord. # 6-79, § 23]
The fee schedules incorporated into and made a part of this section shall be
reviewed by the Borough Council in January of each year. The Council may,
by resolution, amend any of the aforesaid fee schedules.
§ 9-2. ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS.
§ 9-1.17 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 9-2.1
AO:152
§ 9-2.1. Preamble. [Ord. 5/5/11, preamble]
Proposed streets which run in the same general direction as existing streets
in the Borough, and purport to be continuations thereof, but do not join or
conform thereto, would be apt to produce irregularity and confusion.
§ 9-2.2. Approval of Streets; Maintenance. [Ord. 5/5/11, § 1]
No act or proceeding to accept any street now or hereafter proposed of the
character mentioned in the preamble, to the end that the maintenance may
become chargeable upon the Borough, will be taken, unless a map thereof
showing the proposed location and width of such proposed street or streets
or extensions shall be first approved by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 9-3. CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS.
§ 9-3.1. Notice to Construct Sidewalks. [Ord. 10/7/14, § 1]
Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets in the Borough.
Where sidewalks are not already constructed it shall be done by the persons
owning the land fronting on the streets at their expense within 30 days
from the date of service of notice. The notice shall be in writing, requiring
such work to be done and signed by the Borough Clerk. The notice shall be
served personally to the owner if the owner resides in the Borough. If the
owner is residing out of the Borough, the notice shall require the work to be
done within 40 days from its date and it shall be served within two days from
the same date by posting a copy on the premises, if unoccupied. If occupied,
a copy shall be delivered to the owner, tenant or occupant. In either case,
within two days, a copy of the notice shall be sent by registered mail with
prepaid postage. If the owner is absent, the Borough Clerk shall make a
diligent inquiry as to the address of the tenant affected by the notice, by
contacting relatives, the Tax Collector, or other person likely to have such
knowledge. Sufficient proof of service of notice shall be presented to the
Mayor and Council before further action is taken. Affidavits of service shall
state whether such notice was served personally, and if otherwise, how,
when and of whom inquiry was made as aforesaid.
§ 9-3.2. Construction Standards. [Ord. 10/7/14, § 2]
Sidewalks shall be constructed, in a substantial and workmanlike manner,
of cement four (4') feet in width, properly jointed and laid in regular
continuous lines in the center or the space or part of the streets allotted
for sidewalks. The grade shall conform to the grade of the streets, except
where such grade would cause injury to property, including valuable shade
trees. The Street Committee is empowered, upon application, to modify and
change the grade and lines, if necessary, so as to prevent such injury, so far
as they deem practicable. The construction shall be subject to the approval
of the Street Committee.
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.3
AO:153
§ 9-3.3. Owner Fails to Comply. [Ord. 10/7/14, § 3]
Should the owner of land fronting on any street fail to construct or repair
any such sidewalk, after notice was given, the Mayor and Council shall
cause the work to be done. The cost and interest shall be assessed to
the owner of the lot in front of which such sidewalks shall have been
so constructed or repaired by resolution of the Mayor and Council. The
resolution shall set forth the name of the owner, a description of the lot
owned, and the amount assessed thereon and by a certified copy from
the Borough Clerk shall be delivered within 10 days to the Tax Collector,
who shall enter the same in a book called "Sidewalk Assessments." Such
assessments shall become a lien on the lots and shall be enforced in the
same manner as assessments for other improvements.
Chapter 10
SEWER AND WATER
§ 10-1. SEWER USER CHARGES.10
§ 10-1.1. Users to Pay Annual Charge. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
An annual sewer user charge will be paid by certain users of the facilities
provided by the Borough of South Bound Brook and the Middlesex County
Utilities Authority (hereinafter referred to as "MCUA") in accordance with
the terms and provisions of this section.
§ 10-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
provided.
COMMERCIAL USER — Shall mean any property used for nonresidential
purposes, including retail, office, or other business use, discharging
domestic wastes and any multi-family, non-owner occupied rental, and
condominium form of ownership, discharging domestic waste.
DOMESTIC WASTE — Shall mean any liquid waste containing animal or
vegetable matter in suspension or solution of the water carried wastes
resulting from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing
machines, sinks, dishwashers, or any other source of water-carried waste of
human origin or containing putrescible material.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Shall mean any person who discharges, causes, or
permits the direct or indirect discharge of non-domestic wastewater into
the treatment works. All non-domestic wastes discharged by an industrial
user - shall be considered industrial waste.
NON-DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Shall mean water which does not meet
the definition of Domestic Waste (i.e., groundwater, leachate, process).
10.Editor's Note: History includes Ord. No. 11-79; Ord. No. 2011-02.
§ 9-3.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-1.2
AO:154
RESIDENTIAL NON-OWNER OCCUPIED RENTAL UNITS WITH A WELL —
Shall mean a residential non-owner occupied rental unit or units serviced
by a well.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Shall mean any property solely used as a home or
residence, including single family and owner occupied rental discharging
domestic waste.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Shall mean a user defined as a
significant industrial user pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Middlesex County Utilities Authority.
STRENGTH OF SEWAGE — Shall mean the levels of biochemical oxygen
demand, suspended solids and chlorine demand in the sewage discharged.
TAX EXEMPT USER — Shall mean any property exempt from real property
taxation, discharging domestic waste.
UNIT — Shall mean shall be defined as a single water meter.
§ 10-1.3. Method of Payment. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
Each user shall be invoiced directly for their use of the sewage treatment
system.
§ 10-1.4. Sewer Usage Charges. [Ord. No. 2012-06; Ord. No.
2012-09]
a. Users shall pay a set fee per thousand (1,000) gallons of sewage
discharged. User classes and the rate for each user class are
established for 2012 as follows:
1. Residential users: $5.86 per 1,000 gallons.
2. Tax exempt users: $5.86 per 1,000 gallons.
3. Commercial users: $5.86 per 1,000 gallons.
4. Industrial users: $5.86 per 1,000 gallons.
5. Significant industrial users: $5.86 per 1,000 gallons.
6. Residential non-owner occupied: $5.86 per 1,000 gallons.
7. Residential occupied well user: $140.00 per person within the
owner occupied home per year.
b. The Borough Council shall review the rates set by this section on at
least an annual basis to determine their adequacy to meet the
Borough's proportionate share of the costs of operating, maintaining,
and replacing the Borough's sewer system, as well as the fees charged
by the Middlesex County Utilities Authority. The rates may be amended
by Resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 10-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.4
AO:155
§ 10-1.5. Flow Measurement. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
c. Where actual readings of a commercial, industrial, or significant
industrial user reveal that the rate set forth in paragraph a above is less
than the actual fees charged by the MCUA to the Borough for that
user's sewage, that user shall pay the actual fee charged by the MCUA
to the Borough for that user's sewage, plus an administrative fee of
$0.49 per 1,000 gallons, which administrative fee shall be intended to
include the costs of operating, maintaining, and replacing the
Borough's sewer system.
a. Wherever actual readings of sewage flow are available, those readings
shall be used in determining flow charges. Any user with an estimated
sewer user charge of greater than $200,000 per year may be required
to install, at its own cost, a separate meter to measure sewage flow and
strength of sewage.
b. Where actual readings of sewage flows are unavailable, sewage flow
will be estimated by taking 100% of the water flow and/or other meter
reading for the year. In recognition of the higher water usage during
the summer months, which does not enter the Borough's sanitary sewer
system (i.e. watering of laws), the annual flow of a user shall be
estimated to be four times the total of that user's water flow from first
quarter (January, February, March) of the year prior to the billing year.
c. If a commercial user or residential non-owner occupied rental unit(s)
user obtains its water supply from a private well or an unmetered public
water supply or utilizes a process that would yield waste water in
amounts greater than the metered water use, then the owner shall
install a meter at its own cost, the type and location of which is to be
approved by the Borough. In the event that the user fails to install such
a meter within 30 days after receiving notice from the Borough, then
the user shall pay a charge based upon the Borough's estimate of water
consumption, which estimate shall be conclusive and binding upon the
user.
d. If a residential user obtains its water supply from a private well or an
unmetered public water supply, then one of the following four methods
will be used to calculate the sewer user fee:11
1. The owner of an occupied unit shall submit to the Borough an
affidavit in the form annexed hereto disclosing the number of
residents living at the residential address. The sewer user charge
will be calculated by multiplying the number of persons residing at
that address times the average cost for sewer usage by one person.
2. For owner occupied units, the residential user shall submit an
affidavit to the Borough certifying the 90-day water meter reading.
The form of meter reading report is attached hereto. After the first
11.Editor's Note: Forms may be found in the Borough offices.
§ 10-1.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-1.5
AO:156
§ 10-1.6. Strength Measurement. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
The sewer usage charges established in subsection 10-1.4 were based
upon estimated levels of biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids
and chlorine demand in the sewage discharged by each class of user.
Wherever actual readings of biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
and chlorine demand of a user are available, those readings shall be utilized
to determine the sewer usage fees for that user in the manner provided in
subsection 10-1.4.
§ 10-1.7. Extraneous Flows and Prohibition of Inflow Services. [Ord.
No. 2012-06]
§ 10-1.8. Objections to Estimates. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
Any user objecting to any estimate of flow or strength hereunder shall
have the option, at its own expense, of installing metering equipment on its
discharge lines to record actual flow and strength readings. The metering
equipment used, its installation and the location of installation and method
of sampling, shall all be subject to review and approval by the Borough
of South Bound Brook or its designated representative. The Borough may
order the installation of meters and sampling pits if it is determined that
these are needed.
§ 10-1.9. Toxic Pollutants. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
Any user who discharges into the system toxic pollutants, radioactive
materials, or materials with high B.O.D. content, which cause an increase
in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works,
year, each subsequent reading will follow the requirements in
paragraph b above.
3. The sewer user fee will be calculated based on the average number
of persons living at the address based on the average user fees for
the same number of persons at a residence address utilizing the
Borough average.
4. Rental occupied unit(s) shall install a meter for each well user on
each well pump system and submit an affidavit on each unit.
a. Any flows or strengths which are not chargeable to a particular user,
whether by reason of the user being exempted from charges or by
reason of the flow entering the system by infiltration or inflow shall be
charged to all users, proportionately on the basis of flow.
b. No roof drainage, cellar drainage, unpolluted industrial process water,
surface water, waste from hydrants or groundwater from underground
drainage fields, shall be permitted to drain into the sewage system. The
sewer system is intended to convey only domestic wastewater and
industrial waste.
§ 10-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.9
AO:157
shall be required to install, at its own expense, metering equipment to
record actual flow and strength readings. That user shall be responsible for
payment of the actual fees charged to the Borough by the MCUA plus the
administrative fee, as provided in subsection 10-1.4c.
§ 10-1.10. Time of Payment. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
The user charges established and provided for herein shall be due and
payable at a date to be determined within 25 days of billing. Any delinquent
payments shall be subject to interest at the rate set by Borough in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-67. The billing date shall be determined by
resolution adopted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 10-1.11. Franklin Properties. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section, properties in Franklin
Township connected to the South Bound Brook Sewer System shall be
charged in accordance with the provisions of the Sewer Operating
Agreement between the Borough of South Bound Brook and Franklin
Township.
§ 10-1.12. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2012-06]
Properties owned by the Borough of South Bound Brook, the Board of
Education, the Fire Company and those exempt for veterans under N.J.S.A.
54:4-8.10 are excluded from the user charges called for in this section.
§ 10-1.13. Adjustments to Sewer Service Charges. [Ord. No.
2012-06; Ord. No. 2012-09]
In the event a user contends that there is an error in the sewer service
charge calculated and billed to the user, the user may apply for an
adjustment of the sewer service charge. An application for adjustment shall
be filed in writing with the Office of the Tax Collector. The deadline to file an
application for an adjustment is 30 days after the date of the mailing of the
bill. No application filed after that date shall be considered. No applications
for adjustments for prior service years shall be considered. The application
shall be referred to the Borough Engineer who will have the authority to
adjust the charge for good cause shown by the user. The determination of
the Borough Engineer shall be final. "Good cause" may be demonstrated by
the user's presentation of clear and convincing evidence of a broken water
meter, broken water pipe or fixture that resulted in substantial quantities of
water being metered but not discharged into the sewer system, and/or other
exceptional circumstances of documented water use that did not result in
discharge to the sewer system.
§ 10-2. CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, OPERATION AND
EXTENSION OF THE SEWER SYSTEM.
§ 10-1.9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-2.1
AO:158
§ 10-2.1. Control and Regulation. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 1]
The construction, maintenance, operation and extension of the Sewerage
System of the Borough of South Bound Brook up to the point of connection
therewith at the house or building line of any premises, is subject to control
and regulation by the Council of the Borough within the house or building
line the system of plumbing existing or proposed is subject to control by the
Board of Health.
The construction and maintenance of private systems of sewage disposal,
existing or proposed, shall be subject to control and regulation by the Board
of Health.
§ 10-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2-81, § 1]
As used in this section:
B.O.D. (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — Shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty (20°) degrees
centigrade, expressed in parts per million by weight.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — Shall mean the person duly appointed to and
occupying such position in the Borough.
BUILDING SEWER — Shall mean the extension from a commercial or
industrial building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COLLECTOR OF TAXES — Shall mean the person duly appointed to and
occupying such position in the Borough.
HOUSE CONNECTION — Shall mean any pipe together with necessary
connections, conveying sewage from a single building of any kind or sort to
the sewer system.
HOUSE PLUMBING SYSTEM — Shall mean the plumbing work within the
buildings and to a point five (5') feet outside of the building, and shall be
under the control of the Board of Health and subject to its ordinances,
conditions, rules and regulations.
INDUSTRIAL CONCERN — Shall mean any concern engaged primarily in
manufacturing or processing operations.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
pH — Shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — Shall mean the person duly appointed to and
occupying such position in the Borough.
PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
§ 10-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.2
AO:159
SEWAGE — Shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments and
other buildings, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as
may be present.
SEWER — Shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER COMMITTEE — Shall mean the subcommittee composed of the
Chairman of the Sewer Committee of the Borough Council and such other
two persons as may be duly designated annually by the Borough Council.
SEWER INSPECTOR — Shall mean the person duly appointed to and
occupying such a position in the Borough.
SEWER SYSTEM — Shall mean all interceptors, trucks, branches, laterals
and all other sewer appurtenances in the streets or in easements and rightsof-
way, either publicly or privately owned, except house connections, the
sewage from which is delivered to be treated by or under a contract of the
Borough providing for such treatment.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean solids that either float on the surface
or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
§ 10-2.3. Use of Sewer System. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 2]
§ 10-2.4. Restrictions. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any firm, person or corporation:
a. After official notification by the Borough Council of the completion of
the Public Sewerage System or of any extension thereof the main drain
of every new building, except as hereinafter provided, abutting on any
street, road, land or right-of-way in which a public sewer is laid shall be
connected therewith in the manner hereinafter provided and all slops,
filthy water, liquid waste and spent water supplies of every description,
except it be of such a nature as is hereinafter specifically prohibited,
shall be discharged into a properly laid pipe emptying directly in the
public sewer.
b. Within a period of one year from the date of the official notification in
the discretion of the Council, the owner of any existing building located
in the Borough upon premises abutting on any street, road, lane, or
right-of-way in which a public sewer is laid shall cause the sewerage
system of such building or buildings to be connected with the public
sewer, and any cesspool or privy vault on the premises to be thoroughly
cleaned, disinfected and refilled with fresh earth to the satisfaction of
the Board of Health.
a. To cause, to allow or to permit the discharge of sewage from any house
or building in the Borough into or upon any road, highway, public place,
stream, watercourse, ditch surface or subsurface groundwater drain or
stormwater drain.
§ 10-2.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-2.4
AO:160
§ 10-2.5. Authority to Stop Discharge into Sewer. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 3]
The Borough Council or the Board of Health may, at any time in their
discretion, stop and prevent the discharge into the sewers of any substances
liable to injure the sewers, or to interfere with their normal operation, or
to obstruct the flow, or to hinder any processes of sewage purification;
and they may, at any time in their discretion, without notice and without
b. To uncover any portion of the public sewers or drains of the connection
branches thereof, or to open any manhole or flushtank, except with the
written permission of the Borough Clerk.
c. To open any public street or place for the purpose of making any sewer
connection, or to make or cause to be made any connection with a
house connection branch of a public sewer, except under a special
written permit signed by the Borough Clerk allowing such specific
connection, and under the supervision of the Borough Engineer or
Inspector.
d. To break or to cut or to remove any pipe of the public sewers, or to
make or to cause to be made any connection with the sewers except
through the connection branches provided for that purpose, the
location of the connection branches to be designated by the Borough
Engineer.
e. To discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer, directly
or indirectly any groundwater, surfacewater, or drainwater from yards
or courts or roofs; cellar floor drains for removing surplus water from
cellars and laundries are not excluded.
f. To discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer, directly
or indirectly, any overflow or drainage from manure pits, cesspools or
other receptacles storing or constructed to store organic wastes.
g. To connect or cause to be connected with any public sewer, directly or
indirectly, any steam-exhausts, boiler blow-offs, sediment-drips, or any
pipes carrying or constructed to carry hot water or acids, dyes,
germicides, grease, brewery mash, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, oil or
any other substance detrimental to the sewer or to the operation of the
sewerage system or sewage disposal works.
h. To throw or to deposit, or to cause to allow to be thrown or deposited, in
any fixture, vessels, receptacles, inlet or openings connected directly or
indirectly with any public sewer, any garbage, vegetable parings, ashes,
cinders, rags or any other matter or anything whatsoever, except feces,
urine, necessary toilet paper and liquid house slops; or to allow any
house sewer connected with the public sewer to be likewise connected
with any privy vault or cesspool or underground drain, or with any
channel conveying water or filth, except such soil pipes and other
plumbing work as shall have been duly inspected and approved by the
Borough Engineer or Inspector.
§ 10-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.5
AO:161
recourse, sever the connection and cause the removal of any tributary
sewer or drain through which such detrimental substances are discharged.
§ 10-2.6. Separate Connections. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 4]
Each building fronting on a public way must be connected separately and
independently with the public sewer through the house connection branch
directly in front of the buildings or nearest in the down-stream direction.
Grouping of buildings upon one house sewer will not be permitted, save by
special act of the Borough Council and for good sanitary reasons.
§ 10-2.7. Required Pipe Diameter for House Connections. [Ord. 10/
4/16, § 5]
No house connection from the sewer to the wall of the house shall be of any
diameter other than five (5") inches.
§ 10-2.8. Pipe Required for House Connections. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 6;
Ord. 12/4/35, § 1]
Every house or building sewer connection with the public sewer from a
point six (6') feet outside the foundation walls of the building must be of
heavy cast iron pipe, with deep and wide bell and spigot joints. It must be
solidly laid on a true grade, and as nearly as possible in a straight line.
All cast-iron pipes and fittings must be sound, uncoated, cylindrical and
smooth internally, free from cracks, sand holes, or other defects, of uniform
thickness and of the grade known in commerce as "extra heavy."
All joints must be properly gasketed to prevent intrusion or lead into the
pipes. Cast iron pipes shall be joined with first quality lead, the entire joint
being filled in one pouring and thoroughly caulked. The ditch must in all
cases be kept dry during the pipe laying and until the joint has acquired a
hard set. The greatest care must be taken to prevent the entrance of sand
or dirt into the house sewer or the public sewer.
§ 10-2.9. Grade Required for House Connections. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 7]
No house sewer connection with the public sewer shall be laid with a grade
less than one (1") inch fall in four (4') feet without written permission from
the Borough Engineer specifying the minimum grade that will be permitted.
§ 10-2.10. Opening of Sewer; Laying of Pipe. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 8]
No sewer connection branch shall be opened, no pipe shall be laid and
no joints made except under the inspection of the Borough Engineer or
Inspector.
§ 10-2.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-2.11
AO:162
§ 10-2.11. Covering of Pipe. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 9; Ord. 12/4/35, § 2]
All pipes must be covered to a depth of at least one (1') foot with fine earth,
entirely free from stones and rubbish, and well and carefully rammed.
§ 10-2.12. Use of Old Sewers or Connections. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 10]
Old house sewers or connections may be used for new buildings provided
that they are in good condition and conform to the requirements of these
regulations.
§ 10-2.13. Notification of Borough Clerk Prior to Beginning Sewer
Work. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 11]
The Borough Clerk must be notified at least 24 hours before the beginning
of any work upon house sewers or connections.
§ 10-2.14. House Traps. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 12]
The use of house traps will not be allowed without special written
permission of the Board of Health, and then only when such plumbing was
installed prior to January 1, 1916.
Except as mentioned above, no trap or any manner of obstruction to the
free flow of air through the whole course of the drain and soil-pipe will
be allowed; and any mechanic who shall directly or indirectly place, make,
cause, or allow to be placed or made any trap, contraption or other obstacle
anywhere in the course of such drain or soil-pipe, shall, in addition to the
penalty herein prescribed, forfeit his license, and shall be ineligible to relicense
for one year.
§ 10-2.15. Rain Water Conductor. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 13]
No soil, waste or vent pipe may be used as a rainwater conductor; nor may
any rain water conductor be used as a soil, waste or vent pipe.
§ 10-2.16. Licensing for Drain Laying. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 14]
a. No person, firm or corporation, except a Master Plumber, licensed to do
work in the Borough shall carry on the business of drain laying in the
Borough, unless he, they or it shall be first duly licensed by the Borough
Council.
b. Each application for license to carry on the business of drain laying
must be made upon a blank form obtained from the Borough Clerk, and
must be filed with the Borough Clerk and by him presented to the
Borough Council, who will consider the application, and may either
grant or refuse to grant the desired license, at their discretion. If
granted, the license shall not become operative until the applicant has
paid to the Borough Clerk a registration fee of one ($1.00) dollar.
§ 10-2.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.16
AO:163
§ 10-2.17. Drain Laying. [Ord. 10/4/16, § 15]
c. All licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall expire, by
limitation, at 12:00 noon on the day following the first regular meeting
of the Borough Council in the month of January next following the date
of issue, but if the licensee shall be in default because of any violation of
the provisions of this section, his license shall forthwith cease and
terminate, and the fee for the license or any unexpired portion of the
term thereof shall be forfeited to the Borough.
a. Every person, firm or corporation applying for a license to carry on the
business of drain laying shall, when directed by the Borough Council so
to do, furnish a bond, in the sum of $500 with one or more sureties
acceptable to the Borough Council, conditioned substantially that the
applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the Borough and Borough
Council from all suits and actions of every name and description
brought against the Borough or any officer of the Borough, for or on
account of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person in
consequence of or resulting from any work performed by the applicant,
his servants or agents, or of or from any improper materials used in the
work, or of or from any negligence in guarding the work, or of or from
any act or omission of the applicant, his servants or agents; that the
applicant shall faithfully perform the work in all respects, and shall also
replace and restore that portion of any street in which the applicant, his
servants or agents, shall make an excavation, to as good condition as
that in which the same was before the work was performed, and shall
also keep and maintain such street in like good condition to the
satisfaction of the Borough Council, for the period of one year and that
the Borough Council may, within one year, and with or without notice to
the applicant, repair such street or cause the same to be repaired and
that the cost thereof shall be paid by the applicant; and that the
applicant shall comply in all respects with the rules and regulations
established by the Borough Council relative to the work, and shall also
pay all fines imposed upon him, them or it, for violation of any such rule
or regulation.
b. Before any work of drainage be done or commenced in or on any
property, when the same is to be connected with the public sewer, or
before any alterations or additions are made to old work, plans and
description of the proposed work, signed by a licensed plumber or
drainlayer, shall be filed in duplicate in the office of the Borough Clerk,
accompanied by an application for approval of the law and the issuance
of a permit to do the work, plan, description and application to be upon
a blank form obtained from the Borough Clerk and signed by the owner
of the premises or his properly accredited agent. These plans,
descriptions and specifications must conform to all the provisions of
this section and to all the rules and regulations which are or may
hereafter be made concerning such work, and no work may be begun
until the plans have been filed and a permit issued by the Borough
Clerk.
§ 10-2.16 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-2.17
AO:164
§ 10-2.18. Connections Shall Conform to Rules and Regulations.
[Ord. 10/4/16, § 16]
Every sewer connection made from a dwelling house or other building
to the public sewer shall be made in conformity with the specifications,
rules and regulations, now established or hereafter established by the
Board of Health of the Borough of South Bound Brook by its Plumbing and
Sanitary Codes, and shall not be used until the same has been inspected and
approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 10-2.19. Requirements of Person to Make Sewer Connection.
[Ord. 4/5/50, § 17]
No person shall make a sewer connection unless such person is a licensed
and bonded plumber of the Borough who has been duly licensed and bonded
c. For each permit issued, covering the installation of a new house drain, a
fee of $3 must be paid to the Borough Clerk at the time the permit is
issued. This fee is charged to defray the cost of inspection, tests and
incidental expenses that may occur.
d. Whenever, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, any plumber or
drainlayer violates any of the provisions of this Code, the Engineer shall
report the same in writing to the Borough Council. If the Borough
Council shall find that the charges are well founded, they may revoke
the license of such plumber or drainlayer; the Borough Council, may
also, in their discretion, refer such charges to the Recorder for
prosecution.
e. No person, firm or corporation once having been licensed under the
provision of this Code to carry on the business of plumbing or
drainlaying in this Borough, who shall have violated any of the
provisions of this Code, and shall have refused or neglected to make
good, to the satisfaction of the Council, any defective, imperfect or
faulty work, or shall have refused or neglected to pay any fees, fines or
penalties imposed under the provision of this Code, shall, until such
default on his, their or its part has been removed, be ineligible to
receive any renewal of such license.
f. Plumbers must report to the Borough Clerk, in writing, with full
description within 12 hours, the finding by them of all obstructions in
the house drains or the presence therein, if found, of any substances
prohibited by these regulations. Failure to so report will render the
person, firm or corporation so offending liable to the penalty of a
revocation or suspension or his or their license or to the payment of a
fine of $10 for each failure to so report. The finding of the presence of
substances prohibited by these regulations in the house drain of any
house shall constitute presumptive evidence of an offense committed
against these regulations by the owner or occupant or either of the
premises.
§ 10-2.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.19
AO:165
by the Board of Health of the Borough in conformity with the Board of
Health's Plumbing and Sanitary Codes.
§ 10-2.20. Washings; Traps; Flammable Material. [Ord. #2-81, § 18]
No washings from vehicles of any type shall be admitted to the sewer
system except through a silt-basin of suitable size properly protected by a
grating, and trapped, from which the deposits shall be removed by hand as
often as may be required by the Plumbing Inspector or Sewer Inspector.
House connections when connected with garages and stables shall be
properly trapped under the floor and protected by suitable grating and
screens. No gasoline, naphtha, oil or other explosive or flammable material
or acids shall be permitted to discharge into the sanitary sewer.
§ 10-2.21. Steam; Air Conditioning Water. [Ord. #2-81, § 19]
Steam exhausts shall not discharge into the sewer system; and no blowoff
from boilers or from steam heating plants shall be directly connected
therewith but shall in every case discharge into a tank of suitable size from
which a trapped overflow may lead to the sewer. No refrigeration or air
conditioning water shall be allowed to discharge into the sewer system.
§ 10-2.22. Use of Sewer System for Non-Sanitary Sewage. [Ord.
#2-81, § 20]
In all house connections, no storm water from the roof or any other area
shall be admitted to the sewer system. Subsoil water from the cellar or any
other area shall not be admitted to the sewer system. No cesspool or septic
tank shall be allowed to discharge into the sewer system.
§ 10-2.23. Prohibited Wastes or Water. [Ord. #2-81, § 21]
Except as herein provided, no person shall discharge or cause or allow to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to or in any
public sewer:
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
(150°F) degrees Fahrenheit.
b. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
c. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
d. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, wood, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstructions to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage treatment plant.
§ 10-2.19 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-2.23
AO:166
§ 10-2.24. Permission to Discharge Objectionable Waste or Water.
[Ord. #2-81, § 22]
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a) a
B.O.D. greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (b) containing any
quantity of substances having the characteristics described in subsection
10-2.23 or (c) having an average flow greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the Borough, shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Borough Engineer. Where necessary in the opinion of the Borough
Engineer, or required by the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority, the
owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may
be necessary, to (a) reduce the B.O.D. to 300 parts per million and the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits
provided for in subsection 10-2.23 or (c) control the quantities and rates
of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Borough Engineer and of the
State Department of Health of New Jersey, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing.
§ 10-2.25. Preliminary Treatment Facilities. [Ord. #2-81, § 23]
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation, by the owner at his expense.
e. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six point zero (6.0) or
higher than eight point zero (8.0) or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
f. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, or to constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
plant.
g. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such material at the sewage treatment plant.
h. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
i. Any waste, liquid, solid or other substance, the discharge of which is
prohibited by the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority, or which will
not be accepted by Middlesex County Sewerage Authority.
§ 10-2.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.26
AO:167
§ 10-2.26. Sewage Testing Requirements. [Ord. #2-81, § 24]
When required by the Borough Engineer, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Borough Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
§ 10-2.27. Standards and Methods for Testing. [Ord. #2-81, § 25]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in subsections 10-2.23 and 10-2.24 shall
be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Sewage," latest edition, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided for in subsection 10-2.26 or upon suitable samples taken
at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.
§ 10-2.28. Examinations of Waste Discharged in Sewer. [Ord. #2-81,
§ 26]
Readily accessible means shall be provided by the owner, tenant or
occupant of the premises to allow the municipality or its representatives
to make periodic examination and determination of the volume, character
and concentration of waste being discharged into the sewers or laterals
tributary thereto. Laboratory analysis costs shall be paid by sewer user.
§ 10-2.29. Right of Entry. [Ord. #2-81, § 27]
The Plumbing Inspector, Sewer Inspector, Borough Engineer, members of
the Sewer Committee, Board of Health and Borough Council and any other
duly authorized employee of the Borough bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing at any
reasonable hour, in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 10-2.30. Prevention of Discharge of Waste by Borough. [Ord.
#2-81, § 28]
The right is reserved by the Borough of South Bound Brook to stop and
prevent at any time the discharge into the sewers or laterals of any waste
which may injure the sewers or adversely affect sewage treatment or which
is not in conformity with the requirements and standards now or hereafter
made by the Borough or the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority, the
Borough may at any time without notice and without recourse sever the
§ 10-2.26 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 10-2.30
AO:168
connection and cause removal of any sewer or drain through which such
waste may be discharged.
§ 10-2.31. Special Agreements. [Ord. #2-81, § 29]
No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Borough and any industrial
or large concern and any municipality whereby a waste or unusual volume,
strength and/or character may be accepted by the Borough, subject to
payment therefor by the concern, and subject to the provisions of any
agreement with the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority.
§ 10-2.32. Other Laws and Regulations. [Ord. 2-81, § 30]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate the rules, regulations
or requirements of the owners of any public water supply system or public
sewer system. All persons connecting to, or making use of, any sewer in
the Borough shall comply with and abide by any and all present or future
regulations and requirements of the Department of Health of the State
of New Jersey, the Board of Health of the Borough and where applicable,
the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority; and where the regulations or
requirements of said State Department of Health, local Board of Health,
or Sewerage Authority, where applicable, are more restrictive than the
restrictions or requirements of any or all of the bodies shall control.
§ 10-2.33. Fines, Penalties and Remedies. [Ord. #2-81, § 31]
Chapter 11
PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS AND SECONDHAND GOODS,
DEALERS OF
a. Any person who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be liable to the penalty in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
b. The penalties stated in paragraph a above shall not preclude the rights
of the Borough to remove or sever any connection, as provided herein,
or to revoke or suspend any permit or license, as provided herein or
under any other applicable ordinance or code of this Borough or its
Board of Health, or to recover damages in a civil action against any
person, firm or corporation which causes damage or injury to any part
of the sewer system or additional expenses to the Borough in
maintaining or using the system.
c. The owner of a building or structure or portion thereof, or of any lot or
land or part thereof, or of the premises where anything in violation of
this ordinance shall be done or shall exist, and any engineer, building,
contractor, agent, plumber, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who assists in the commission of such
violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense and be subject to the
penalties herein prescribed.
§ 10-2.30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1
AO:169
§ 11-1. Purpose and Intent. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-003]
§ 11-2. Definitions. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-003]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, clauses, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings indicated herein. Words used in
the present tense shall include the future, words in the plural number shall
include the singular number and words in the singular number shall include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Acceptable forms of identification which
include: a current valid New Jersey Driver's License or Identification Card,
a current valid photo driver's license issued by another U.S. state, a valid
United States Passport, or other verifiable U.S. government-issued
identification.
ARTICLE — Any article of merchandise, including any portion of such
article, whether a distinct part thereof or not, including every part thereof
whether separable or not, and also including material for manufacture; and
as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6-1.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of South Bound
Brook or his designee/representative.
DATABASE — A computerized internet-capable database with hardware and
software compliant to that set by the Chief of Police.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity, whether
permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any means)
buys or sells or otherwise exchanges or trades secondhand gold, silver,
precious metals, gems, or jewelry, and includes anyone advertising the
purchase or sale of any of the aforementioned items.
a. The purpose and intent of this section is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious materials,
gems, gemstones and/or other articles by requiring minimum reporting,
maintenance and distribution criteria for secondhand and transient
dealers.
b. No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or
occupation of buying scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home
electronics/audio and visual equipment, musical instruments,
telephones and telephonic equipment, scales, computers, computer
hardware and software, typewriters, word processors, scalmers,
sporting goods of all kinds, antiques, platinum, all other precious
metals, tools of all kinds, televisions, DVRs, GPS, camcorders, car
stereos, gift cards, furniture, clothing or other valuable articles,
hereinafter referred to as "secondhand goods or articles," or being a
secondhand dealer within the Borough of South Bound Brook without
having first obtained a license from the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 11-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 11-2
AO:170
DESIGNATED VENDOR — A person or entity that is appointed or
designated by the Chief of Police who is authorized to collect and maintain
precious metal transaction information, or other purchase information as
defined herein, for the Borough of South Bound Brook.
GIFT CARD — A restricted monetary equivalent or script that is issued by
retailers or banks to be used as an alternative to a nonmonetary gift.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
Borough of South Bound Brook or at varying locations.
PERSON — Any individual natural person, partnership, joint venture,
business, society, associate, club, trustee, trust, corporation, or
unincorporated group, or an officer, agent, employee, servant, factor or any
form of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting for
self or on behalf of another.
PRECIOUS METALS — Comprised of gold, silver, platinum and/or their
alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq., and/or
N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.; gems, gemstones, coins and all forms of jewelry
herein contained.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
PURCHASE — The exchange of money and the exchange, deposit, pledge,
sale, conveyance or trade of any tangible or intangible article.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted by a dealer
in which precious metals, or other tangible property, are purchased or
exchanged from or with the public.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Any article previously sold, acquired, exchanged,
conveyed, traded or otherwise formerly owned, including but not limited
to scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home electronics/audio and visual
equipment, telephones and telephonic equipment, scales, computers,
computer hardware and software, coins, electronic tablets, cameras,
summers, sporting goods of all kinds, antiques, platinum, all other precious
metals, tools of all kinds, televisions, DVRs, GPS, camcorders, car stereos,
gift cards, furniture, clothing or other valuable articles.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer who has not been in any retail business
continuously for at least six months at any address in the municipality
where the dealer is required to register or who intends to close out or
discontinue all retail business in the Borough of South Bound Brook within
six months; or as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-5 and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1.
§ 11-3. Application and Issuance of License. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-003]
a. Initial License Application Process.
1. Every dealer intending on conducting business with the jurisdiction
of the Borough of South Bound Brook shall first make application to
the municipal clerk and shall set forth the name and address of
§ 11-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3
AO:171
dealer, his or her age, whether or not he or she is a citizen of the
United States and whether or not he or she has been convicted of a
crime, the place of conviction, and the date thereof.
2. A dealer of precious metals, gems or gemstones or secondhand
goods shall, prior to buying, attempting to buy or offering to buy
shall be required to be fingerprinted and shall consent to an
investigation of the applicant's moral character and business
responsibility, as deemed necessary by the South Bound Brook
Police Department, for the protection of the public welfare. In the
event that the dealer is a business entity other than a sole
proprietorship, the officers in a corporation or the partners in a
partnership (or limited partnership) shall be deemed to be the
applicant(s) who shall be fingerprinted and investigated in
accordance with this section.
3. Upon initial application to the municipal clerk, each dealer shall be
provided with an application prescribed by the South Bound Brook
Police Department and shall provide the following information on
said application:
(a) Name and address of dealer;
(b) Address from which dealer shall conduct business;
(c) Copy of valid zoning and/or construction permits from the
Borough of South Bound Brook;
(d) Proof that dealer has obtained computer equipment and
software required in § 11-6 of this chapter, for purposes of
reporting all transaction data in electronic format to the South
Bound Brook Police Department.
b. Contingency. Upon completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police
shall either approve or deny the license based upon the results of the
South Bound Brook Police Department investigation. No license shall
be issued without the approval of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
c. Renewal.
1. All renewal applications are to be received in the clerk's office no
later than January 10 of each year. In the event that the dealer is a
business entity other than a sole proprietorship, if the business
entity took on a new officer(s) or partner(s) within the preceding
year, the new officer(s)/partner(s) shall be deemed to be the
applicant(s) who shall be fingerprinted and investigated in
accordance with Subsection a, Initial License Application Process.
2. In the event a dealer fails to file a renewal application by January
31 of each year, the applicant will be assessed a $50 penalty.
§ 11-3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 11-3
AO:172
§ 11-4. License Fees; Nontransferability. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-003]
§ 11-5. Revocation of License. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-003]
3. In the event a dealer fails to file a renewal application after January
31 and after receiving notice by the Borough of South Bound Brook
Police Department and given 10 business days to file such renewal
application, the dealer license may be revoked following the
process as outlined in § 11-5 of this chapter.
a. Each application for a dealer of secondhand goods license shall be
accompanied by an annual fee of $300 payable to the municipal clerk by
January 1, annually.
b. A license issued under the provisions of this section shall not be
transferable and shall terminate on December 31 of the year in which
said license is issued.
c. No license fee shall be prorated.
a. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Chief of Police after a hearing upon notice to the applicant for any of
the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand precious
metals, gems, and jewelry;
3. Any violation of this chapter;
4. Conviction of any crime or disorderly person's offense involving
moral turpitude; and
5. Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
matter or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of
the public.
b. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing.
§ 11-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6
AO:173
§ 11-6. Dealers' Responsibilities, Requirements and Recordkeeping.
[Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-003]
Every dealer within the Borough of South Bound Brook shall, upon the
purchase of any precious metals, or secondhand goods from the public, be
required to do as follows:
a. Record on a numbered receipt the name, address and telephone
number of the purchaser; the name, address and telephone number of
the seller or sellers; the time and date of the transaction; the net weight
in terms of pounds Troy, pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams of the
precious metals; fineness in terms of karats for gold, and sterling or
coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
51:6-1 et seq. This information is to be documented through use of an
electronic database software system as designated by the Chief of
Police. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized police officer of the Borough of South Bound Brook.
b. Through the use of applicably required computer equipment, and using
the electronic format approved by the Chief of Police, enter all
transaction into the electronic database within 48 hours from the date
of purchase. The information entered will contain the information in
Subsection a above, plus the following:
1. A physical description of the seller.
2. The receipt number.
3. A full description of the item or items purchased, including but not
limited to, marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms and serial numbers.
4. The price paid for the item.
5. The form must be signed by the seller.
6. The form must be legibly initialed by the clerk or the dealer who
made the transaction so as to readidly identify that individual.
7. A color photograph or color image of the seller's presented
identification.
8. A color photograph or color image of all items sold. When
photographing or imaging all items must be positioned in a manner
that makes them readily and easily identifiable;
9. Items should not be grouped together when photographing or
imaging; each item will have its own color photograph or color
image.
c. The precious metals are to be made available for inspection by the Chief
of Police of the Borough of South Bound Brook for a period of three days
from the date the information required above is received by the Chief of
§ 11-6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 11-6
AO:174
§ 11-7. Nonapplicability. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-003]
This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by jewelers or other dealers
from wholesalers or other suppliers, but shall only apply to those purchases
made from the public or other retail purchases. The dealer shall keep
records of all wholesale purchases for a period of six months from the date
Police on the approved form. The precious metals shall remain in the
same condition as when purchased and shall not be changed, modified,
melted or disposed of by the purchaser until the three-day period
has expired. During this three-day period, the precious metals shall
be placed in public view at the purchaser's place of business. If the
property is such that it would create a hardship on the dealer by
holding the precious metals for such period, the dealer may present the
property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be photographed
and, if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an investigation be
implemented. The Chief of Police has the authority to grant the dealer
a waiver of the requirement under this subsection.
d. In the event a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police. In the event that paper
forms are used, the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction
information into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so.
e. Dealer payment to the sellers in cash shall be limited to two
transactions during a seven-day period for the same seller. The sevenday
period will commence on the day of the first transaction and end
seven days after the transaction; i.e., if transaction No. 1 occurs on
Monday, the seven-day period ends on Sunday. Furthermore, no cash
payments shall be made to the same sellers who make more than five
transactions in any given thirty-day period. Sellers making transactions
over the number of prescribed weekly and monthly periods will be paid
by the dealer by means of a bank check drawn from the dealer's
business account.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the South Bound Brook Police Department to examine any
database, book, ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to
the purchase of precious metals from the public, as well as the articles
purchased or received, and to take possession of any article known by
the police officer or official to be missing or to have been stolen, or
where the officer or official has probable cause to believe the article is
missing or stolen.
§ 11-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7
AO:175
of such purchase, which records shall be opened to investigation by the
Borough of South Bound Brook Police Department.
§ 11-8. Purchases from Minors. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-003]
No dealer within the Borough of South Bound Brook shall purchase any
precious metals from any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 11-9. Violations and Penalties. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-003]
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a minimum fine of $100 or a maximum of $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days. Each and every violation shall be considered
a separate violation. Every day that a violation continues shall be a separate
violation. Each violation shall result in an additional ten-day suspension.
Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter
within one year of the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the
previous violation may be sentenced by the Court to an additional fine as a
repeat offender. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not
be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and
same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation
of this section.
§ 11-10. When Effective. [Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-003]
This chapter shall take effect in the time and manner provided by law.
Chapter 12
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 12-1. STATE UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Local Enforcement. [Ord. #6-85, § 1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c.383) the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough of
South Bound Brook.
§ 12-1.2. Agency Designation. [Ord. #6-85, § 2]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the
South Bound Brook Fire Department.
§ 11-7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 12-1.3
AO:176
§ 12-1.3. Duties. [Ord. #6-85, § 3]
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Safety Act and the
codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures, and
premises within the established boundaries of the Borough, other than
owner-occupied one and two family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply
with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire
Code.
§ 12-1.4. Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. #6-85, § 4]
The local enforcing agency established by subsection 12-1.2 shall carry out
the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 12-1.5. Organization. [Ord. #6-85, § 5]
The local enforcing agency established by subsection 12-1.2 shall be a
part of the South Bound Brook Fire Department and shall be under the
direct supervision and control of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
(hereinafter known as the Fire Official) who shall report to and be
supervised by the Board of Engineers of the South Bound Brook Fire
Department.
§ 12-1.6. Appointments; Terms of Office; Removal; Salaries. [Ord.
#6-85, § 6]
a. Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under
the supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by the Mayor of
the Borough. In making this appointment the appointing authority shall
make the appointment from among a list of three recommendations
provided by the Board of Engineers of the Fire Department. The Fire
Official shall be subject to removal by the Mayor on the
recommendation of the Board of Engineers for inefficiency or
misconduct. Notification of removal shall be made in writing and shall
be delivered by hand or by certified mail. The individual so removed
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority
or a designated hearing officer.
b. Term of Office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of three years.
Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
c. Inspectors and Employees. Such inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary in the local enforcing agency may be appointed by
the Mayor of the Borough upon the recommendation of the Fire Official
with the approval of the Board of Engineers. Said inspectors and
employees shall serve for a term of three years. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term. There shall be no more than four
inspectors and employees, including the Fire Official.
§ 12-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1.6
AO:177
§ 12-1.7. Board of Appeals. [Ord. #6-85, § 7]
Pursuant to Section 15 and Section 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,
any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall
have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Somerset
County.
§ 12-2. FEES AND REVENUES.
§ 12-2.1. Additional Required Inspections and Fees. [Ord. #6-85,
§ 8]
In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required:
§ 12-2.2. Permits; Collection Fees and Revenues. [Ord. #6-85, § 9]
d. Removal from Office. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing
agency shall be subject to removal by the Fire Official, with the
approval of the Board of Engineers, for inefficiency or misconduct. Each
inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a designated
hearing officer.
e. Salaries. The Fire Official shall receive, for services rendered, the sum
of $200 per annum. The fire inspectors shall each receive, for services
rendered, the sum of $100 per annum. Said sum is to be obtained from
revenues collected by the local enforcing agency pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:18-2.8, N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.6, and subsection 12-2.2a.
a. There shall be an annual inspection of any or all commercial,
educational, public assembly, industrial, or multiple-dwelling (common
areas only) occupancies that do not fall under the classification of a Life
Hazard Use as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.4.
b. There shall be an immediate inspection or examination of any real or
perceived fire hazard as recognized by a member of the Fire
Department, Police Department, Health Department, Construction
Official, or any private citizen.
c. There shall be no fees required for the performance of the above
inspections.
a. Permits. The permit fee schedule established by the Uniform Fire Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.8(c)) shall be the fee schedule for permits issued by the
local enforcing agency. The fee schedule shall be as follows:
Permit Type Fee
Type 1 $25.00
Type 2 $100.00
§ 12-1.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 12-2.2
AO:178
§ 12-3. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS. [Ord. #6-85, § 10]
Permit Type Fee
Type 3 $200.00
Type 4 $300.00
Type 5 $1,000.00
b. Collection of and Accounting for Fees and Revenues.
1. The Bureau of Fire Safety in the Division of Housing and
Development in the Department of Community Affairs shall
annually bill for and take such steps as may be necessary to collect
the annual registration fees for life hazard uses that are located
within the Borough as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:18A-2.6(a)1.
2. The Bureau of Fire Safety shall remit 80% of the fee amount
collected from the life hazard uses located within the Borough to
the local enforcing agency as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:18A-2.6(a)2.
3. All revenues received by the local enforcing agency shall be
appropriated by the Borough Council to the local enforcing agency
for the purpose of enforcing the Code, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:18A-2.6(e).
4. The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall record and account
for all revenues received by and for the local enforcing agency, with
a copy of the accounting furnished to the local enforcing agency
once a month.
5. The Fire Official shall give a written accounting of this report,
along with a written accounting of all expenditures, to the Board of
Engineers during their regular monthly meeting. Any expenditures
made by the agency shall have prior approval from the Board of
Engineers.
a. The following publication is hereby adopted by reference into this
section.
1. NFPA Publication No. 101, "The Life Safety Code," being the 1981
edition thereof and the whole thereof, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, 60 Battery March Street, Boston, MA
02110, along with any subsequent editions, amendments, or
changes made in the normal code change process by NFPA.
b. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:18-3, Section F-311.0, there shall be certain
areas within the Borough that shall be designated as Fire Zones. There
shall be no parking permitted at any time within these Zones.
Identification of these Zones shall be made in the following manner:
1. Standard grade yellow traffic line paint shall be used to indicate the
outer limits of the Zone, with lines four (4") inches in width. There
§ 12-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3
AO:179
shall be diagonal lines placed along the inside of the border lines,
spanning the entire length and width of the Zone. These diagonal
lines shall be spaced three (3') feet apart and shall be four (4")
inches in width. The border and diagonal lines indicating the Fire
Zone shall be placed on the paving elements present within the
Zone.
2. Metal sign(s) with the legend "No Parking—Fire Zone," with red
letters on a white background shall be so placed and lettered as to
be clearly visible and readable at a distance of fifty (50') feet in the
normal approach direction to the designated Zone.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon
which the particular Zone is located to mark and identify the Zones
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
4. The following areas are hereby designated as Fire Zones:
(a) The front of Krauzer's Convenience Store located at 50 Main
Street, South Bound Brook. Said Zone shall extend across the
entire width of the building for a distance of sixty-three (63')
feet, three (3") inches, and shall extend out from the front edge
of the concrete apron in the front of the building for a distance
of fifteen (15') feet. Said zone shall be marked in accordance
with subsections 12-3b1 and 12-3b2.
(b) The driveway immediately in front of the First National Bank of
Central Jersey, located at 194 Main Street, South Bound Brook.
Said Zone shall extend from the corner of the concrete apron at
the west end of the building along the front of the building
eastwards for a distance of eighty-seven (87') feet, and shall
extend out from the front edge of the concrete apron at the
front of the building across the driveway to the opposite curb
for a distance of twenty (20') feet. Said Zone shall be marked in
accordance with subsections 12-3b1 and 12-3b2.
(c) The areas immediately in front of the two fire hydrants located
within the Finchley Gardens apartment complex at 203 Main
Street, South Bound Brook. Fire hydrant number 1, which is
located at the eastern end of the complex, shall have a Zone
extending out ten (10') feet in a straight line from the hydrant,
with the outer limit of the Zone being a line extending from
curb to curb laid at ninety (90°) degrees to the ten (10') foot
line extending from the hydrant. Fire hydrant number 2, which
is located at the western end of the complex, shall have a Zone
that is semi-circular in shape, with the limits of said Zone to
extend a distance of ten (10') feet from the hydrant in all
directions, with those directions being along the curbs to the
right and left of the hydrant, and straight out in front of the
hydrant. Both Zones shall be marked in accordance with
subsections 12-3b1 and 12-3b2.
§ 12-3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 12-3
AO:180
§ 12-4. FIRE DETECTORS.
§ 12-4.1. Fire Detectors Required. [Ord. #2-82, § 1]
All existing residential dwellings of one or two families within the Borough
shall, upon sale or transfer of ownership, be equipped with an approved fire
detection system.
The detector shall be of the ionization or other approved type, sensitive
to any of the products of combustion except that detectors sensitive to
heat only are unacceptable. The detector shall be of the types operated by
battery or electricity on a specific circuit. A minimum of one detector shall
be required on each level containing sleeping quarters. Alarm signaling
devices shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms when all intervening doors
are closed. For the purpose of installation and maintenance, only the
applicable sections of National Fire Prevention Association (N.F.P.A.) No.
74, "Standard for the Installation, Maintenance and Use of a House Fire
Warning System," shall constitute accepted practices.
§ 12-4.2. Rental Dwellings. [Ord. #2-82, § 2]
In the case of rental properties, the occupants of the dwellings units shall be
responsible for replacing batteries in fire detection devices whenever new
batteries are required.
(d) The area immediately in front of the easterly side of Buildings
"A" and "B" in the Towne Oakes apartment complex located at
159 Main Street, South Bound Brook. Said Zone shall run
along the easternmost curbing of the driveway/parking area
that leads into the complex for a distance of three hundred
eighteen (318') feet from the southern end of "A" Building, and
extending to the northern end of "B" Building. The curbing
shall be painted yellow for the entire distance. There shall be
placed three signs, equally spaced, along this curbing. Said
signs shall be constructed and lettered in accordance with
subsection 12-3b2.
(e) The driveway that runs between the building section that
houses Van's Confectioners at 14 Main Street, South Bound
Brook, and the used car lot operated by Classy Classics, 14
Main Street, South Bound Brook. Said Zone shall extend a
distance of fifteen (15') feet in a westerly direction from the
building towards the used car lot. The western limit of the Zone
shall run from the northern most end of the building at 14 Main
Street to the building section that houses South Brook Auto
Body, 14 Main Street, South Bound Brook. This outer limit shall
follow the contour of the building housing Van's Confectioners.
Said Zone shall be marked in accordance with subsections
12-3b1 and 12-3b2.
§ 12-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.3
AO:181
§ 12-4.3. Violations. [Ord. #2-82, § 3]
Failure to install and/or maintain a fire detection system as mandated by
this section will subject the offender to a fine as established in Section 1-5,
per each location of violation.
§ 12-4.4. Transfer of Ownership. [Ord. #2-82, § 4]
Each time there is a transfer of ownership of a single family or a two
family dwelling within the Borough a seller of such property must obtain
from the Construction Official of the Borough a smoke detector compliance
certificate certifying that the property is in compliance with the provisions
of this section.
§ 12-4.5. Certificate Fee. [Ord. #2-82, § 5]
The fee for a smoke detector compliance certificate shall be $10.
§ 12-4.6. Inspection. [Ord. #2-82, § 6]
Before a smoke detector compliance certificate shall be issued, the
Construction Official shall make an inspection of the premises to determine
whether the certificate may or may not be issued.
§ 12-4.7. Application. [Ord. #2-82, § 7]
Application for a smoke detector compliance certificate shall be submitted
to the Construction Official of the Borough and once the application has
been received by the Construction Official, the certificate shall be issued
within six business days of the receipt of the application if the property is
found to be in compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 12-4.8. Failure to Obtain Smoke Detector Compliance Certificate;
Penalty. [Ord. #2-82, § 7]
In the event a seller of property in the Borough fails to obtain a smoke
detector compliance certificate prior to the transfer of title, the purchaser
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.
Chapter 13
CABLE TELEVISION
[Editor's Note: The most recent cable television agreement may be
found in the Borough offices.]
§ 13-1. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS. [Ord. #1-92, § I]
The Municipality hereby grants to the Company its non-exclusive consent
to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the Municipality,
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other television
§ 12-4.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 13-1
AO:182
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Municipality of a cable television system and cable communications system.
Construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon prior approval
of the Board of Regulatory Commissioners.
§ 13-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1-92, § II]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission, F.C.C. Rules and Regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1, et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 USC
521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et
seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
Federal or State definitions:
§ 13-3. STATEMENTS OF FINDINGS. [Ord. #1-92, § III]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the Company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act. Said hearing having been held as above stated and said hearing
having been fully open to the public, and the Municipality having received
at said hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company to
receive this consent, the Municipality hereby finds the Company possesses
the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications
and that the Company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ 13-4. DURATION OF THE NEW FRANCHISE. [Ord. #1-92, § IV]
The consent herein granted shall expire 15 years from the date of the
expiration of the original Certificate of Approval as issued by the Board.
§ 13-5. EXPIRATION AND SUBSEQUENT RENEWAL. [Ord. #1-92,
§ V]
If the Company seeks a successive consent it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a Municipal consent and Certificate of Approval
in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and 16 and
applicable State and Federal rules and regulations. The Company shall
a. MUNICIPALITY – Shall mean the Municipality of South Bound Brook,
County of Somerset in the State of New Jersey.
b. COMPANY – Shall mean the grantee of rights under this ordinance and
is known as TKR Cable Company.
c. ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT – Shall mean Chapter 186 of the
General Laws of New Jersey, 1972, and subsequent amendments
thereto, Section 48:5A-1, et seq.
d. BOARD – Shall mean the Board of Regulatory Commissioners.
§ 13-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5
AO:183
also petition the Board for a Certificate of Approval authorizing continued
operation during the period following expiration of the consent granted
herein, and until such a time that a decision is made by the Municipal
Governing Body relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ 13-6. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. #1-92, § VI]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable television
reception service in the Municipality or any amount permitted by the New
Jersey Cable Television Act or otherwise allowed by law.
§ 13-7. CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLES. [Ord. #1-92, § VII]
The Company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application. The timetable as
presented in the application incorporated herein has been determined to be
reasonable by the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 13-8. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. #1-92, § VIII]
The Company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
franchise territory described herein, in accordance with the proposal for
the provision of services as described in the application. Any additional
extension of the system will be made in accordance with the proposal in the
Appendix to the application.
§ 13-9. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #1-92, § IX]
a. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the Company shall at its sole expense restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
b. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
The Company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of
its facilities to allow moving of buildings, machinery or in other similar
circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party requesting such
action except when requested by the Municipality, in which case the
Company shall bear the cost.
§ 13-5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 13-9
AO:184
§ 13-10. INSTALLATION OF INDIVIDUAL SUBSCRIBERS. [Ord.
#1-92, § X]
The Company shall provide installation to any person's residence or
business as described in the Appendix to the application.
§ 13-11. TERRITORY. [Ord. #1-92, § XI]
The consent granted herein to the Company shall apply to the entirety of
the Municipality and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ 13-12. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. #1-92, § XII]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00
a.m. — 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ 13-13. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. #1-92, § XIII]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for South Bound Brook pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b).
All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-7.1.
§ 13-14. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. #1-92, § XIV]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give a bond to the
Borough of South Bound Brook, which bond shall be in the amount of
$25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the Company as represented in its application for Municipal
consent incorporated herein.
§ 13-15. LOCAL ACCESS AND ORIGINATION CABLECASTING. [Ord.
#1-92, § XV]
The cable operator shall provide access time to non-commercial public,
governmental and educational entities to the extent such access was
promised to the Municipality during the application and as set forth in the
Appendix to the application.
c. Removal or Trimming of Trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the Company's facilities.
§ 13-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-16
AO:185
§ 13-16. FREE SERVICES. [Ord. #1-92, § XVI]
The Cable Company shall provide the installation of one outlet and basic
monthly service to each school and/or library in the Municipality free of
charge. Each additional outlet installation shall be paid for by the institution
on a materials plus labor basis. Monthly service on such additional outlets
shall be charged at the regular tariffed rates for additional outlets.
§ 13-17. EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL. [Ord. #1-92, § XVII]
The Municipality finds that the equipment and/or personnel to be provided
by the Company for public, educational or governmental use as provided in
the Appendix to the application for Municipal consent is reasonable.
§ 13-18. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. #1-92, § XVIII]
The Company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Borough of South Bound Brook as an insured and
insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of:
§ 13-19. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. #1-92,
§ XIX]
The application and Appendix filed by the Company is incorporated herein
be reference. Any portion of the application which is in conflict with the
provisions of the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., the Cable
Communications Policy Act, 47 USC 521 et seq., and/or FCC Rules and
Regulations, 76.1 et seq., as amended, is not to be construed as effective
under the terms of this chapter.
§ 13-20. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. #1-92, § XX]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
a. One hundred fifty thousand dollars for bodily injury or death to one
person, within the limit, however, of $500,000 for bodily injury or death
resulting from any one accident;
b. One hundred thousand dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
c. Fifty thousand dollars for all other types of liability.
§ 13-16 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 13-21
AO:186
§ 13-21. ORDINANCES REPEALED. [Ord. #1-92, § XXI]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 13-22. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. #1-92, § XXII]
The Consent herein granted shall become effective as of the date upon
which the Borough receives written notification shall the Company accepts
the terms and conditions set forth herein.
Chapter 14
TAXATION
§ 13-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-22
AO:187

ARTICLE I
Abatement of Real Property Taxes in Areas in Need of
Rehabilitation or Redevelopment
[Adopted 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-004]
§ 14-1. Definitions.
The definitions contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3 are incorporated herein by
reference as if set forth at length, except as modified or supplemented
herein. As used in this chapter, words shall have the meanings as so defined
unless a different meaning is expressed.
COMPLETION — The issuance of a certificate of occupancy, continuing
certificate of occupancy, final certificate of occupancy for the improvement
in question or other determination of completion by the Borough consistent
with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3(e).
§ 14-2. Tax Exemptions and Abatements Authorized.
The Borough hereby authorizes the utilization of tax exemption and
abatement in accordance with Article VIII, Section I, Paragraph 6, of the
New Jersey Constitution and establishes the eligibility of new multiple
dwellings for five-year tax exemptions and abatements as authorized by
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., located on Lot 1 as set forth herein, provided that
the property is not ineligible pursuant to the provisions of § 14-14 of this
article.
§ 14-3. Construction of Multiple Dwellings.
Construction of new multiple dwellings on Lot 1 shall be eligible for tax
exemption or exemption and abatement commencing with completion of the
project. Upon approval in accordance with the provisions of this article,
any such exemption and abatement shall be subject to the owner and
Borough entering into a tax agreement as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10.
For year one of the exemption period, the improvements shall be assessed
at 0% of their true market value. For year two of the exemption period,
the improvements shall be assessed at 20% of their true market value. For
year three of the exemption period, the improvements shall be assessed at
40% of their true market value. For year four of the exemption period, the
improvements shall be assessed at 60% of their true market value. For year
five of the exemption period, the improvements shall be assessed at 80% of
their true market value.
§ 14-4. Application.
a. The applicant shall furnish to the municipality all the information
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9. In addition, every applicant shall file the
application form prescribed by the Director of the New Jersey Division
of Taxation in the Department of Treasury, with the Tax Assessor, as a
condition to approval. The application for exemption or exemption and
abatement so filed shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor to the
§ 14-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-4
AO:189
§ 14-5. Applicability of Statutory Regulatory Provisions.
Every application for exemption or abatement and every exemption and
abatement granted shall be subject to all the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1
et seq., and all rules and regulations issued thereunder.
§ 14-6. Applicability of Federal, State and Local Laws.
All tax abatement and exemption agreements shall provide that the
applicant is subject to all federal, state and local laws and regulations.
§ 14-7. Equalization.
The percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes bears to the property
taxes which would have been paid had an abatement not been granted for
the property under the agreement shall be applied to the valuation of the
property to determine the reduced valuation of the property to be included
in the valuation of the municipality for determining equalization for county
apportionment and school aid during the term of the tax abatement
agreement covering the property.
degree that the application is consistent with the provisions of this
article, provided that the improvement, conversion, alteration or
construction for which the application is made qualifies as an
improvement, a conversion alteration or construction pursuant to the
provisions of this act and the tax agreement, if any. The granting
of an exemption or exemption and abatement and tax agreement, if
appropriate, shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the
official tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a
notice of termination date thereof.
b. The Borough Council determines and finds that all new multiple
dwellings on Lot 1 in the ANR are eligible for a five-year tax abatement
upon filing an application with the assessor in accordance with
Subsection a above. No other tax exemption shall be granted unless
approved in accordance with law by the Borough Council on an
individual basis after review, evaluation and approval of each
application for compliance with the terms of this article and the
underlying statute, rules and regulations.
c. The tax agreement for new construction shall provide for the applicant
to pay to the Borough in lieu of full property tax payments an amount
annually to be computed by the "tax phase-in" basis formula set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10(c) and as set forth in § 14-3 hereinabove.
d. The tax agreement for all other improvements shall provide for the
applicant to pay to the Borough in lieu of full property tax payments an
amount annually to be computed by one, but in no case a combination,
of the three formulas set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10; the "cost," "gross
revenue" or "tax phase-in" basis.
§ 14-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 14-8
AO:190
§ 14-8. Cessation or Disposition of Property.
If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax abatement or
exemption agreement, the applicant ceases to operate or disposes of the
property or otherwise fails to meet the conditions of eligibility, after 30
days' notice and opportunity to cure, the tax otherwise due if there had
been no abatement or exemption shall become due and payable by the
property owner. The Tax Assessor shall notify the property owner and the
Tax Collector forthwith and the Tax Collector shall within 15 days thereof
notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes due. However, with
respect to sale or other disposal of the property which it is determined that
the new owner of the property will continue to use the property pursuant
to the conditions which were set forth in the tax abatement or exemption
agreement, the exemption or abatement shall continue.
§ 14-9. Default in Tax Payments.
In the event of default by the applicant, including but not limited to the
failure to make timely tax or in lieu of tax payments to the municipality,
the municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, of said default. The
applicant shall have 30 days to cure any default. Following the thirty-day
cure period, the municipality shall have the right to proceed against the
property pursuant to the In Rem Tax Foreclosure Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-1 et
seq. and/or may cancel the financial agreement upon 30 days' notice to the
applicant.
§ 14-10. Taxes upon Termination.
At the termination of a tax abatement or exemption agreement, a project
shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by state law
and local ordinance.
§ 14-11. Ordinance Sent to Department of Community Affairs.
The municipal clerk is hereby authorized and directed to forward a certified
copy of this article to the State of New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 14-12. Ineligibility.
No exemption or abatements shall be granted in the following
circumstances:
a. No exemptions or abatement shall be granted for any property for
which property taxes or any other municipal charges are delinquent or
remain unpaid or for which penalties for nonpayment are due for a
period of at least one year, or for any property not being used in
conformance with a local, state or federal ordinance, regulation or
statute. In addition, one- and two-family structures which contain
home-based businesses are ineligible for the tax exemption or
abatement programs described herein.
§ 14-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-12
AO:191
§ 14-13. Appeal.
The grant or denial of application for a tax exemption or abatement
pursuant to this article shall be made in the sound discretion of the Borough
Council, unless an application may be processed by the assessor pursuant
to § 14-4b. In making its determination Council shall consider the cost
and benefits of the improvements to the Borough as a whole including
its location, financial impacts, effect on the zone plan and master plan,
consistency with the development goals of the Borough, fiscal
determinations with respect to the Borough budget and other factors
deemed relevant by Council. Appeal of any determination made by the
municipality under the terms of this article shall be made to the Somerset
County Board of Taxation.
§ 14-14. Construction.
Where consistent with the context in which used in this article, words
importing the singular shall include the plural; words importing the plural
shall include the singular; and words importing one gender shall include all
other genders.
§ 14-15. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed.
Should any provision of this article be inconsistent with the provisions of
any prior ordinances, the inconsistent provisions of such prior ordinances
are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of the inconsistencies.
§ 14-16. Severability.
In the event that any provision of this article or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such declaration of invalidity shall not affect any other
provision or application of this article which may be given effect, and,
b. No exemption or abatement shall be granted for any property being
converted from single-family use to a multiple-family use.
c. No exemption or abatement shall be granted for any property the
improvements to which will increase the density, as that term is defined
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, beyond that permitted by the applicable zone
regulations notwithstanding that a variance may have been granted for
such increase.
d. No exemption or abatement shall be granted for any property that
presently constitutes a valid nonconforming use or structure unless the
improvement eliminates the nonconformity.
e. No exemption or abatement shall be granted unless the improvement is
reasonably estimated by the assessor to result in an increase in
assessed value of the property, if fully taxed, equal to or greater than
$10,000.
§ 14-12 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 14-16
AO:192
to realize this intent, the provisions and applications of this article are
declared to be severable.
§ 14-17. Captions.
Captions contained in this article have been inserted only for the purpose of
facilitating reference to the various sections, and are not intended and shall
not be utilized to construe the intent and meaning of the text of any section.
§ 14-18. Effective Date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final adoption and
publication in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 14-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-18
AO:193
Chapter 15
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 15-1. COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE.
§ 15-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #7-89, § 1; Ord. #8-97]
The purpose of this section is to regulate and control the collection of solid
wastes within the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 15-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. #7-89, § 2; Ord. #8-97]
As used in this section:
ASHES — Shall mean the residue from fires used for cooking foods and
heating fires within residential units.
BULK ITEMS — Shall mean any large, heavy and/or bulky household
appliances, furniture and furnishings which cannot easily and safely be
placed in the common collection vehicle used for removal of solid waste
within the Borough.
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL USER — Shall mean business
establishments conducting a business, whether for pecuniary profit or not
for pecuniary profit, not including churches, South Bound Brook Firehouse,
South Bound Brook Nutrition Center or the South Bound Brook Board of
Education.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Shall mean any scrap lumber, metal, earth,
sand, bricks, stone, plaster, roofing and siding material and other debris of
a similar nature which accumulates and is incidental to the construction or
renovation of homes, buildings, public works or other projects.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean and include only single family house,
multifamily house, apartment, condominium or townhouse units or other
living units which are not defined as an excluded user in this section.
EXCLUDED USER — Shall mean any type of industrial user, any apartment
house, hotel, dwelling house or building having more than four dwelling
units, and shopping centers or any user presently excluded.
GARBAGE — Shall mean any animal or vegetable waste solids resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Shall mean all waste which is deemed to be
chemical waste, hazardous waste or infectious waste, as defined by N.J.S.A.
7:26-1.4, and which shall include but not be limited to wastes which are
flammable, corrosive or explosive or which, by themselves or in combination
with other waste, would be hazardous to life or property.
HOLIDAYS — Shall mean days observed by the Solid Waste Collector. These
days are: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
§ 14-18 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 15-1.2
AO:194
INCOME PRODUCING UNITS — Shall mean any apartments, rooms,
commercial units, professional offices or suites, which are rented or
available to rent to persons other than the owner(s).
PAPER — Shall mean and include newspapers, periodicals, cardboard and
all other wastepaper.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Shall mean a dwelling unit, inclusive of a house
or a multifamily dwelling of four or less units, all of which are used for
residential purposes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean and include rags, old clothes, leather, rubber,
carpets, wood, sawdust, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and
other combustible solids not of highly volatile or explosive nature, metals,
metal shavings, tin cans, glass, crockery and other similar materials,
exclusive of trade waste resulting from building construction or alteration
work, and exclusive of cellar or yard dirt.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION CONTRACTOR — Shall mean a person or firm
for hire, properly licensed in the State of New Jersey for the purpose of
collection of solid waste and solid waste materials; specifically excluded are
recyclable materials.
TIRES — Shall mean discarded rubber tires originally used on vehicle
wheels.
TRADE WASTE — Shall mean all material resulting from the prosecution
of any business, trade or industry, whether or not conducted for profit, and
shall include paper, rags, leather, rubber, cartons, boxes, wood, sawdust,
garbage, combustible solids, except manure, metals, metal shavings, wire,
tin cans, cinders and other materials exclusive of wastes resulting from
building construction or alteration work.
WASTE MATERIAL — Shall mean and include any and all garbage, refuse,
paper, ashes and wastes from building construction or alteration work,
regardless of how originating, and shall also include cellar or yard dirt.
§ 15-1.3. Responsibilities for Collection and Disposal. [Ord. #7-89,
§ 3; Ord. #8-97]
a. Every user placing garbage, exclusive of recycling materials, ashes and
nonexcluded rubbish, herein defined, for collection from, on or in
connection with nonexcluded property, which property shall be within
the boundaries of the Borough, shall be subject to the rules and
regulations set forth within this section.
b. Disposal of trade waste, bulky items, waste material, construction
debris, and hazardous waste shall be the responsibility of the property
owner or his agent, the construction contractor or the producer thereof,
to have the construction debris and/or trade waste, waste material and
properly licensed waste collection contractor and the Borough shall not
be responsible therefor.
§ 15-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.3
AO:195
§ 15-1.4. Preparation for Collection; Interference with Collector.
[Ord. #7-89, § 4; Ord. #8-97]
c. The Borough shall not be responsible to furnish collection vehicles or
personnel to remove and dispose of solid waste of excluded users within
the Borough.
d. Any user that elects to use or is required to use a private collector must
use a duly licensed and approved disposal service and must provide
documentary proof on or before July 1 of each year that a private
collector has been engaged by the user.
a. Preparation for Collection.
1. Containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be maintained in
a clean, safe and good condition. Any container that does not
conform to the provisions of this subsection or that may have
ragged or sharp edges or any defect liable to hamper or injure the
person collecting the contents thereof shall not be utilized. The
collector shall have authority to refuse collection services for
failure to comply herewith.
2. Appropriate containers.
(a) The containers shall be galvanized or of plastic composition,
shall not exceed 40 gallons in capacity, shall be no heavier than
35 pounds when filled, shall have a lid or cover and shall have
two sturdy handles.
(b) Plastic bags not larger than 40 gallons may be used if properly
tied.
(c) Substitute containers may be used in place of approved
containers, such as another bag which is water repellent and
animal repellent, treated paper garbage and refuse bags or a
bag of similar nature. These bags shall not be larger than 40
gallons. All bags used shall be properly tied and secured so as
to prevent escape of solid or liquid waste.
3. All garbage shall be thoroughly and completely drained of all
liquids, wrapped securely in paper and placed in a receptacle as
hereinbefore set forth.
4. All nonrecyclable broken glass or any other dangerous materials
shall be placed in a secure container to facilitate safe loading of
broken glass or other dangerous material.
5. All ashes shall be placed in a container covered in such a manner as
to prevent contents of the container from becoming wet due to rain
or snow. Ashes shall be cold and free from any hot coals to prevent
§ 15-1.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 15-1.4
AO:196
the possibility of fire, and the container with the ashes shall not
exceed 35 pounds in weight.
6. Hedge and shrubbery clippings, leaves and tree trimmings will not
be collected as part of the regular garbage pickup. These items
shall be collected as part of a special collection program to be
established by the Borough from time to time.
7. No person shall place on the curb or anywhere else for purposes of
collection any explosive or highly flammable materials or
hazardous waste, inclusive of, but not limited to benzine, gasoline,
petroleum, explosive powder, or nitrocellulose film. No person shall
place in any receptacle any garbage, refuse or any other material
which could be injurious to the collectors of the Borough.
8. Large metal items, such as refrigerators, stoves, beds, crates, etc.,
shall not be collected with the regular garbage and trash pickup
but may be collected in accordance with a schedule as determined
by the Department of Public Works for the Borough upon specific
request by a residential user. The Borough will assess a separate
charge for the pickup of these items in accordance with the rate
schedule set forth in subsection 15-1.14, Schedule "B." The
Borough through its Public Works Department, reserves the right
to refuse excessively bulky or heavy items and will not dispose of
items such as motor engine blocks, automobiles (bodies or portions
thereof), truck bodies or parts, and other such items not ordinarily
collected.
No refrigerators shall be placed for collection or disposal unless
and until the door of the refrigerator and/or freezer has been
completely removed from the hinges and the lock has been
rendered inoperable.
9. Arrangement for disposal of trees and stumps shall be made by the
owner, occupant or person in control of the premises and shall not
be collected by the Borough.
10. Each container of solid waste shall be placed on level ground or
surface by the property owner, tenant or other person placing
garbage for collection, or from whose property such garbage is
proposed to be collected, so that it does not easily upset.
11. If any container of garbage is upset or overturned other than by the
Borough employees engaged in garbage or refuse collection, the
property owner, tenant or other person placing the garbage for
municipal collection shall promptly clean up such spill of garbage
and restore it to a suitable container as defined hereinbefore.
12. No person shall place any of the items referred to in this section for
collection in any street or highway, either for collection by
municipality or private disposal.
§ 15-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.4
AO:197
13. If any Borough employee in the course of his duties observes
noncompliance with any of the regulations of this section, he shall
immediately notify the tenant or land owner of noncompliance and
the reason for not making the collection. Such notice may be given
personally or by written statement left on the premises. Each such
instance of noncollection shall be reported to the Borough Public
Works Superintendent by the person in charge of the particular
truck not making the collection.
14. Paper drums or plywood drums shall not be utilized for the storage
of garbage, refuse or ash, and containers of this type will be
collected by the municipality and disposed of.
15. It shall be the obligation of the residential user to place such
material in such quantity and in such a manner as not to create a
public health nuisance or safety hazard.
16. No trash or garbage shall be deposited upon any public street nor
any other public place except at the curb in front of a residence or
place of business for collection by the municipality in accordance
herewith.
17. Receptacles by excluded users utilizing a private Solid Waste
Collection Contractor must meet the minimum requirements as set
forth herein. However, said receptacles can be larger in size, so
long as they are covered to prevent any refuse from being scattered
about by the wind or other elements, are rodent proof, are cleaned
and sanitized as required and are conveniently located on the
premises for storage of refuse and are maintained in such a manner
as to prevent creation of a nuisance or menace to the public health.
Excluded users shall arrange to have refuse removed daily unless
suitable facilities are provided for the storage of solid waste until
its removal.
18. Any solid waste placed at the curb shall be placed in such a manner
as not to create a public nuisance and safety hazard.
19. The contractor shall not be required to make garbage or trash
collection from the premises of any residential user whereon a dog
is permitted to run loose.
20. No trash or garbage shall be removed if found to contain recyclable
material as defined by the Borough Recycling Ordinance.
b. Interference with Collection. No person or persons shall prevent or
interfere with any agent, servant or employee of the Borough or any
authorized contractor or collector of garbage, trash or refuse, or with
his employees engaged in the discharge of their duties, in the sweeping
or cleaning of any street or removal therefrom of sweepings, ashes,
garbage, rubbish or paper or other refuse materials, or in the collection
of garbage, trash, waste, ashes, rubbish or similar material.
§ 15-1.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 15-1.5
AO:198
§ 15-1.5. Quantity of Containers. [Ord. #7-89, § 5; Ord. #14-91, § 1;
Ord. #8-97; Ord. #17-97]
§ 15-1.6. Collection Schedules. [Ord. #7-89, § 6; Ord. #8-97]
Collection from residential users shall be in accordance with a schedule
announced by the Borough. This schedule may be from time to time
amended upon notice by Council after publication.
§ 15-1.7. Set-Out Time. [Ord. #7-89, § 7; Ord. #8-97]
For collection pursuant to a schedule announced by the Borough all
approved containers must be placed at the curbline where easily accessible.
No containers shall be set out prior to 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to
collection, and all containers shall be removed by 8:00 p.m. on the collection
day. When a regular collection day falls on a legal holiday, containers shall
be set out for pickup on the date following the holiday.
§ 15-1.8. Restrictions on Collectors. [Ord. #7-89, § 8; Ord. #8-97]
§ 15-1.9. Placement for Collection. [Ord. #7-89, § 9; Ord. #9-97]
a. Each household shall be entitled to two containers (as defined) per pick
up.
b. During the months of December, July and August, three containers per
pick up, per household will be allowed.
c. Stickers can be purchased at a cost to be determined by resolution of
the Borough Council and additional stickers may be purchased at the
Tax Office during regular business hours or by mail. Each sticker shall
represent one container.
a. Collection shall be done in a quiet and orderly manner in compliance
with all applicable statutes and Noise Ordinances within the Borough.
b. All solid waste collection contractors shall comply with the ordinances
of the Borough and rules and regulations and orders of the Borough as
well as all applicable State, County and Federal laws and regulations.
c. All vehicles of solid waste collection contractors shall be of a closed
type and of such construction and loaded in such a fashion that no part
of the contents shall fall, leak or spill therefrom.
a. All materials set or placed for collection shall be set or placed as near as
possible upon or along the curbline and shall not be set or placed in any
gutter, road or on any walk, sidewalk or public thoroughfare so as to
interfere with public travel.
b. City collectors of solid waste are prohibited from entering upon any
unaccepted lands, streets, service areas, driveways or alleys or any
privately owned buildings or portion of any such buildings for the
§ 15-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.9
AO:199
§ 15-1.10. Transportation from Outside Municipality. [Ord. #7-89,
§ 10; Ord. #8-97]
§ 15-1.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #7-89, § 11; Ord. #8-97]
§ 15-1.12. Powers to Enforce. [Ord. #7-89, § 12; Ord. #8-97]
This section shall be enforced by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer,
the Health Officer, or any South Bound Brook Police Officer and any of their
authorized representatives.
§ 15-1.13. Bulk Items. [Ord. #7-89, Sched. A; Ord. #8-97; Ord.
#18-98]
Bulk items, which cannot be included within a container, shall be charged
as determined by resolution by the Mayor and Council. Such schedule shall
be determined by the Public Works Committee and shall set the item and
charges for such bulk item.
§ 15-1.14. Applications for Bulk Pick-Up. [Ord. #7-89, Sched. B;
Ord. #8-97]
Applications for bulk pick-up shall be available at the Code Enforcement
Office during regular office hours.
purpose of removing refuse materials to the curb, and if solid waste
of residential users is not placed in accordance with this section, the
municipal collector will not accept the waste for collection.
a. No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any solid
waste, whether garbage, paper, ashes, rubbish, waste materials,
construction debris, bulk items, hazardous waste or trade from outside
the Borough or into the Borough for the purpose of dumping or
disposing thereof.
b. No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any trade
waste, waste materials, construction debris, hazardous waste or bulk
items from an excluded user and place for collection with the solid
waste of a residential user in the event residential and excluded users
are located on the same premises, the solid waste shall be disposed of
separately and in accordance with this section.
a. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $2,500 or imprisonment in the County Jail for a term
not exceeding 30 days, or both. However, where the penalty for such
offense may be limited by a State statute, then such limitation shall be
applicable notwithstanding the provisions of this section.
b. Each and every violation of this section or each and every day that any
provision of this section shall be violated shall be construed as a
separate and distinct violation thereof.
§ 15-1.9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 15-2
AO:200
§ 15-2. RECYCLING PROGRAM.
§ 15-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. #6-86, preamble]
Conservation of recyclable materials has become an important public
concern by reason of the growing problem of solid waste disposal and its
impact on our environment.
Landfills which have been accepting solid waste are fast being filled up.
There is an increasing necessity to conserve our natural resources.
The collection of newspapers, magazines, aluminum cans and glass for
recycling purposes from residences and commercial and institutional
establishments promotes the general public interest.
Somerset County's Solid Waste Management Plan, as amended, requires all
municipalities in the County of Somerset to adopt a mandatory recycling
ordinance.
§ 15-2.2. Title. [Ord. #6-86, § 1]
The short title of this section shall be "Recyclable Materials Collection," and
the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 15-2.3. Definitions. [Ord. #6-86, § 2]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Shall mean and include all aluminum beverage
containers; the same will be reasonably clean of foreign matter.
GLASS — Shall mean and include all glass bottles and jars, the same to have
lids and neck rings removed and to be reasonably clean of foreign matter.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean and include garbage and rubbish normally
placed at the curb by the residents of the Borough for regular municipal
collection.
§ 15-2.4. Program Established. [Ord. #6-86, § 3; Ord. #6-87]
a. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and
occupants of residences or commercial or institutional properties to
separate newspapers, magazines, aluminum cans and glass from all
other solid waste produced by any such properties and to separately
bundle the newspapers, magazines, aluminum cans and glass for
pickup, collection and recycling.
b. The owner, operator or occupant of any commercial, professional or
institutional establishment shall recycle material as required under
Somerset County Recycling Amendment of December 1985 and N.J.S.A.
P.L. 1987, Chapter 102 including but not limited to paper, glass and
aluminum.
§ 15-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-2.5
AO:201
§ 15-2.5. Separation and Placing for Disposal. [Ord. #6-86, § 4; Ord.
#3-91, § 9A]
§ 15-2.6. Leaf Collection, Removal and Disposal. [Ord. #6-86, § 10]
It shall be a violation of this section for any owner, lessee or occupant of
any residential, commercial or institutional property in the Borough to put
leaves into or cause leaves to be put into the solid waste collection system
of the Borough. All leaves shall be separated from newspapers, magazines,
aluminum cans, glass and all other solid waste produced or accumulating at
such properties and all leaves shall be disposed of, removed or collected in
conformity with the following regulations:
a. Newspapers and magazines shall be reasonably compacted and shall be
tied or otherwise secured in bundles not exceeding 35 pounds in
weight.
b. All cans shall be reasonably clean and all glass shall have lids and neck
rings removed and shall be reasonably clean; both cans and glass shall
be placed in plastic bags (can be mixed) that do not exceed 35 pounds in
weight each.
c. Bundles shall be placed separately at the curb for collection at such
time as may hereinafter be established by regulation. All plastic bags
will be supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant.
d. All plastic bottles shall be placed in a plastic bag or bags separate from
the glass, aluminum and/or steel cans and secured at the top. Plastic
bottles will be rinsed with lids and rings removed.
e. All corrugated paper boxes and other corrugated paper products shall
be securely tied in bundles of no large than twenty-four (24") inches
square.
f. All tin-plated steel and bi-metal food and beverage cans shall be placed
in the same plastic bag or bags as the glass and aluminum. All steel
cans shall be rinsed with labels removed.
a. The Borough shall publish each fall a schedule of leaf pickup for all
residential properties in the Borough.
b. The owners, lessees or occupants of any residential properties,
according to the schedule of collection, shall place all leaves for
disposal in the street near the curb or in plastic bags in a place away
from the regular garbage collection area.
c. Twigs, sticks or branches shall be removed from any leaves set out for
collection.
d. The Borough shall collect all leaves set out for collection from
residential properties according to this subsection.
§ 15-2.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 15-2.6
AO:202
§ 15-2.7. Disposal of Crankcase Oil. [Ord. #6-86, § 11]
It is prohibited and will be deemed a violation hereof for any owner, lessee
or occupant of any residential, commercial or institutional property in the
Borough to put into or cause to be put into the solid waste collection system
of the Borough any crankcase oil.
§ 15-2.8. Collection of Recyclable Items by Unauthorized Personnel.
[Ord. #6-86, § 5]
From the time of placement at the curb by any resident of newspapers,
magazines, aluminum cans and glass for collection by the Borough or its
agent, in accordance with the terms hereof, such newspapers, magazines,
aluminum cans and glass shall be and become the property of the Borough
or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this section for any person
unauthorized by the Borough to collect or pick up or cause to be collected
or picked up any such newspapers, magazines, cans or glass. Each such
collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 15-2.9. Enforcement and Administration. [Ord. #6-86, § 6]
The Superintendent of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce this section. He is hereby authorized and directed to establish
and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and times
for the collection of newspapers, magazines, aluminum cans and glass
in accordance with the terms hereof and any other matters required to
implement this section. The Borough Council may change, modify, repeal or
amend any portion of the rules and regulations at any time.
§ 15-2.10. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. #6-86, § 7]
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates or neglects to
comply with any provision of this section or any regulation thereof, will be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $50 upon a first conviction; $100 upon
a second conviction, and $300 upon a third or subsequent conviction. The
above fines shall not be applicable to a conviction for subsection 15-2.8
hereof which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
e. The owner, lessee or occupants of any commercial or institutional
properties within the Borough shall be responsible for disposal of
leaves, produced or accumulating at such properties, at a site
designated by or approved by the County of Somerset.
f. Nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent the owner, lessee or
occupant of any residential or commercial or institutional properties
from composting of leaves as an alternate or supplement to the disposal
of leaves by other methods provided for in this subsection.
§ 15-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-2.11
AO:203
§ 15-2.11. Franchise or License. [Ord. #6-86, § 8]
The Borough Council shall enter into an agreement with the Association
of Retarded Citizens, granting a franchise or license to authorize that
organization to collect all newspapers, magazines, aluminum cans and glass
at curbside. Without the entry of such an agreement this section shall be of
no effect whatsoever.
§ 15-2.12. Alternate Newspaper and Magazine Collection. [Ord.
#6-86, § 9]
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, any person
who is an owner, lessee or occupant may donate newspapers to the Boy
Scouts of America. The Boy Scouts of America shall not pick up newspapers
and magazines from curbside in the Borough on or immediately preceding
[within 24 hours] regularly scheduled curbside collection by the Association
of Retarded Citizens unless specifically requested by the owner, lessee or
occupant of the premises. The Boy Scouts of America are authorized to
pick up newspapers and magazines at any other time without such specific
authorization.
§ 15-3. YARD WASTE.
§ 15-3.1. Containerization of Yard Waste Required. [Ord. No.
2007-04]
a. Purpose. This subsection establishes requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in Borough of South Bound Brook, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Means the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from
spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or
municipal roadway, and includes the land between the street lines,
§ 15-2.11 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 15-3.1
AO:204
§ 15-3.2. Placement of Yard Waste in Curb or Street Restricted.
[Ord. No. 2007-04]
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas
within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Means leaves and grass clippings.
c. Prohibited Conduct. The owner or occupant of any property, or any
employee or contractor of such owner or occupant engaged to provide
lawn care or landscaping services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or
otherwise place yard waste, unless the yard waste is containerized, in
the street. If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street,
the party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard
waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
subsection.
d. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by
Police Department and/or other Municipal Officials.
e. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
a. Purpose. This subsection establishes a yard waste collection and
disposal program in Borough of South Bound Brook, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Means the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from
spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or
municipal roadway, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
§ 15-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.2
AO:205
Chapter 16
HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
[Editor's Note: Chapter 16, excluding Article XI, was adopted in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 9-97.]
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas
within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Means leaves and grass clippings.
c. Yard Waste Collection, Time for Placement, Location. Sweeping, raking,
blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not containerized at the
curb or along the street is only allowed during the seven days prior to a
scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be placed closer
than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste
at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner
is a violation of this subsection. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this subsection.
d. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by
Police Department and/or other Municipal Officials.
e. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
§ 15-3.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 15-3.2
AO:206
ARTICLE I
Enforcement
§ 16-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 16-1.1. Short Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Housing and Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of South Bound Brook, State of New Jersey."
§ 16-1.2. Scope.
The intent of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
in all existing structures, residential and nonresidential, and on all existing
premises by:
§ 16-1.3. Intent.
This code shall be construed liberally and justly to insure public health,
safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the maintenance of
structures and premises.
§ 16-1.4. Other Regulations.
The provisions of this code shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which prescribe standards
other than are provided herein.
§ 16-1.5. Application of Building Code.
Any repairs or alterations to a structure, or changes of the use therein,
which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the New
Jersey State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 16-1.6. Existing Remedies.
The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the Borough or its officers or agencies relating to the removal
or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or
unsanitary.
a. Establishing minimum maintenance standards for all structures and
premises for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space
heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for space, use and location;
and for safe and sanitary maintenance of all structures and premises
now in existence;
b. Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators, agents and occupants
of all structures, and;
c. Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
§ 16-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.7
AO:207
§ 16-1.7. Summons.
At the discretion of the Code Official, no notices, orders or hearings to
abate are required prior to the issuance of a summons when the following
violations have occurred:
§ 16-2. VALIDITY.
§ 16-2.1. Serviceability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this code which shall continue in
full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this code are hereby
declared to be serviceable.
§ 16-2.2. Saving Clause.
This code shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such violations
shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the fullest extent
of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in
effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 16-3. EXISTING STRUCTURES.
As provided in Section 16-1, this code establishes minimum requirements
for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all structures and
premises and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise
established by ordinance which may be additional or more stringent for the
construction, repair, alteration or use of structures, equipment or facilities.
a. Not providing sufficient heat of minimum temperature of 68 degrees F.
during the hours from 6:00 a.m. till 11:00 p.m. or 65 degrees F. during
the hours from 11:00 p.m. till 6:00 a.m. in any building or dwelling unit.
b. The illegal use of any use of any building or dwelling unit.
c. The conversion of a building or dwelling unit without proper
application.
d. The ownership of a building or a dwelling unit that has been illegally
converted.
e. Inadequate exit way facilities.
f. Overcrowding of any structure or dwelling unit in violation of this
section.
g. Or any violation that the Code Official deems a hazard to public safety
or welfare.
§ 16-1.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-4
AO:208
§ 16-4. ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
§ 16-4.1. Officer.
The Code Official, officer or employee who acts in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of their duties of enforcement of this code is
relieved of all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act. Further, the
official shall not be held for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding
that may be instituted against the official in the enforcement of this code.
In any of these actions, the official or employee shall be defended or
represented by the Borough's attorney-at-law until the final termination of
the proceedings.
§ 16-4.2. Official Records.
An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the
department specified in the provisions of this code, and all such records
shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times and under
reasonable regulations established by the Code Official to maintain the
integrity and security of such records.
§ 16-5. DUTIES AND POWERS OF CODE OFFICIAL.
§ 16-5.1. General.
The Code Official shall enforce all the provisions of this code relative to
the maintenance of structures and premises, except as may otherwise be
specifically provided for by other regulations.
§ 16-5.2. Notices and Orders.
The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal
or unsafe conditions to insure compliance with the code requirements for
the safety, health and general welfare of the public.
§ 16-5.3. Inspections.
To safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the Code Official
is authorized to enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time for
the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this code,
subject to constitutional restrictions.
§ 16-5.4. Right of Entry.
If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure subject
to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the structure
or premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought, the Code
Official may seek in a court of competent jurisdiction, an administrative
search warrant.
§ 16-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-5.5
AO:209
§ 16-5.5. Access by Owner or Operator.
Every occupant of a structure or premise shall give the owner or operator
thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of the structure or the
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection,
maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this code.
§ 16-5.6. Credentials.
The Code Official or authorized representative shall disclose proper
credentials of their respective office for the purpose of inspecting any and
all buildings and premises in the performance of their duties under this
code.
§ 16-5.7. Coordination of Enforcement.
Inspection of premises, the issuance of notices and orders and enforcement
thereof shall be the responsibility of the Code Official so charged by the
Borough. Whenever, in the opinion of a Code Official initiating an inspection
under this code, it is deemed necessary or desirable to have inspections by
any other department, the Official shall make reasonable effort to arrange
for the coordination of such inspections so as to minimize the number
of visits by inspectors, and to confer with the other departments for the
purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. A
department shall not, however, delay the issuance of any emergency orders
which it determines must be issued.
§ 16-5.8. Rule-Making Authority.
The Code Official shall have the power as may be necessary in the interest
of public safety, health and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations to interpret and implement the provisions of this code to
secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because
of local climatic or other conditions; but such rules shall not have the effect
of waiving working stresses or fire protection requirements specifically
provided in this code or of violating accepted engineering practice involving
public safety.
§ 16-5.9. Annual Report.
At least annually, the Code Official shall submit to the Mayor and Council
a written statement of operations in the form and content as shall be
prescribed by such authority.
§ 16-6. CONDEMNATION.
§ 16-6.1. General.
When a structure or a part thereof is found by the Code Official to be unsafe,
or when a structure or part thereof is found unfit for human occupancy or
§ 16-5.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-6.1
AO:210
use, is overcrowded or is found unlawful, it may be condemned pursuant
to the provisions of Section 16-7 of this code and may be placarded and
vacated. It shall not be reoccupied without the approval of the Code Official.
Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed out of service.
§ 16-6.2. Closing of Vacant Structures.
If the structure or part thereof is vacant or unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use and is not in danger of structural collapse, the Code
Official may post a placard of condemnation on the premises and may order
the structure closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance to youngsters.
Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified
in the order, the Code Official shall cause it to be closed through any public
agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost
thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
§ 16-7. NOTICES AND ORDERS.
§ 16-7.1. Notices to Owner or to Person or Persons Responsible.
Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of
this code or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred,
or whenever the official has condemned any structure or equipment under
the provisions of Section 16-6, he shall give notice to the owner or person or
a. An unsafe structure is one in which all or a part thereof is found to be
dangerous to life, health, property; the safety of the public or its
occupants because it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally
unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that it is
likely to partially or completely collapse.
b. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator,
moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid
containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is of such disrepair or condition that it is found to be hazardous to
life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure. Unsafe equipment may contribute to the finding
that the structure is unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use.
c. A structure is unfit for human occupancy or use whenever the Code
Official finds that it is unsafe, unlawful or because of the degree in
which it lacks maintenance or is unsanitary, vermin or rodent infested,
contains filth and contamination or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by
this code or because its location constitutes a hazard to its occupants or
to the public.
d. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by
more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered
or occupied contrary to law.
§ 16-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7.1
AO:211
persons responsible therefore in the manner prescribed below. If the Official
has condemned the property, or part thereof, the Official shall give notice
to the owner and to the occupants of intent to placard and to vacate the
property or to order equipment out of service.
§ 16-7.2. Form.
Such notice prescribed in subsection 16-7.1 shall:
§ 16-7.3. Service.
The notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a
copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice
at his usual place of abode in the presence of someone in the family of
suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof,
or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at his last known
address with return receipt requested, or if the certified or registered letter
is returned with receipt showing that it has not been delivered, by posting
a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected
by such notice, and publishing such notice in a local newspaper of general
circulation at least once a week for three consecutive weeks.
§ 16-7.4. Service on Occupant.
When a condemnation order is served on an occupant other than the owner
or person responsible for such compliance, a reasonable time to vacate
the property after noncompliance shall be stated. The owners or persons
responsible for compliance must vacate at the time set for correction of the
defects if there is failure of compliance.
§ 16-7.5. Penalties.
Penalties for noncompliance of orders and notices shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in subsection 16-10.2.
§ 16-7.6. Transfer of Ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has
received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been
served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of the dwelling
unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order
or notice of violation have been complied with or until such owner shall
a. Be in writing.
b. Include a description of real estate sufficient for identification.
c. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued.
d. Include a correction order allowing reasonable time for repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this code.
§ 16-7.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-7.6
AO:212
first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of
any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code Official and
shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and notarized statement from the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility
without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such
compliance order or notice of violation.
§ 16-8. PLACARDING.
§ 16-8.1. Placarding of Structure.
After the condemnation notice required under the provisions of this code
has resulted in an order by virtue of failure to comply within the given time,
the Code Official may post on the premises or structure or parts thereof,
or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the words: CONDEMNED
AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY OR USE, and a statement of the
penalties provided for any occupancy or use or for removing the placard.
The owner or person or persons responsible for the correction of violations
shall remove themselves from the property on failure to comply with the
correction order in the time specified, but other occupants shall be given a
reasonable time thereafter to vacate.
§ 16-8.2. Prohibited Use.
Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or structure or part
thereof, or who shall use placarded equipment, and any owner or any
person responsible for the premises shall be liable for the penalties
provided by this code.
§ 16-8.3. Removal of Placard.
The Code Official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the
defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based
have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation
placard without the approval of the Code Official shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this code.
§ 16-9. EMERGENCY ORDERS.
§ 16-9.1. General.
Whenever the Code Official finds that an emergency exists on any premises,
or in any structure or part thereof, or on any defective equipment which
requires immediate action to protect the public's health and safety or that
of the occupants thereof, the Official may, with proper notice and service in
accordance with the provisions of Section 16-7, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring the vacating of premises or
such action taken as the Official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, such order shall be effective
§ 16-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-9.1
AO:213
immediately, and the premises or equipment involved shall be placarded
immediately upon service of the order.
§ 16-10. VIOLATIONS.
§ 16-10.1. Unlawful Acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any structure or
equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, contrary to or
in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
§ 16-10.2. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or
both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions
hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 16-10.3. Prosecution.
In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the Code Official
may request the Borough's legal representative to institute an appropriate
action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty provided in subsection
16-10.2 and in addition thereto, may ask the legal representative to proceed
at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the
purpose of ordering that person:
§ 16-11. DEMOLITION.
§ 16-11.1. General.
The Code Official may order the owner of the premises upon which is
located any structure or part thereof which in his judgment is so old,
dilapidated, fire damaged or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation,
a. To restrain or correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
b. To restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such
structure;
c. To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof
erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in
compliance with, the provisions of this code; or in violation of a plan or
specifications under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued
or in violation of the Borough of South Bound Brooks' Land Use
Ordinance.
§ 16-9.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-11.1
AO:214
occupancy or use and that would be unreasonable to repair, to raze and
remove such structure or part thereof; or if it can be made safe by repairs,
to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner's
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to raze and remove such
structure or part thereof.
§ 16-11.2. Unreasonable Repairs.
Whenever the Code Official determines that the cost of such repairs would
exceed 100% of the current value of such structure, such repairs shall be
presumed unreasonable and it shall be presumed for the purpose of this
section that such structure is a public nuisance which may be ordered razed
without option on the part of the owner to repair.
§ 16-11.3. Order.
The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply therewith
and specify repairs, if any. It shall be served on the owner of record or the
owner's agent where an agent is in charge of the building and upon the
holder of any encumbrance of record in the manner provided for service of
a summons by a court of record. If the owner or holder of an encumbrance
cannot be found, the order may be served by posting it on the main entrance
of the building and by publishing it once in a newspaper authorized to
provide service by publication.
§ 16-11.4. Failure to Comply.
Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply with a demolition order
within the time prescribed, the Code Official shall cause the structure or
part thereof to be razed and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost
of such razing and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
§ 16-12. through § 16-14. (RESERVED)
§ 16-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-12
AO:215

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 16-15. GENERAL USE OF WORDS AND TERMS.
§ 16-15.1. Scope.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this code, have the meaning indicated in this section.
§ 16-15.2. Interchangeability.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular.
§ 16-15.3. Terms Defined in Other Codes.
Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, they shall have the same meaning ascribed to
them therein.
§ 16-15.4. Terms Not Defined.
Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this code or under the
provisions of the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code, they shall
have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the
context herein may imply.
§ 16-16. DEFINITIONS; APPLIED MEANING OF WORDS AND
TERMS.12
APPROVED — As applied to a material, device or method of construction
shall mean approved by the Code Official under the provisions of this code,
or approved by some other authority designated by law to give approval in
the matter in question.
BASEMENT — Shall mean the portion of a building that is partly
underground, which has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from clear
floor to ceiling, above the average adjoining ground level. Where the natural
contour of the ground level immediately adjacent to the building is
interrupted by ditching, pits or trenching, then the average adjoining
ground level shall be the nearest natural contour line parallel to the walls
of the building without regard to the levels created by the ditching, pits or
trenching. (See Cellar)
BUILDING CODE — Shall mean the code officially adopted by the Borough
Council of South Bound Brook or such other code as may be officially
designated by the Council for the regulation of construction, alteration,
12.Note: Whenever the words "multi-family dwelling", "residence building", "dwelling unit",
"rooming house", or "premises" are used in this code they shall be construed as though
they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 16-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-16
AO:217
addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures.
CELLAR — Shall mean the lowermost portion of a building partly or totally
underground, having 1/2 or more of its height measured from clear floor to
ceiling below the average adjoining ground level. Where the natural contour
of the ground level immediately adjacent to the building is interrupted by
ditching, pits or trenching, then the average adjoining ground level shall be
the nearest natural contour line parallel to the walls of the building without
regard to the level created by the ditching, pits or trenching.
CENTRAL HEATING — Shall mean the heating system permanently
installed and adjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments from a source
outside of these rooms.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the official designated by
the Borough to enforce building, property maintenance, zoning or similar
laws, or his duly authorized representative.
CODE OFFICIAL — Shall mean the official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized
representative.
CONDEMN — Shall mean to adjudge unfit for use or occupancy.
CONDEMNATION — Shall mean the act of judicially condemning.
DWELLINGS —
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a building containing one
dwelling unit.
a.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a building containing two
dwelling units.
b.
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean a building arranged or used for the
lodging, with or without meals, for compensation, by more than five
persons and not more than 20 individuals and is licensed.
c.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a building or portion thereof
containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one or
two family dwelling.
d.
DORMITORY — Shall mean a space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons, not members of the same
family group, in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms.
e.
LODGING HOUSE — Shall mean a building or portion thereof
containing more than five rooming units which are used by not more
than five guests where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise.
A lodging house shall comply with all the requirements for dwellings.
f.
§ 16-16 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-16
AO:218
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREA — Shall mean the open space on the premises
and on adjoining property under the control of owners, operators or tenants
of such premises.
EXTERMINATION — Shall mean the control and elimination of insects,
rodents or other pests and vermin by eliminating their harborage places;
by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food;
by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
GARBAGE — Shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE SPACE — Shall mean space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage
or utility space and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence within, or contiguous to, a
structure or premises of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
JUNK VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle which is without a currently
valid license plate or plates and is either in a rusted, wrecked, discharged,
dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET — Shall mean to permit possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, building or structure by a person who shall be
the legal owner or not be the legal owner of record thereof pursuant to a
written or unwritten lease, agreement, license or pursuant to a recorded or
unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
MAINTENANCE — Shall mean conformance of a building and its facilities
to the code under which the building was constructed.
MOTEL — Shall mean a hotel as defined in this code.
MULTI-FAMILY (MULTIPLE) DWELLINGS — See Dwellings.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person over one year of age (including
owner or operator) living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual
possession of said dwelling or rooming unit.
FAMILY — Shall mean an individual or married couple and the children
thereof with not more than two other persons related directly to the
individual or married couple by blood or marriage.
g.
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean any residence building or any part
thereof containing one (l) or more rooming units in which space is let by
the owner or operator to more than three persons who are not members
of a family and is licensed.
h.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a single unit providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
i.
§ 16-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-16
AO:219
OPERABLE AREA — Shall mean that part of a window or door which
is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
OPERATOR/AGENT — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or
control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, agent, firm or corporation having legal
or equitable interest in the property.
PERSON — Shall mean and include a corporation or copartnership as well
as an individual.
PLUMBING — Shall mean the practice, materials and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances within the scope of the New Jersey Plumbing
Code.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Shall mean a receptacle or device which is either
permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of
the premises, and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used
water, liquid-borne waste materials or sewage either directly or indirectly
to the drainage system of the premises; or which requires both water supply
connections and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot or parcel of land including the building or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Shall mean and include the following:
The physical conditions or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law; or
a.
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including
but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and
unsafe fences or structures; or
b.
c. Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or is
manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb or property; or
d.
e. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities
required by this code have been removed; or from which utilities have
been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective; or the
required precautions against trespassers have not been provided; or
f.
Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
g.
Any structure or building which is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration, decay, faulty construction, overcrowded, open, vacant,
abandoned or damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in
h.
§ 16-16 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-16
AO:220
RENOVATION — Shall mean a building and its facilities made to conform to
present day minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety.
RESIDENCE BUILDING — Shall mean a building in which sleeping
accommodations or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities, as a
unit, are provided; except when classified as an institution under the
building code.
ROOMING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit use or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for
cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean combustible and non-combustible waste material,
except garbage. The term - Shall include the residue from the burning of
weeds, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other
similar materials.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean that which is built or constructed, including
without limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy
or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, stairways, chute
escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks,
stairways, tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which
is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground.
SUPPLIED — Shall mean installed, furnished or provided by the owner,
operator or agent.
VENTILATION — Shall mean the process of supplying and removing air by
natural or mechanical means to or from any space.
WORKMANLIKE — Shall mean, whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this code, that maintenance and repair
shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
YARD — Shall mean an open unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, extending along the entire length of a street, or rear or interior lot
line.
danger of collapse or failure and is dangerous to anyone on or near the
premises.
MECHANICAL VENTILATION — Shall mean ventilation by powerdriven
devices.
a.
NATURAL VENTILATION — Shall mean ventilation by opening to outer
air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks without wind
driven devices.
b.
§ 16-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-16
AO:221

ARTICLE III
Exterior Property, Premises and Structures
§ 16-17. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 16-17.1. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions for the
maintenance of exterior property, premises and structures; premises shall
comply with the conditions herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
§ 16-17.2. Responsibility.
The owner of the premises shall maintain such structures and premises in
compliance with the following requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use the premises which
do not comply with the following requirements of this section.
§ 16-17.3. Vacant Structures and Land.
All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided
herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public
health or safety.
§ 16-18. PREMISES CONDITIONS.
§ 16-18.1. Sanitation.
All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
§ 16-18.2. Containers.
The operator of every establishment producing garbage, vegetable wastes
or other prescribed materials shall provide, and at all times cause to be
used, leak proof approved containers provided with close fitting covers for
the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
§ 16-18.3. Grading and Drainage.
All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any structure located
thereon. It shall be unlawful to discharge any liquid from a pump onto
adjacent properties.
§ 16-18.4. Loading and Parking Areas.
All loading areas, automobile service stations, drive-in establishments, etc.
except those located within a flood plain shall be paved with bituminous
concrete or equivalent surfacing and shall be free from dirt and other litter
§ 16-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-18.4
AO:223
and kept in good repair. When lighted for nighttime use, lights shall not be
permitted to cast directly upon dwellings nearby.
§ 16-18.5. Insect and Rodent Control.
An owner of a structure or property shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests in all exterior
areas of the premises, except that the occupant shall be responsible for
such extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a single family
dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public parts of the
premises of other than a single family dwelling, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
§ 16-18.6. Public Areas.
All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas for
public use shall be kept in a proper state of repair and free of all snow,
ice, mud and other debris. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof
by virtue of its state of repair shall constitute a danger to public health and
safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof shall be replaced.
§ 16-18.7. Weeds or Plant Growth.
All areas shall be kept free from weeds or plant growth which are noxious,
overgrown or detrimental to the public health and welfare.
§ 16-18.8. Storage Areas.
All open salvage yards and open storage areas shall be completely obscured
from surrounding property by a solid screen not less than six feet in height.
§ 16-18.9. Exhaust Vents.
A person shall not construct, maintain or operate pipes, ducts, conductors,
fans or blowers discharging gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke,
odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes so as to discharge directly
upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another
tenant.
§ 16-18.10. Accessory Structures.
All necessary structures, including detached garages, fences and walls shall
be maintained structurally sound and in compliance with Sections 16-19
and 16-20 of this code.
§ 16-18.11. Motor Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on
the streets, vacant lots, driveways and residential lawns, except in a fully
enclosed structure, any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer which is (a)
missing tires, wheels, engine or any essential parts; or (b) which does not
§ 16-18.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-18.11
AO:224
display a current, valid New Jersey state license; or (c) which is wrecked,
disassembled or partially disassembled. Furthermore, no person shall park,
stop or stand any motor vehicle, or permit or suffer the same to be done, in
any front yard areas of premises occupied by a dwelling or hotel, except on
driveways and parking areas constructed and installed in compliance with
applicable Borough ordinances and not less than three feet from the interior
front sidewalk line adjacent to said premises.
§ 16-19. EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
§ 16-19.1. General.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants
and so as to protect the occupants from the environment.
§ 16-19.2. Structural Members.
All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept
structurally sound, free of deterioration and maintained capable of safely
bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them.
§ 16-19.3. Exterior Surfaces (Foundations, Walls and Roof).
Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be
maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be
kept in such condition as to exclude rodents.
§ 16-19.4. Foundation Walls.
All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and
operating dead and live loads and shall be maintained plumb and free from
open cracks and breaks so as not to be detrimental to public safety and
welfare.
§ 16-19.5. Exterior Walls.
Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, graffiti, breaks, loose or rotting
boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or
dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces
of the building. All exterior surface material, including wood, composition
or metal siding, shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly
surface coated as required to prevent deterioration.
§ 16-19.6. Roofs.
The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and not have defects which might
admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent the rain water
from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building.
§ 16-18.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-19.7
AO:225
§ 16-19.7. Decorative Features.
All cornices, shutters, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim,
wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
§ 16-19.8. Signs, Marquees and Awnings.
All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes,
standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be
maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a
safe and sound condition. They shall be protected from the elements and
against decay and rust by the periodic application of a weather-coating
material such as paint or other protective treatment.
§ 16-19.9. Chimneys.
All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances shall
be maintained structurally safe, sound and in good repair. All exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating material such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
§ 16-19.10. Stairs and Porches.
Every stair, porch, balcony and all appurtenances thereto shall be so
constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to
which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
§ 16-19.11. Window and Door Frames.
Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such
relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely
as possible, and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling or
structure.
§ 16-19.12. Weather Tight.
Every window and exterior door shall be fitted reasonably in its frame and
be weather tight and weather stripping shall be used to exclude wind or
rain from entering the dwelling or structure and they shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
§ 16-19.13. Glazing.
Every required window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing
material which are without open cracks or holes.
§ 16-19.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-19.14
AO:226
§ 16-19.14. Openable Windows.
Every window, other than fixed window, shall be capable of being easily
opened and shall be held in position by window hardware.
§ 16-19.15. Insect Screens.
Every door and window or other outside opening used for ventilation
purposes shall be supplied with approved screening and every swinging
screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition,
except that such screens shall not be required for areas on a floor above
the fifth floor and screen doors shall not be required on nonresidential
structures or structures where the doors are required to swing out.
§ 16-19.16. Door Hardware.
Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be maintained in good
condition. Door locks in dwelling units shall be in good repair and capable
of tightly securing the door.
§ 16-19.17. Basement Hatchways.
Every basement or cellar hatchway shall be so constructed and maintained
as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water into
the structure.
§ 16-19.18. Guards for Basement Windows.
Every basement or cellar window which is openable shall be supplied with
rodent proof shields, storm windows or other material affording protection
against the entry of rodents.
§ 16-20. INTERIOR STRUCTURE.
§ 16-20.1. General.
The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be maintained
structurally sound and in sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the
health and safety of the occupants and to protect the occupants from the
environment.
§ 16-20.2. Structural Members.
The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained
structurally sound, not showing any evidence of deterioration which would
render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. In every existing
building used for business, industrial, mercantile or storage occupancy
in which heavy loads or concentrations occur or in which machinery is
introduced, the owner or occupant shall cause the weight that each floor
shall safely sustain to be calculated by a registered architect or engineer
§ 16-19.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-20.2
AO:227
and filed with the Code Official, and after such acceptance by the Code
Official, posted on each floor in a conspicuous place.
§ 16-20.3. Interior Surfaces.
Floors, walls, including windows, doors, ceilings and other interior surfaces
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint,
cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface
conditions shall be eliminated.
§ 16-20.4. Lead Based Paint.
Lead based paint with a lead content of more than five-tenths of one
percent: (0.5%) shall not be applied to any interior or exterior surface
of a dwelling, dwelling unit or child care facility, including fences and
outbuildings at these locations. Existing interior and exterior painted
surfaces of dwelling units and child care facilities that contain an excess
of five-tenths of one percent (0.5%) lead shall be removed and remedied in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 23:14(A)-1 et seq.
§ 16-20.5. Bathroom and Kitchen Floors.
Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water so as to permit
such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 16-20.6. Free from Dampness.
In every building, cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained
reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or
deterioration of the structure.
§ 16-20.7. Sanitation.
The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, refuse or garbage.
Rubbish, garbage and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary
storage facilities as required under Section 16-66.
§ 16-20.8. Storage.
Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in public
halls or stairways.
§ 16-20.9. Insect and Rodent Harborage.
All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation and
where insects or rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated
by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
§ 16-20.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-20.10
AO:228
§ 16-20.10. Exit Doors.
Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened easily from
the inside and without the use of a key.
§ 16-20.11. Stairs, Porches and Railings.
Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in the
building code.
§ 16-20.12. Exit Facilities.
All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure
shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads
and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose.
Every inside stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to
use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads.
§ 16-20.13. Handrails.
Every flight of stairs which is more than three risers high shall have
handrails.
§ 16-21. through § 16-25. (RESERVED)
§ 16-20.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-21
AO:229

ARTICLE IV
Light, Ventilation and Space Requirements
§ 16-26. GENERAL.
§ 16-26.1. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for the light, ventilation and space for the occupancy of a
structure. All light, ventilation and space conditions shall comply with the
requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
§ 16-26.2. Responsibility.
The owner of a structure shall provide and maintain such light and
ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as owner occupant or let to another for occupancy
or use any premises which does not comply with the following requirements
of this article.
§ 16-26.3. Access to Public Property.
All structures shall be provided access to public property. Such access
means shall be maintained unobstructed.
§ 16-26.4. Open Space.
An open space when used for the origin of light and ventilation shall be
maintained unobstructed.
§ 16-27. LIGHT.
§ 16-27.1. General.
All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient light so as not to endanger
health and safety.
§ 16-27.2. Habitable Rooms.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window of approved size
facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window
area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 8% of
the floor area of such room, except in kitchens when artificial light may be
provided in accordance with the provisions of the building code. Whenever
walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such
obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and extend
to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not
be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the
room.
§ 16-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-27.3
AO:231
§ 16-27.3. Common Halls and Stairways.
Every common hall and stairway in every building, other than one-family
dwellings, shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination
equivalent to at least a 60 watt light bulb. Such illumination shall be
provided throughout the normally traveled stairs and passageways. Such
fixtures shall have shades provided to protect the light bulb.
§ 16-27.4. Other Spaces.
All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light of sufficient
intensity and so distributed as to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions, and the safe use of the space and the appliances, equipment and
fixtures.
§ 16-28. VENTILATION.
§ 16-28.1. General.
All spaces or rooms shall be provided with sufficient natural or mechanical
ventilation so as not to endanger health and safety. Where mechanical
ventilation is provided in lieu of natural ventilation, such mechanical
ventilating system shall be maintained in operation during the occupancy of
any structure or portion thereof.
§ 16-28.2. Habitable Rooms.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be easily
opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total
openable window area in every room shall be equal to at least 45% of the
minimum window area size required in subsection 16-27.2.
§ 16-28.3. Toilet Rooms.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light
and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required by subsection
16-27.2 except that a window shall not be required in bathrooms or water
closet compartments equipped with an approved mechanical ventilation
system.
§ 16-28.4. Cooking Facilities.
Cooking shall not be permitted in any sleeping room or dormitory unit and
a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a
sleeping room or dormitory unit.
§ 16-28.5. Process Ventilation.
Where any process permits and where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated by said process, a local approved
exhaust ventilation shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at
§ 16-27.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-28.5
AO:232
the source so that it is not allowed to permeate the general atmosphere of
the workroom.
§ 16-29. DWELLING UNIT LIMITATIONS.
§ 16-29.1. Separation of Units.
Dwelling units shall be separate and apart from each other. Sleeping rooms
shall not be used as the only means of access to other sleeping rooms or
habitable spaces.
§ 16-29.2. Privacy.
Hotel units, lodging units, rooming houses and dormitory units shall be
designed to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
§ 16-29.3. Common Access.
A habitable room, bathroom or water closet compartment which is
accessory to a dwelling unit shall not open directly into or be used in
conjunction with a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's
examination or treatment room or similar room for public purposes.
§ 16-29.4. Basement.
Basement dwelling units or rooms shall not be used for living or sleeping
purposes unless:
§ 16-29.5. Cellars.
The use of cellars as dwelling units or for sleeping purposes is hereby
prohibited.
§ 16-30. SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
§ 16-30.1. Dwelling Units.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less
than 175 square feet for the first occupant and 125 square feet for each
a. Floors and walls are watertight and so insulated as to prevent entry of
moisture.
b. Total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in
accordance with this code.
c. Required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
d. Each basement unit shall be provided with two means of egress leading
directly to the outdoors.
§ 16-28.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-30.1
AO:233
additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the
total area of all habitable rooms.
§ 16-30.2. Area for Sleeping Purposes.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 90 square
feet of floor area for the first occupant and at least an additional 60 square
feet of floor area for each additional occupant thereof.
§ 16-30.3. Overcrowding.
If any room or dwelling unit used for residential purposes is overcrowded,
the Code Official shall order the number of persons sleeping or living in
said area to be reduced so that there shall be not less than the total area
required in the following table:
MINIMUM OCCUPANCY AREA REQUIREMENTS IN SQUARE FEET
Space 1-2 Occupants 3-5 Occupants
6 or More
Occupants
Living Room (1) No requirement 145 175
Dining Room (1) No requirement 100 120
Kitchen 50 70 85
Bedrooms (2) Must comply with Subsection 16-30.2
Notes:
(1) Combined living room/dining room spaces will be construed as meeting the requirements
of this table if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space
is so located that it may function as a combination living room/dining room.
(2) Every room used as a bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet without
passing through another room used as a bedroom. Every room used as a bedroom shall
have access to at least one water closet located on the same floor as the bedroom, except
that this requirement shall not apply to the only bedroom on a floor.
§ 16-30.4. Prohibited Use.
It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen, nonhabitable
space, public space or cellar.
§ 16-30.5. Minimum Ceiling Heights.
Habitable rooms shall have a clear ceiling height over the minimum area
required by this code of not less than seven and one-third (7 1/3) feet,
except that in attics or top half stories the ceiling height shall not be less
than seven feet or not less than 1/3 of the minimum area required by this
code when used for sleeping, study or similar activity. In calculating the
floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area of the room
having a clear ceiling height of five feet or more may be included.
§ 16-30.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-30.6
AO:234
§ 16-30.6. General.
It shall be unlawful to alter, renovate or add additional dwelling units to
any building or structure without first obtaining construction permits and
all required approvals. It shall be the responsibility of the current owner of
any building or structure that has been altered to prove or to show that the
use is a legal conforming use.
§ 16-31. through § 16-34. (RESERVED)
§ 16-30.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-31
AO:235

ARTICLE V
Plumbing Facilities and Fixtures
§ 16-35. GENERAL.
§ 16-35.1. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum plumbing facilities
and fixtures to be provided. All plumbing facilities and fixtures shall comply
with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
§ 16-35.2. Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing
facilities and fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall
not occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use any
structure or portion thereof or premises which does not comply with the
following requirements of this article.
§ 16-36. REQUIRED FACILITIES.
§ 16-36.1. Dwelling Units.
Every dwelling unit shall include its own plumbing facilities which are
in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy and are adequate
for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. The following
minimum plumbing facilities set forth in subsections 16-36.2 through
16-36.4 shall be supplied and maintained in sanitary, safe working
condition.
§ 16-36.2. Water Closet and Lavatory.
Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room separate from
habitable rooms which affords privacy and a water closet supplied with cold
running water. The lavatory may be placed in the same room as the water
closet, or, if located in another room, in which said water closet is located.
The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
§ 16-36.3. Bathtub and Showers.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person
and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower supplied with hot and cold
running water.
§ 16-36.4. Kitchen Sinks.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory
required under subsection 16-36.2 and supplied with hot and cold running
water.
§ 16-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-36.5
AO:237
§ 16-36.5. Rooming Houses.
At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower properly
connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house
wherever said facilities are shared. Each lavatory, bathtub or shower shall
be supplied with hot and cold water at all times.
§ 16-36.6. Hotels.
Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided one
water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub accessible from a public hallway
shall be provided on each floor. Each lavatory, bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot and cold water at all times.
§ 16-36.7. Other Structures.
In nonresidential structures, the requirements for sanitary facilities shall
comply with the minimum requirements of the plumbing code.
§ 16-37. TOILET ROOMS.
§ 16-37.1. Privacy.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and arranged to provide
privacy.
§ 16-37.2. Direct Access.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall not be used as passageways to a hall or
other space or to the exterior. A toilet room or bathroom in a dwelling unit
shall be accessible from any sleeping room without passing through another
sleeping room.
§ 16-37.3. Same Story.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, lodging units or dormitory
units, unless located within such respective units or directly connected
thereto, shall be provided on the same story with such units and be
accessible only from a common hall or passageway.
§ 16-37.4. Employee Facilities.
Toilet rooms for employees shall be readily accessible to such employees
and shall not open directly into any public kitchen or other public space
used for the cooking or preparation of food.
§ 16-37.5. Floors.
Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with floors of moisture
resistant material.
§ 16-36.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-37.6
AO:238
§ 16-37.6. Partitions.
Every nonresidential structure that requires or supplies a water closet
shall provide within the toilet room partitions, enclosures or compartments
for privacy and shall comply with fixtures clearance requirements of the
plumbing code.
§ 16-38. PLUMBING FIXTURES.
§ 16-38.1. General.
All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and usable condition. All
plumbing fixtures shall be approved nonabsorbent material.
§ 16-38.2. Connections.
Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly
installed, connected and maintained in working order and shall be kept free
from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable of performing the function
for which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of the building code or plumbing code.
§ 16-38.3. Maintained Clean and Sanitary.
All plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
by the occupant so as not to breed insects and rodents or produce
dangerous or offensive gases or odors. All bathtubs, shower enclosures,
sinks, etc. shall be properly caulked and sealed.
§ 16-38.4. Water Conservation.
Plumbing fixtures which are replaced shall be of water saving construction
and use as may be required by the energy and plumbing codes.
§ 16-39. WATER SYSTEM.
§ 16-39.1. General.
Every sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet or
other facility shall be properly connected to either a public water system
or to an approved private water system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and
showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
§ 16-39.2. Contamination.
The water system shall be maintained free from contamination and all water
inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the overflow rim of the
fixture.
§ 16-37.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-39.3
AO:239
§ 16-39.3. Supply.
The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide at all
times a supply of water to the plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances
in the sufficient volume and at pressures to enable them to function
satisfactorily.
§ 16-39.4. Water Heating Facilities.
Where hot water is provided, water heating facilities shall be installed in an
appropriate manner, properly maintained and properly connected with hot
water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with the hot water. Water
heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such temperature
as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or other
similar units, at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees F.
§ 16-40. SEWAGE SYSTEM.
§ 16-40.1. General.
Every sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet or
other facility shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or
to an approved private sewerage disposal system.
§ 16-40.2. Maintenance.
Every plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be so installed and
maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All
repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
the building code or plumbing code.
§ 16-40.3. Sump Pumps.
It shall be unlawful for any sump pump to be connected to the public sewer
system.
§ 16-41. STORM DRAINAGE.
§ 16-41.1. General.
An approved system of storm water disposal shall be provided and
maintained for the safe and efficient drainage of roofs and paved areas,
yards and courts and other open areas on the premises.
§ 16-42. through § 16-45. (RESERVED)
§ 16-39.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-42
AO:240
ARTICLE VI
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
§ 16-46. GENERAL.
§ 16-46.1. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. All mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment shall comply with the requirements
herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
§ 16-46.2. Responsibility.
The owner or operator of the structure shall provide and maintain such
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to
another for occupancy or use any premises which does not comply with the
following requirements of this article.
§ 16-46.3. Heating Requirements for a Habitable Space.
It shall be the responsibility of an owner or operator to maintain heat in
every habitable space. Whenever the outside temperature of a structure
falls below 55 degrees F., heat shall be maintained at 68 degrees F. between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and 65 degrees F. between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Any owner or operator who has an express
contractual arrangement with an occupant under which the occupant
undertakes to supply heat through facilities under the occupant's exclusive
control shall be exempt from the requirements to supply heat.
§ 16-47. HEATING FACILITIES.
§ 16-47.1. Residential Buildings.
Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with central heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees F. at a
point three feet above the floor and three feet from an exterior wall in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Portable space heaters are
prohibited.
§ 16-47.2. Other Structures.
In all other structures where heating facilities are supplied or available for
use, they shall be capable of adequately and safely heating areas of the
structure to a reasonable temperature for work conditions.
§ 16-47.3. Cooking and Heating Equipment.
All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in every
heating, cooking and water heating device shall be maintained free from
§ 16-46 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-47.3
AO:241
leaks and obstructions and kept functioning properly so as to be free from
fire, health and accident hazards. All installations and repairs shall be made
in accordance with the provisions of the applicable code or other laws or
ordinances applicable thereto. Portable cooking equipment employing flame
is prohibited, except for approved residential type food trays or servers
which are heated by a candle or alcohol lamp.
§ 16-47.4. Installation.
All mechanical equipment shall be properly installed and safely maintained
in good working condition and be capable of performing the function for
which it was designed and intended.
§ 16-47.5. Flue.
All fuel burning equipment shall be securely connected to an approved
chimney, flue or vent and be free of any accumulations of soot or debris.
§ 16-47.6. Clearances.
All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained in
accordance with the building code.
§ 16-47.7. Safety Controls.
All safety controls for fuel burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation.
§ 16-47.8. Combustion Air.
A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the
space shall be provided for fuel burning equipment.
§ 16-47.9. Fireplaces.
Fireplaces, and other similar devices intended for use similar to a fireplace,
shall be stable and structurally safe and connected to approved chimneys.
§ 16-47.10. Climate Control.
When facilities for interior climate control (heating, cooling and/or
humidity) are integral functions of structures used as a dwelling unit or
other occupancies, such facilities shall be maintained and operated in a
continuous manner in accordance with the designed capacity.
§ 16-48. ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.
§ 16-48.1. Outlet Requirements.
Every habitable room of a dwelling unit shall contain one duplex receptacle
on each wall. In a kitchen, three separate and remote wall type electric
§ 16-47.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-48.1
AO:242
convenience outlets or two such convenience outlets and one ceiling or
wall type electric light fixture shall be provided. Every public hall, water
compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at
least one electric light fixture. In addition to the electric light fixture in
every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one
electric outlet. All electric outlets in bathrooms, laundry rooms and at
kitchen counters within six feet of any sink shall be ground fault protected.
§ 16-48.2. Installation.
All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and
maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All
electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.
§ 16-48.3. Defective System.
Where it is found, in the opinion of the Code Official, that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure
by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets,
improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage or for similar
reasons he shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
§ 16-48.4. Extension Cords.
One extension cord shall be permitted per receptacle and shall not exceed
six feet in length.
§ 16-49. ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.
§ 16-49.1. General.
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to safely sustain
the loads to which they are subject, to operate properly and to be free of
physical and fire hazards.
§ 16-50. through § 16-54. (RESERVED)
§ 16-48.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-50
AO:243

ARTICLE VII
Fire Safety Requirements
§ 16-55. GENERAL.
§ 16-55.1. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum fire safety facilities
and equipment to be provided. All structures shall be constructed and
maintained to prevent and avoid fire hazards, and in a manner conducive
to fire safety. All fire safety facilities and equipment shall comply with the
requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
§ 16-55.2. Responsibility.
The owner or operator of a structure shall provide and maintain such fire
safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements and
the Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey. A person shall not occupy
as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any premises
which does not comply with the following requirements.
§ 16-56. MEANS OF EGRESS.
§ 16-56.1. General.
A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be provided from
the interior of any structure to the exterior at a street, or to a yard, court or
passageway leading to a public open area at grade.
§ 16-56.2. Direct Exit.
Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the outside
or to a public corridor. All exit ways shall be unobstructed. Exits from
dwelling units, rooming units and other spaces shall not lead through other
such units, toilet rooms, bathrooms or equipment rooms.
§ 16-56.3. Locked Doors.
All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily operable from the
inner side without the use of keys and shall not be locked.
§ 16-56.4. Fire Escapes.
All required fire escapes shall be maintained in working condition,
structurally sound and free of debris and accumulations of ice and snow.
§ 16-56.5. Exit Signs.
All exit signs shall be maintained illuminated and visible and not to be
operated from a switch.
§ 16-55 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-56.6
AO:245
§ 16-56.6. Emergency Lighting.
All emergency lighting units shall be maintained in good working order.
§ 16-57. ACCUMULATIONS AND STORAGE.
§ 16-57.1. Accumulations.
Waste, refuse or other materials shall not be allowed to accumulate in attics,
basements, cellars, stairways, doors, windows, fire escapes or other means
of egress.
§ 16-57.2. Flammable Matter.
Highly flammable or explosive matter such as paints, volatile oils and
cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse such as waste paper, boxes and
rags shall not be accumulated or stored on residential premises except in
reasonable quantities consistent with normal usage.
§ 16-57.3. Residential Unit.
A dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not be located within a structure
containing an establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable
liquids.
§ 16-57.4. Nonresidential Structures.
Nonresidential structures shall be permitted to store combustible or
flammable materials provided they are confined to approved storage areas
and comply with applicable requirements of the building fire codes for the
appropriate use group classification.
§ 16-58. FIRE RESISTANCE RATINGS.
§ 16-58.1. General.
Floors, walls, ceilings and other elements and components required to
develop a fire resistance rating shall be maintained so that the respective
fire resistance rating of the enclosure, separation or construction is
preserved.
§ 16-59. FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
§ 16-59.1. General.
All fire protection systems and equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times.
§ 16-56.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-59.2
AO:246
§ 16-59.2. Fire Alarms.
Fire alarms and detecting systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
§ 16-59.3. Fire Suppression Systems.
Fire suppression systems shall be maintained in good condition, free from
mechanical injury and be certified yearly by a licensed agency. A copy of
such certification shall be provided to the Code Official. Sprinkler heads
shall be maintained clean, free of corrosion and paint and not bent or
damaged.
§ 16-59.4. Standpipe Systems.
Hose stations shall be identified and accessible. The hose shall be in proper
position, ready for operation, and free of deterioration and leaks.
§ 16-59.5. Fire Extinguishers.
All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible and accessible, secured to a
wall and maintained in an efficient and safe operating condition.
§ 16-60. OVERCROWDING.
§ 16-60.1. Posted Occupancy.
The owner or operator of any nonresidential structure, such as places of
public assembly, shall not permit overcrowding in any space exceeding the
posted occupancy.
§ 16-61. SMOKE DETECTORS.
§ 16-61.1. Types of Smoke Detectors.
Smoke detectors shall be installed in all one and two family dwellings and
shall be Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (U.L.), Factory Mutual Research
Corporation (F.M.) or other nationally recognized testing laboratory listed
ionization or photo-electric type units. Single station units shall have the
following features: integral alarms capable of emitting a minimum sound
intensity of 85 dbA at a 10 foot distance, an easily seen and activated
manual unit test button or approved alternative and a power source monitor
light or trouble signal. All units shall be listed as conforming to the latest
N.F.P.A No. 72E and No. 74 standards for design and performance.
§ 16-61.2. Power Source and Owner Duties.
All smoke detectors in all one and two family dwellings shall be battery
powered single station units and may be installed in dwelling units provided
that the following conditions are met:
§ 16-59.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-61.2
AO:247
§ 16-61.3. Required Locations of Smoke Detectors in Dwelling
Units.
Dwelling units in one and two family dwelling shall have smoke detectors
installed at locations as follows:
§ 16-61.4. Common Area Smoke Detection Requirements.
Common areas in all buildings that do not comply with the minimum life
safety requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code shall be
required to have an approved system. Alarms shall be located so as to be
effectively heard above all other sounds, by all occupants, in every occupied
space within the building.
a. The owner or occupant shall inspect and clean all units and replace
batteries in all units annually or as otherwise required as per the
manufacturer's printed recommendations.
b. The owner of a two family dwelling unit shall supply each occupant with
a copy of the manufacturer's printed instructions for the testing of the
installed unit(s).
c. The owner of a two family dwelling who has been notified either by an
occupant or by the Code Official that such occupant is unable to
perform the required monthly testing of the detector units in his
dwelling or have this performed by a member of his household shall
perform such monthly testing.
d. In all common areas of all dwellings and in dwelling units, the owner or
occupant shall test all smoke detectors and/or detection systems
monthly and maintain them as per the manufacturer's
recommendations.
a. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one approved single station
smoke detector located in close proximity to each sleeping area. Smoke
detectors shall be located so that the maximum distance from the
detector to any sleeping area exit door shall not exceed 10 feet. If any
required detector is to be located closer than five feet to a kitchen or
bathroom area, it shall be of photo-electric type only.
b. A basement, cellar or attic directly connected to a dwelling unit, and
used by the occupants of the unit only, shall have a minimum of one
approved smoke detector located in the highest ceiling area or at the
ceiling of the first floor sari landing or other approved location where
the earliest detection of fire would activate the alarm(s).
a. All corridors up to 30 feet in length which form part of a means of
egress shall have a minimum of one approved smoke detector. An
additional smoke detector shall be installed for every additional 30 feet
or part thereof. Detectors shall be so located as to provide the most
coverage.
§ 16-61.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-61.4
AO:248
§ 16-61.5. Smoke Detectors in Multiple Dwellings.
Smoke detectors in all multiple dwellings shall be installed in accordance
with the requirements of subsection 16-61.1, 16-61.2, 16-61.3 and 16-61.4
but shall not be battery operated. The power source shall be a direct
connection to a dedicated electrical panel and said panel shall be marked as
smoke detector circuits.
§ 16-61.6. Substitution of Heat Detectors.
With the approval of the Code Official, heat detectors may be substituted for
smoke detectors in those locations where frequent nuisance alarms would
be likely to occur.
§ 16-62. through § 16-64. (RESERVED)
b. All interior stairways in buildings not enclosed by a minimum one hour
fire rated separation from other common areas and/or which function
as a sole interior means of egress shall have approved smoke detectors
installed at each floor level at either the ceiling of the landing or the
high point of the sloped staircase soffit.
c. All basements, cellars or attics which lack a minimum of one hour fire
rated smooth ceiling surface shall have approved smoke detectors
installed at spacing not to exceed 300 square feet of floor space
coverage per smoke detector, unless the detector is listed for a greater
allowable spacing. One of such detectors shall be located at the ceiling
of the first floor stair landing, or other approved location, where the
earliest detection of fire would activate the alarm.
d. All basements, cellars or attics which have an existing approved
minimum of one hour fire rated ceiling assembly shall have a minimum
of one approved smoke detector per 625 square feet of area, unless the
detector is listed for a greater allowable spacing. One of such detectors
is to be located at the ceiling of the first floor stair landing, or other
approved location, where the earliest detection of fire would activate
the alarm.
§ 16-61.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-62
AO:249

ARTICLE VIII
Responsibilities of Tenants
§ 16-65. GENERAL.
§ 16-65.1. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the responsibilities of tenants for
the maintenance of structures and the equipment and premises thereof.
§ 16-66. SANITARY CONDITIONS.
§ 16-66.1. Cleanliness.
Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall keep that part of the
structure or premises thereof which he occupies, controls or uses in a clean
and sanitary condition. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
§ 16-66.2. Disposal of Rubbish.
Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall dispose of all rubbish in
a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in rubbish containers equipped
with tight fitting covers as required by this code.
§ 16-66.3. Disposal of Garbage.
Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall dispose of garbage in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing it in garbage disposal facilities, or if
such facilities are not available, by removing all non-burnable matter and
securely wrapping such garbage and placing it in tight garbage storage
containers as required by this code, or by such other disposal method as
may be required by applicable laws or ordinances.
§ 16-66.4. Garbage Storage Facilities.
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal
facility, which may be any adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit
(mechanical sink grinder), in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to
be approved by the Building Official, in the structure for the use of the
occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can or
cans as required in subsection 16-18.2. Such facilities shall be sufficient to
meet the needs of the occupants.
§ 16-66.5. Rubbish Storage Facilities.
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers
for storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such
dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish.
§ 16-65 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-66.6
AO:251
§ 16-66.6. Food Preparation.
All spaces used or intended to be used for food preparation shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary
manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary
disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary
storage where necessary.
§ 16-66.7. Supplied Fixtures and Equipment.
The owner or occupant of a structure or part thereof shall keep the supplied
equipment and fixtures therein clean and sanitary, and shall be responsible
for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
§ 16-66.8. Furnished by Occupant.
The equipment and fixtures furnished by the occupant of a structure shall
be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working condition,
kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks or obstructions.
§ 16-66.9. Caretaker.
In every multiple dwelling in which the owner does not reside there shall
be a responsible person, designated by the owner, whose duties include
maintaining the premises.
§ 16-67. EXTERMINATION.
§ 16-67.1. Owner.
The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the
structure prior to renting, leasing or selling the structure.
§ 16-67.2. Tenant-Occupant.
The occupant of a structure containing a single dwelling unit or of a single
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests in the structure or on the premises.
§ 16-67.3. Single Occupancy.
The occupant of a structure containing a single dwelling unit or of a single
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests in the structure or on the premises.
§ 16-67.4. Multiple Occupancy.
Every owner, agent or operator of two or more dwelling units or multiple
occupancies, or nonresidential structures and rooming houses, shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests in
the public or shared areas of the structure and premises. When infestation
§ 16-66.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-67.4
AO:252
is caused by failure of an occupant of an unit of the two or more dwelling
units or by an occupant or lessee of a nonresidential structure to prevent
such infestation in the area which he occupies, the occupant shall be
responsible for such extermination.
§ 16-67.5. Continued Rodent Infestation.
Continuing or repeated incidents of rodent infestation determined from the
official records as provided in subsection 16-4.2 of this code shall require
the installation of rat and vermin proof walls. The rat and vermin proof walls
shall be installed in accordance with the building code.
§ 16-68. through § 16-70. (RESERVED)
§ 16-67.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-68
AO:253

ARTICLE IX
Duties and Responsibilities of Occupants: Residential
§ 16-71. OCCUPANCY AND REPORTS WHERE VIOLATIONS EXIST.
Occupants shall not after notice as required hereafter, occupy or continue to
occupy, premises which are substandard by reason of failure of the dwelling
unit or rooming unit occupied by them or the dwelling or premises to
conform to and comply with the requirements of this code. Upon discovery
by the occupant of any condition on the premises occupied by the occupant
which constitutes a violation hereof, the occupant shall report the same to
the Code Official responsible for enforcement thereunder.
§ 16-72. GARBAGE DISPOSAL AND PERSONAL ACCUMULATIONS.
Occupants shall place all garbage in the receptacles provided for garbage
disposal and shall, where janitor service is not supplied, place for disposal
all garbage and other refuse in garbage cans located in the exterior of the
premises in an area designated and set forth for this disposal, but such
containers may not be stored in the area between dwellings and street side
lines or on the streets. Where janitorial service for the removal of garbage
and other refuse to the exterior of the premises is provided by the owner
or operator, then the occupant shall dispose of garbage and other refuse
in containers provided therefor by the owner or operator in a designated
and enclosed area in the interior of the premises. Garbage and other refuse
shall not be thrown out of windows or down dumbwaiters, fire escapes,
stairways and common hallways shall be kept free of accumulations of
personal belongings. All dumbwaiters shall be operative at all times where
in existence and used as a regular part of the garbage disposal system.
§ 16-73. INFESTATION ELIMINATION.
Every occupant of a single family dwelling shall be responsible for the
elimination of infestation in the dwelling on the premises. Every occupant
of a dwelling shall be responsible for eliminating all conditions causing
infestation which are caused by the occupant and also conditions which are
subject to and under his exclusive control.
§ 16-74. MALICIOUS DAMAGE.
Every occupant or operator shall be responsible for willfully or maliciously
causing damage to any part of the premises.
§ 16-75. DAMAGE BY HEATING OR COOKING.
No occupant shall cause excessive discoloration of the sidewalks or ceilings
of any part of the premises by improper use of heating or cooking
equipment.
§ 16-71 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-76
AO:255
§ 16-76. HEAT SUPPLY.
Where an occupant undertakes by contract, or as a condition of his letting,
to supply his own heat through a furnace or boiler which also heats a
dwelling unit or rooming unit by other persons, the occupant shall be
responsible for supplying heat in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 16-46.3.
§ 16-77. HEATING EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE.
Where an occupant undertakes to install heating equipment, the same shall
conform to the requirements of section 16-47. The occupant shall thereafter
be responsible for maintaining the equipment in good repair and operating
condition during all times that the heating equipment shall remain under
the occupant's control.
§ 16-78. PLUMBING MAINTENANCE.
Every occupant or operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall not deposit any material in any fixture or
sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to the fixtures
or sewer system.
§ 16-79. WIRING.
No loose cords or loose extension lines in excess of six feet in length shall
be permitted and no ceiling or wall fixture shall be used to supply power to
equipment other than that for which they are designated.
§ 16-80. NOTICE OF DEFECT TO OWNER.
Where the owner or operator would not otherwise know of a defect of
any facility, utility or equipment required to be furnished thereunder and
the same is defective or inoperable, each occupant or operator affected
thereby shall, upon learning of the defective, provide notice to the owner,
operator or other person in charge of the premises. Nothing herein shall be
construed to provide a defense to any owner or operator violating this code.
§ 16-81. OCCUPANCY.
No occupant shall occupy or permit the occupancy of any rooming or
dwelling unit in violation of the occupancy standards established in Section
16-30. No occupant shall occupy or continue to occupy a dwelling unit or
rooming unit that does not have provision for bathroom facilities as required
under Section 16-36.
§ 16-76 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-82
AO:256
§ 16-82. COOKING.
No occupant shall cook in any dwelling unit or rooming unit except where
all of the required facilities are installed as required under subsection
16-47.3.
§ 16-83. VIOLATIONS BY MINORS.
Any adult member of the family shall be responsible and liable for any
violation of the stated section and subsection caused by minors under their
care or custody, occupying the same dwelling unit, if the violation were
created or permitted to continue with the knowledge, acquiescence or
consent of the adult member.
§ 16-85. through § 16-88. (RESERVED)
§ 16-82 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-85
AO:257

ARTICLE X
Registration of Dwellings and Apartments
§ 16-89. REGISTRATION OF MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS AND
APARTMENTS.
a. Registration. Each multiple dwelling unit or apartment shall file a
Certificate of Registration with the municipal housing inspector
pursuant to the State of New Jersey Certificate of Registration Statute,
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.
b. The landlord of each multiple dwelling unit or apartment shall prepare
leases which set forth, at a minimum:
1. The number of bedrooms in each separate dwelling unit.
2. The number of permissible inhabitants.
3. The identity and ages of the individuals who reside at the premises
pursuant to the terms of the lease.
c. The information contained in such lease shall be provided to all
Borough officials and agencies including, but not limited to, the
Borough schools to verify proof of residency prior to enrollment. The
definition of any and all terms relevant to this section shall be the same
as set forth in the State of New Jersey Multiple Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A.
55:13a-3 and are specifically incorporated herein by reference.
§ 16-89 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-89
AO:259

ARTICLE XI
Removal of Weeds, Growths and Debris
§ 16-90. REMOVAL OF WEEDS, GROWTH AND DEBRIS.
§ 16-90.1. Notice to Remove. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-12]
The owner, tenant or occupant of lands lying within the Borough, where it
shall be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works to be necessary
and expedient for the preservation of public health, safety and general
welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, shall remove from such lands brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash and debris within 10 days after notice to remove the same,
which shall be conspicuously posted on said property and sent by regular
mail to the last known address of the tenant, owner or occupant.
§ 16-90.2. Failure to Remove. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 2; Ord. No. 2012-12]
Whenever the owner, tenant or occupant of any lands shall refuse or neglect
to remove from said lands all brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris as required by
subsection 16-90.1 and after notice given as provided therein, then the
same may be removed under the direction of the Superintendent of Public
Works or his designee. The Superintendent of Public Works shall certify the
costs of such removal to the Borough Council. Upon approval of said costs
by the Borough Council, same shall be charged against the lands, and shall
forthwith become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes then next to be assessed and levied upon the
lands and shall be collected and enforced according to law.
§ 16-90.3. Warning Stated in Notice; Removal by Borough; Costs to
Become a Tax Lien. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 3]
The notice required to be given to the owner or tenant of any lands within
the limits of the Borough pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be given in writing and in addition to requiring the removal from the lands
therein specified, within 10 days, of all poison ivy, brush, weeds, dead or
dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and
debris, shall warn the owner or tenant of such lands that in the event of
failure to comply with the notice such removal will be made under the
direction and supervision of the Superintendent of Streets of the Borough
and that the cost thereof will become a lien upon the lands and be added to
and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the same
and bear interest at the same rate and be collected in the same manner as
taxes.
The notice shall also contain a further warning that in the event of the
failure of any person to whom the notice is given to comply therewith, he
may be charged with violating the provisions of this section and, if convicted
thereof, may, in addition to having the cost of removal become a lien upon
§ 16-90 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-90.3
AO:261
the lands as aforesaid, suffer the penalties for the violation of this section
as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 16-90.4. Delivery of Notice. [Ord. 7/5/51, § 4]
The notice required to be given pursuant to the provisions of this section
may be served upon the owner or owners, tenant or tenants, in person, or
by leaving it at their usual place of residence with a member of their family
above the age of 14 years, but if any such owner or tenant shall not reside
in the Borough such notice may be served upon him by mailing the same to
his last known post office address with postage thereon prepaid.
§ 16-91. DUMPSTERS AND REFUSE CONTAINERS.
§ 16-91.1. Purposes. [Ord. No. 2009-07]
This section requires that dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to storm water be covered at all times and prohibits the
spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or
solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Borough of South Bound Brook the waters of the State so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 16-91.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2009-07]
As used in this section:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
South Bound Brook or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying storm water.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of the State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORM WATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 16-90.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 16-91.3
AO:262
§ 16-91.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2009-07]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 16-91.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2009-07]
§ 16-91.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2009-07]
This section shall be enforced by the Borough of South Bound Brook Code
Enforcement Department.
§ 16-91.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2009-07]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00).
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge storm water
under a valid NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 16-91.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-91.6
AO:263
Chapter 17
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 17-1. USE OF PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
§ 17-1.1. Advertising. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall without a permit issued by the Mayor and Council or
Recreation Committee:
§ 17-1.2. Soliciting. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall solicit for any purpose.
§ 17-1.3. Animals. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him, in his custody or
under his control, to go or be at large.
§ 17-1.4. Disorderly Conduct. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall engage in any acts prohibited under N.J.S.A. 2C:1-1, et seq.,
including but not limited to disorderly persons offenses and petty disorderly
persons offenses and, in addition, those prohibited by local municipal
ordinance. Not by way of limitation but by way of example, the following are
prohibited:
a. Post, paint, affix, distribute or hand out any bill, billboard, circular or
advertisement or any of the following without written permission of the
Commission.
b. Display any flag, banner, transparency, target, sign placard or any other
matter for advertising purposes.
c. Operate any musical instrument, soundtrack or drum for advertising
purpose or for the purpose of attracting attention to any exhibition,
show performance or other display.
a. Dogs shall be restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length.
a. Littering/dumping.
b. Hunting.
c. Open burning without a permit.
d. Possession of glass containers.
e. Possession of fireworks/explosive devices.
f. Destruction/removal of plant/animal life.
§ 16-91.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 17-1.4
AO:264
§ 17-1.5. Fires. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire, except in places
provided for such purposes or where a permit has been issued.
§ 17-1.6. Vending. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise or any other
thing within the parks except by special permit of the Mayor and Council.
§ 17-1.7. Motor Vehicle Operation. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle except on roadways or parking
areas provided, unless permitted by signs or directed by South Bound Brook
Police or other designated employees.
§ 17-2. PROTECTION OF PROPERTY.
§ 17-2.1. Littering. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
§ 17-2.2. Plants and Trees. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall injure, cut, remove from the ground or otherwise disturb
any plant, tree or shrub in any park, nor shall any person:
g. Remaining, loitering after hours.
h. Possession/use of alcoholic beverage.
a. All fires shall be continuously under the care and direction of a
competent person from the time is kindled until it is extinguished.
b. No fire shall be built within 10 feet of any tree or building or beneath
the branches of any tree or in any underbrush.
c. No cigar, cigarette or lighted match shall be discarded carelessly or in a
manner which may start a fire.
a. No person shall throw or deposit litter or waste substance in any
fountain, drain, pond, lake, stream, or any other body of water in any
park.
b. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park except in public
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevent from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park.
Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be
carried away from the park by the person(s) responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
a. Pile debris of any kind against the same.
b. Attach a rope, cable or other contrivance thereto.
§ 17-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-2.2
AO:265
§ 17-2.3. Walkways. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall damage, deface, or tamper with any drive or walkway nor
make any excavation of any kind in any park.
§ 17-2.4. Damage to Borough Property. [Ord. No. 2000-03]
No person shall damage, deface, remove or destroy any structure, building,
sign, utility or any other property or equipment, owned by or under the
control or jurisdiction of the Borough.
§ 17-3. PRIORITY USE WHEN AUTHORIZED.
§ 17-3.1. Reserved Times; Priority for Use. [Ord. No. 2005-09]
It is the intention of the Borough of South Bound Brook that its parks
and playgrounds are available for use by all persons regardless of their
residency, as prescribed in this section. It is the further intention of this
section to provide for the orderly use of the parks, playgrounds and other
recreational areas in an orderly manner. Therefore, where a group has
previously reserved time as per this section, at a particular recreational
area, then that group shall have priority.
§ 17-4. HOURS.
§ 17-4.1. Hours of Use Established. [Ord. No. 2005-09]
All public parks and playgrounds owned and operated by the Borough of
South Bound Brook shall be formally opened to the public at dawn and
closed at dusk daily, provided, however, that when any supervised program
duly authorized by the Sports Director of the Borough or by the Mayor and
Council shall extend beyond the regular closing hour, the particular section
or part of the public park or playground in which such program is being
conducted shall not be closed until 15 minutes after such program shall
have been concluded. All such public parks and playgrounds shall be closed
to the public at all other times.
§ 17-5. PERMITS.
§ 17-5.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2005-09]
A permit shall be required for the use of a field or playground or for use
under any of the following circumstances:
c. Set fire or assist in setting fire to the same.
a. Except as otherwise determined by the Sports Director, when there are
more than 25 participants and/or spectators in attendance. The Sports
Coordinator shall evaluate each park and playground to determine the
appropriate maximum number of participants and/or spectators for
purposes of requiring a recreational field or playground permit.
§ 17-2.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 17-5.1
AO:266
§ 17-5.2. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 2000-03; Ord. No.
2005-09]
Permits for use of the field, playground or court shall be obtained by
an application in writing to the Sports Director in accordance with the
following procedures:
b. Any equipment is needed to be installed temporarily on the field
playground or court, including but not limited to soccer goals, volley
ball nets and the lining of any field. No permanent installation of
equipment may be installed.
c. Any field, playground or court will be used for any sport purpose other
than for which it was specifically created.
d. The field, playground or court will be used for "organized" games.
Games will be considered organized if (a) there is a referee, umpire or
other official; (b) teams are part of a league; (c) teams have uniforms;
(d) there is a charge to any team or player for participating; (e) there
are trophies, medals or other prizes offered to individuals or teams; (f)
spectators are invited; or (g) a group of ten or more of the same players
or essentially the same players regularly gather to play at the same
time and place.
e. The game or event is sponsored by a business or organization.
f. A person or group elects to reserve the field for exclusive use for a
period of time.
a. The person or group of persons seeking issuance of the permit shall file
an application in writing with the Sports Director, stating:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The name and address of person, persons corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;
3. The day and the hours for which the permit is desired;
4. The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired;
5. A reasonable estimate of the anticipated attendance;
6. The type of game or activity for which the permit is desired;
7. The anticipated age group of the expected participants;
8. Such other information as may be reasonably required.
b. The permittee shall provide a certificate of liability insurance in an
amount not less than a $1 million, combined single limit, naming the
Borough of South Bound Brook as an additional insured.
c. All permit holders shall be responsible for:
§ 17-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-5.2
AO:267
§ 17-5.3. Denial or Rescinding of Permit. [Ord. No. 2005-09]
The Sports Director may refuse to issue a permit where the applicant
has violated the conditions of a permit issued on a previous occasion,
and may also, rescind a permit which has been issued for a material
misrepresentation of fact on the application.
§ 17-6. FEES.
§ 17-6.1. Established by Mayor and Council. [Ord. No. 2005-09]
Fees for use of the Borough parks and playgrounds shall be set by resolution
of the Mayor and Council.
§ 17-7. VIOLATIONS.
§ 17-7.1. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-09]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $1,250 or imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days, or both.
Chapter 18
(RESERVED)
Chapter 19
(RESERVED)
Chapter 20
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 20-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE.
1. Insuring that all participants and spectators adhere to park rules,
and for summoning the police if individuals fail to do so;
2. Insuring that the field or court is in a safe condition prior to
allowing players to proceed and for reporting unsafe conditions to
the Sports Director not later than one business day after its use;
3. Insuring that upon conclusion of the use, the field, playground or
court is left in the same condition in which it was found, including
removal of any equipment, and cleanup and proper disposal of any
litter;
4. Compliance with any special conditions imposed on the permit by
the Sports Director.
§ 17-5.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-1.1
AO:268
§ 20-1.1. Enforcing Agency Established. [Ord. 2/8/77, § 1]
§ 20-1.2. Fees. [Ord. 2/8/77, § 2a; Ord. 9/13/77, § 1; Ord. #97-2; Ord.
No. 2000-04; Ord. No. 2002-04; Ord. No. 2004-01; Ord. No. 2007-01;
amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-002]
a. There is hereby established in the Borough of South Bound Brook a
State Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
South Bound Brook Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency
consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official,
Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection
Subcode Official, and such other subcode officials for such additional
subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs,
State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. Each official position created in Subsection a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.217 as
amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
a. The fee for construction permits shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed hereof and shall paid before the permit is issued.
1. The Building Subcode Fee: The minimum fee for this section shall
be $75.
(a) New Construction and Additions.
(1) Use Groups B, H, 1-1, 1-2, 1-3, M, E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
U:$0.066 per cubic foot of building or structure volume;
(2) Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1, S-2; § 0.054
per cubic foot of building or structure volume.
(b) Renovations, Alteration, and Repairs.
(1) For renovations, alterations and repairs: $40 per $1,000 of
estimated cost up to and including $100,000, plus;
(2) Portions of cost above $100,000 an additional fee of $30
per $1,000 of work.
(c) Demolition or Removal Permit:
§ 20-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.2
AO:269
(1) For one- or two-family residences and related structures,
the fee shall be $250.
(i) All other structure fees shall be $550.
2. Plumbing Fee Schedule.
(a) Water closet: $20.
(b) Urinal/bidet: $20.
(c) Bath tub: $20.
(d) Lavatory: $20.
(e) Shower: $20.
(f) Floor drain: $20.
(g) Sink: $20.
(h) Dishwater: $20.
(i) Drinking fountain: $20.
(j) Washing machine: $20.
(k) Hose bibb: $20.
(l) Stacks: $75.
(m) Water heater: $20.
(n) Fuel oil/piping: $20.
(o) Gas piping: $20.
(p) Steam Boiler: $75.
(q) Hot water boiler: $75.
(r) Sewer pump: $75.
(s) Intercaptor/separator: $75.
(t) Backflow Preventer: $75.
(u) Grease trap: $75.
(v) Sewer connection: $100.
(w) Water service connect: $100.
(x) Minimum fee: $75.
3. Fire Protection Fee Schedule.
(a) Storage Tanks: $75.
§ 20-1.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-1.2
AO:270
(b) Alarm/Supervisory/Signaling.
(1) First: $20 to $75.
(2) Each additional: $100 to $500.
(c) Wet and Dry Sprinkler Heads:
(1) 1-20: $150.
(2) 2-100: $250.
(3) 10-200: $600.
(4) 20-300: $700.
(5) 30-400: $800.
(6) Over 400: $5,000.
(7) Stand pipes: $350.
(d) Pre-Engneered Systems.
(1) Wet chemical: $350.
(2) Dry chemical: $350.
(3) CO2 suppression: $350.
(4) Foam suppression: $350.
(5) Helon suppression: $350.
(6) Kitchen/hood exhaust system: $350.
(7) Smoke control system: $125.
(8) Gas or oil/fuel appliance: $65.
(9) Minimum: $75.
(e) Certificate of Legal Use (Smoke Detector Certification): $100
per unit.
4. Electrical Fee Schedule.
(a) Receptacles and Fixtures.
(1) 50: $65.
(2) Each additional 25: $35.
(b) Motors and Electrical Devices.
(1) Up to 10 HP: $20.
(2) Up to 50 HP: $65.
§ 20-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.2
AO:271
(3) Up to 100 HP: $125.
(4) Larger than above: $650.
(c) Transformers and Generators.
(1) Over 1K, 10.0kw: $20.
(2) Up to 45: $65.
(3) Up to 475.5: $125.
(4) Larger than above: $650.
(d) Service Panels, Entrances and Subpanels.
(1) 225 amps: $65.
(2) Up to 1,000 amps: $250.
(3) Larger than above: $650.
(e) Minimum Fee: $75.
(f) Minimum for Solar Panel.
(1) Up to 50 kilowatts: $150.
(2) 51 to 100 KW: $250.
(3) 101 + KW: $750.
5. Permit Fee Schedule.
(a) For Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1, S-2:
(1) New building: $0.0540 cubic foot.
(2) Addition: $0.0540 cubic foot.
(3) Alteration.
(i) First $100,000: $50/$1,000.
(ii) Next $100,000: $40/$1,000.
(4) Roofing R3/R5: $150 Flat.
(5) Siding R3/R5: $150 Flat.
(6) Sign: $3/square foot.
(7) Pool, in-ground: $500 Flat.
(8) Asbestos abatement: $500 Flat.
(9) Lead hazard: $500 Flat.
§ 20-1.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-1.2
AO:272
(10) Demolition: $550 Flat.
(11) R3, < 50,000 square feet, 0.30 foot: $250.
(12) CO: $250 Flat.
(13) CCO: $150 Flat.
(14) CCL: $46 Flat.
(15) Use group change: $100 Flat.
(16) Plan review credit: 20%.
(17) Minimum fee: $75.
(b) For use groups A-5, B, E, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2, I-3,
I-4, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, U:
(1) New building: $0.0660/cubic foot.
(2) Addition: $0.0660/cubic foot.
(3) Alteration.
(i) First $100,000: $50/$1,000.
(ii) Next $100,000: $40/$1,000.
(iii) Balance: $40/$1,000.
(4) Roofing R3/R5: $75 Flat.
(5) Siding R3/R5: $75 Flat.
(6) Sign: $3 Square Feet.
(7) Pool, Aboveground: $100 Flat.
(8) Pool, in-ground: $175 Flat.
(9) Asbestos Abatement: $250 Flat.
(10) Demolition: $550 Flat.
(11) R3, < 50,000 square feet, 0.30 foot: $250 Flat.
(12) CO: $250 Flat.
(13) CCL: $46 Flat.
(14) Use group change: $250 Flat.
(15) Plan review credit: 20%.
(16) Minimum fee: $75.
6. Fire Protection and Hazardous Equipment Fee:
§ 20-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.2
AO:273
§ 20-1.3. Fee Schedule Report; Biannually. [Ord. 2/8/77, § 2b]
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Borough Council biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform construction Code Act.
§ 20-1.4. Surcharge. [Ord. 2/8/77, § 2c; Ord. #97-2]
(a) The minimum fee for this section shall be $75.
(b) Sprinkler heads;
(1) 1-20 heads: $150.
(2) 201-300 heads: $700.
(3) 21-100 heads: $250.
(4) 301-400 heads: $800.
(5) 101-200 heads: $600.
(6) 401-500 heads: $900.
(7) 501-750 heads: $1,000.
(8) 751-1,000 heads: $1,450.
(9) Each additional 1,000 heads or part thereof: $950.
(c) Alarm devices (e.g., smokes, heats, pulls, any other alarm
initiation device).
(1) 1-20 devices: $65.
(2) 21-100 devices: $500.
(3) 101-500 devices: $1,000.
(4) 501-1,000 devices: $1,250.
(5) Each additional 1,000 devices or part thereof: $1,000.
(d) For independent pre-engineered systems, the fee is $350 each.
(e) For kitchen hood exhaust systems, the fee is $350 each.
(f) Fire pumps fee is $750.
(g) The fee for standpipes shall be $350.
a. In order to provide for the training, certification, and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and The
Regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect in addition to the fees
§ 20-1.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-1.4
AO:274
§ 20-2. DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
§ 20-2.1. Unfit Dwellings; Purpose. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 1]
The existence and occupation of dwellings in the Borough of South Bound
Brook which are unfit for human habitation are inimical to the welfare and
dangerous to the health and safety of the residents of the Borough, and
that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such
dwellings.
§ 20-2.2. Power to Repair, Close or Demolish. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 2]
Whenever the proper officials of the Borough designated herein find that
there exists in the Borough a dwelling which is unfit for human habitation
due to dilapidation, defects, increasing hazards of fire, accident, or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such dwelling unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare of
the residents of the Borough, the officials designated shall exercise the
power vested under this section and under the Law of the State of New
Jersey, to repair, close or demolish said dwelling in the manner set forth in
this section.
§ 20-2.3. Definitions. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 2]
As used in this section:
DWELLING — Shall mean any building, or structure, or part thereof, used
and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes
any outhouses, and appurtenances belonging thereto usually enjoyed
therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Council of the Borough.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple.
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0016 per cubic foot of volume
of new construction and $0.80 per $1,000.00 cost of renovation work,
including all disciplines. The surcharge fee shall be remitted to the
Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a
quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, December
31, March 31, June 30, and not later than one month next succeeding
the end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which
The Regulations first become effective, the fee shall be collected and
remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspections, and not later than July 31,
the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which The Regulations first become effective, the report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
§ 20-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.3
AO:275
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing authority or any officer who
is in charge of any department or branch of the Borough relating to health,
fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings in the
Borough.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized
by this section to exercise the powers prescribed by this section.
§ 20-2.4. Mayor Designated to Exercise Provisions. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 4]
The Mayor of the Borough is hereby designated and appointed to exercise
the powers set forth in this section. The Mayor and Borough Council may,
by resolution, designate any other person to act in the place of the Mayor.
§ 20-2.5. Complaints; Notices. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 5]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Office by a Public Authority,
or by at least five residents of the Borough charging that any dwelling is
unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Public Officer (on
his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation the Public
Officer shall, if such preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in such dwelling, a complaint stating the charges in that respect
and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public Officer
at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days, nor more than 30 days after
the serving of the complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 20-2.6. Determination of Unfit Dwelling; Order to Repair or
Remove. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 6]
If, after such notice and hearing, the Public Officer determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he shall state in
writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an
order as follows:
a. If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, which said
reasonable cost is hereby fixed at not exceeding 50% of the assessed
value of the dwelling, the order of the Public Officer shall require the
owner to repair, alter or improve the dwelling within 90 days to render
the dwelling fit for human habitation, or, at the option of the owner, to
§ 20-2.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-2.6
AO:276
§ 20-2.7. Failure of Owner to Comply. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 7]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve; or, at
the option of the owner, to vacate and close the dwelling, the Public Officer
may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated
and closed subject to the approval of the Borough Council, and the Public
Officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so
closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupancy of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful."
§ 20-2.8. Removal or Demolition. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 8]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
dwelling, the Public Officer may cause such dwelling to be removed or
demolished, subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
§ 20-2.9. Cost of Repair or Removal. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 9]
The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition of such dwelling shall be a municipal
lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the
dwelling is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, he shall sell the
materials of such dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against
the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Court of Chancery by the Public Officer, shall be secured
in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be reimbursed
by such court to the person found to be entitled thereto by final code or
decree of such court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Borough of South
Bound Brook or the Board of Health to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
§ 20-2.10. Public Officer's Determination of Conditions. [Ord. 8/7/
46, § 10]
The Public Officer may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are
dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such
dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the
Borough; such conditions may include the following:(without limiting the
generality of the foregoing) defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation within the 90 days;
or
b. If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made
at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling as
hereinbefore specified, such order of such public officer shall require
the owner to remove or demolish such dwelling, or other structure
within 60 days of the date of such order.
§ 20-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.10
AO:277
accidents or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities; dilapidation; disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 20-2.11. Notice Served. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 11]
Complaints or orders issued by a Public Officer pursuant to this section
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of the complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed
and published in the Borough or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one
printed and published in the County of Somerset and circulating in the
Borough of South Bound Brook. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or
order. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded in Clerk's
Office of the County of Somerset.
§ 20-2.12. Procedure Prescribed by State Act. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 12]
Any person affected by an order issued by the Public Officer shall be entitled
to the remittance and procedure prescribed by an act entitled "An Act
authorizing municipalities to adopt Ordinance relating to the repair, closing
and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation; and providing for
the remedies and procedure in connection with action taken under such
Ordinance," being known as N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.
§ 20-2.13. Powers Granted to Public Officer. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 13]
The Public Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this section, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
§ 20-2.14. Appropriations for Costs. [Ord. 8/7/46, § 14]
The Mayor and Council of the Borough shall prepare an estimate of the
annual expenses or costs to provide the equipment, personnel and supplies
necessary for periodic examinations and investigations of the dwellings in
a. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Borough of South Bound
Brook in order to determine which dwellings within the said Borough of
South Bound Brook are unfit for human habitation;
b. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause
the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
§ 20-2.10 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-2.14
AO:278
the Borough for the purpose of determining the unfitness of such dwellings
for human habitation and for the enforcement and administration of this
section. They may make such appropriations from its revenues as deemed
necessary for this purpose and may accept and apply grants and donations
to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this section.
§ 20-3. CERTIFICATES OF LEGAL USE.
§ 20-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. #8-90, preamble]
Properties have been sold in the Borough of South Bound Brook wherein the
sellers have represented that the properties may be used for certain uses,
which representation may be in error.
Certain properties in the Borough have been illegally converted from one
family dwellings to two family dwellings and have been sold as two family
dwellings notwithstanding the fact that the property was never legally
converted to a two family dwelling and notwithstanding the fact that the
property is located in a zone which prohibits two family dwellings.
Properties have also been sold in the Borough whereby the sellers have
represented that the property may be used for commercial and/or industrial
purposes, when such uses are not in fact permitted in the zones in which
the properties are located.
In order to protect persons who are buying property in the Borough and in
order to prevent the continued illegal use of properties within the Borough,
the Mayor and Council are of the opinion that an ordinance should be
adopted which would require the seller of property in the Borough to obtain
a certificate of legal use from the Borough's Construction Official.
§ 20-3.2. Required for Transfer of Ownerships. [Ord. #9-80, § 1]
Each time there is a transfer of ownership of property within the Borough,
a seller of such property shall obtain from the Construction Official a
Certificate of Legal Use certifying that the property may be continued to be
used as it is currently being used and certifying that the use of the property
is a permitted use in the zone or by virtue of the fact that the use is a
nonconforming use in the zone which was established prior to the adoption
of an ordinance which prohibited the use in the zone, or by virtue of the fact
that the use is permitted by the prior receipt of a variance.
§ 20-3.3. Fee for Certificate of Legal Use. [Ord. #9-80, §§ 1, 2]
The fee for a Certificate of Legal Use shall be $20 in the event only one
inspection of the premises is required of the Construction Official, but in
the event the Construction Official is required to make more than one
inspection of the premises before issuing a Certificate of Legal Use, there
shall be an additional charge of $5 for each inspection of the premises made
by the Construction Official after the initial inspection.
§ 20-2.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.4
AO:279
§ 20-3.4. Inspection by Construction Official. [Ord. #9-80, § 3]
Before a Certificate of Legal Use shall be issued, the Construction Official
shall make an inspection of the premises to determine whether the
certificate may or may not be issued.
§ 20-3.5. Application. [Ord. #9-80, § 4]
Applications for a Certificate of Legal Use shall be submitted to the
Construction Official and once the application has been received by the
Construction Official, the certificate indicating whether the permitted use
may or may not be continued shall be issued within six business days of the
receipt of the application.
§ 20-3.6. Violations. [Ord. #9-80, § 5]
In the event a seller of property in the Borough fails to obtain a Certificate
of Legal Use, the seller shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000. In addition to the foregoing, the Borough of South Bound
Brook may institute and maintain a civil action:
§ 20-4. CONNECTION OF SUMP PUMPS TO SEWER LINES
PROHIBITED.13 [Ord. No. 3-96]
No person shall cause or allow the connection of any sump pump or French
drain to the sewerage system. The Code Enforcement Official is hereby
empowered to inspect said connections and issue a summons if this
condition is not abated within 90 days.
§ 20-5. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
§ 20-5.1. Certificate of Occupancy Required. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
a. For injunctive relief; and
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made if a Certificate of
Legal Use has not been issued in accordance with this section.
a. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall sell, rent, lease, suffer
or allow any person or persons, firms, partnerships or corporations to
live in or inhabit as a tenant or lessee any house, apartment or other
structure, including a mobile home and modular unit, less said person,
firm, partnership or corporation shall first obtain from the Borough of
South Bound Brook an occupancy permit or continued certificate of
occupancy in accordance with this section.
b. No person, group of persons, associations, partnerships or
corporations, or any combination thereof, who own, manage, conduct or
operate a dwelling unit shall sell, rent, lease, sublet or permit the same
to be occupied or rented. Nor shall any person, group of persons,
13.Editor's Note: See also Subsection 10-2.22 for similar provisions.
§ 20-3.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-5.1
AO:280
§ 20-5.2. Compliance with Other Standards Required. [Ord. No.
2000-10]
No certificate of occupancy or continued certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for a dwelling unit unless the condition of the same complies with
all of the statutes of the State of New Jersey, the rules and regulations
issued thereunder, the ordinances of the Borough of South Bound Brook
now in existence or hereinafter enacted pertaining to building, plumbing,
electrical, zoning, health, safety, fire and minimum housing standards,
including but not limited to BOCA Basic/National Building Code, BOCA
Basic/National Mechanical Code, BOCA Basic/National Fire Prevention
Code, BOCA Basic/National Energy Conservation Code, CABO One and
Two Family Dwelling Code, Barrier Free Code, regulations providing for
accessibility to and usability by the physically handicapped, the Code of the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., the National
Electrical. Code and the. National Standard Plumbing Code, and any other
codes, rules and regulations established by the State of New Jersey and the
Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 20-5.3. Conflict of Provisions. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
In the event that there is a conflict in the provisions of the codes of the
Borough of South Bound Brook and the codes, rules and regulations of the
State of New Jersey, the higher standards for the promotion and protection
of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough shall
prevail.
§ 20-5.4. Enforcement Authority. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
The Construction Official, as Code Enforcement Officer, his assistants and
deputies of the Borough of South Bound Brook shall be the persons who
have the duty to enforce this section.
§ 20-5.5. Powers and Duties of Enforcement Authority. [Ord. No.
2000-10]
The Construction Official, as Code Enforcement Officer, his deputies and
assistants shall have such powers as may be necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this section, including but not limited to the following
enumerated powers:
associations, partnerships or corporations, or any combination thereof,
purchasing or acquiring in any manner occupancy or dwelling units
permit same to be occupied without first securing from the
Construction Official as head of the Code Enforcement Agency, or his
designated representative of the Borough of South Bound Brook, a
certificate of occupancy or a continued certificate of occupancy for said
dwelling unit.
a. To investigate the dwelling conditions of the Borough of South Bound
Brook, in order to determine which house, apartments or structures,
§ 20-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.5
AO:281
§ 20-5.6. Grounds for Denial. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
Violations of the foregoing statutes, codes ordinances, rules and
regulations, or noncompliance therewith, shall be grounds for denial of an
occupancy permit or a continued certificate of occupancy.
§ 20-5.7. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to hotels or motels which are
generally occupied by tenants or guests for less than 30 successive days or
those units regulated by the Department of Community Affairs of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 20-5.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
Any individual, person, group of persons, associations, partnerships or
corporations, or any combination thereof, violating any of the terms of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not less than $500
nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not in excess of 90 days,
or both.
In addition to the foregoing, the Borough of South Bound Brook may
institute and maintain a civil action:
including mobile homes and modular units, are unfit for human
habitation.
b. To enter into the lands and premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of making housing inspections incidental to his duties.
c. To delegate any of his functions and powers as the Code Enforcement
Officer to persons designated by the Borough Council of the Borough of
South Bound Brook who are licensed to administer the Uniform
Construction Code.
d. Upon written application of a property owner, the Code Enforcement
Officer, his assistants or deputies shall make an inspection of said
house, apartment or other structure for which there has been an
application for an occupancy permit or continued certificate of
occupancy, within five working days from the receipt of such
applications and the payment of the proper fee.
e. The Construction Official, as Code Enforcement Officer, his assistants
or deputies shall make a report promptly after such inspection and
advise the applicant of any violations of the codes, statutes and
ordinances governing said premises in the Borough of South Bound
Brook.
a. For injunctive relief; and
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made if a Certificate of
Occupancy has not been issued in accordance with this section.
§ 20-5.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-5.9
AO:282
§ 20-5.9. Fees. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
The Construction Code Official shall collect a fee of $50 from each applicant
requesting an occupancy permit.14
§ 20-5.10. Separate Registration and Permit Required. [Ord. No.
2000-10]
Where there is more than one apartment or dwelling unit in a given building
or dwelling unit, a separate registration and occupancy permit must be
obtained for each said apartment or dwelling unit.
§ 20-5.11. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2000-10]
Appeal from any refusal to grant an occupancy permit shall be to the
Borough Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting and the Borough
Council shall uphold or reverse such refusal by a majority vote, with the
Mayor voting in case of a tie.
§ 20-6. (RESERVED)
§ 20-7. REGISTRATION OF RENTAL UNITS.
§ 20-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 1]
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases when used in this section shall have the following
meaning:
AGENT — Shall mean the individual or individuals designated by the owner
as the person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon
the owner by this section. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey as those terms
are defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Shall mean two or more buildings, each
containing two or more apartments which are located within close proximity
of each other and are owned by the same owner.
APARTMENT OR DWELLING — Shall mean any apartment, cottage,
bungalow, any room or rooms in a rooming/boarding house or other
dwelling unit consisting of one or more rooms occupying all of part of a
floor or floors in a building, whether designed with or without housekeeping
facilities for dwelling purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment
be designed for residence, for office, or the operation of any industry or
business, or for any other type of independent use.
14.Editor's Note: See also Subsection 20-1.1
§ 20-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-7.1
AO:283
LICENSE — Shall mean the license issued by the Borough Clerk or designee
attesting that the rental unit has been properly registered in accordance
with this section.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the person to whom the license is issued pursuant
to this section. The term licensee includes within its definition the term
agent where applicable.
OWNER — Shall mean any person or group of persons, firm, corporation,
or officer thereof, partnership association, or trust, who owns, operates,
exercises control over or is in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, trust or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY — Shall mean every building, group of buildings or a
portion thereof which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to
be a place where living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or
unfurnished, for pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals and
is meant to include apartments and apartment complexes.
RENTAL UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit which is available for lease
or rental purposes and is meant to include individual apartments located
within apartment complexes.
§ 20-7.2. Registration. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 2]
All rental units shall hereafter be registered with the Borough Clerk or
designee of the Borough of South Bound Brook or such other person as
designated by the Borough Council on forms which shall be provided for
that purpose and which shall be obtained from the Borough Clerk or
designee. Such registration shall occur on an annual basis as provided
herein.
§ 20-7.3. Registration and Licensing Term; Initial Registration
Provisions. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 3]
Each rental unit shall be registered with each change in occupancy. The
license term shall commence on. October 1st and shall be valid until
September 31st of the following calendar year, at which time it shall expire
and .a new registration shall be required. The initial registration shall occur
within 45 days following the adoption of this section. Any lease which has
been executed prior to the adoption of this section shall not be effected but
the rental unit must nevertheless be registered, inspected and licensed in
accordance with this section. No rental unit shall hereafter be rented unless
the rental unit is registered and licensed in accordance with this section.
§ 20-7.4. Registration Forms; Filing, Contents. [Ord. No. 2000-11
§ 4]
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units shall be registered and licensed as provided herein.
Every owner shall file with the Borough Clerk or designee of the Borough
§ 20-7.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-7.4
AO:284
of South Bound Brook or such other person as designated by the Borough
Council a registration form for each unit contained within a building or
structure which shall include the following information:
a. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises
and the record owner or owners of the rental business if not the same
persons. In the case of a partnership the names and address of all
general partners shall be provided together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals indicating where such individual
may be reached both during the day and evening hours. If the record
owner is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
and corporate officers of said corporation together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals indicating where such individual
may be reached both during the day and evening hours.
b. If the address of any record owner is not located in South Bound Brook
or in Somerset County, the name and address of a person who resides in
Somerset County and who is authorized to accept notices from a tenant
and to issue receipts therefor and to accept service of process on behalf
of the record owner;
c. The name and address of the agent of the premises, if any;
d. The name and address, including the dwelling unit number of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by the
owner or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any;
e. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent who may be reached or contacted
at any time in the event of an emergency affecting the premises or any
unit of dwelling space therein, including such emergencies as the
future of any essential service or system, and who has the, authority to
make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith;
f. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises;
g. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used;
h. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of sleeping
rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the requirement
of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan which shall become
part of the application and which shall be attached to the registration
form when filed by the Borough Clerk of designee;
i. Such other information as may be prescribed by the Borough.
§ 20-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-7.5
AO:285
§ 20-7.5. Registration Form; Indexing and Filing; Public Inspection;
Fee. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 5]
The Borough Clerk or designee shall index and file the registration forms.
In doing so, the Borough Clerk or designee shall follow the mandates of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1 as amended and supplemented so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements
of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property being
registered and will also satisfy the registration requirements of this section.
§ 20-7.6. Registration Form; Amendments; Filing. [Ord. No. 2000-11
§ 6]
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this section,
shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in
the information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be required
for the filing of an amendment except where the ownership of the premises
is changed.
§ 20-7.7. Periodic Inspections; Unsatisfactory Inspections. [Ord. No.
2000-11 § 7]
§ 20-7.8. Access for Inspections, Repairs. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 8]
a. Each rental unit shall be inspected at least once every 12 month period.
b. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Borough of South Bound Brook
and inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly
authorized and appointed person, persons or agency of the Borough of
South Bound Brook shall not be used as a valid substitute.
c. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining Zoning
Ordinance compliance, and to the extent applicable, to determine if the
property complies with the Property Maintenance Code, Uniform
Construction Code, BOCA Maintenance Code, Housing Code, and/or
Building Code, and/or Uniform Fire Safety Act.
d. Unsatisfactory Inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection, such property shall not
thereafter be registered, nor shall a license issue, and the owner of the
property, or his agent, shall not lease or rent such property; nor shall
any tenant occupy the property until the necessary corrections have
been made so as to bring the property and rental unit into compliance
with the applicable Code and the property is thereafter subsequently
inspected, registered, and licensed. In the event that the property is
occupied when such conditions are discovered, all such corrections
shall be made within 60 days, and if not made within that time period,
the owner shall be deemed in violation of this section and every day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation,
subject to the penalty provisions of Subsection 20-7.18.
§ 20-7.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-7.8
AO:286
§ 20-7.9. Prohibitions on Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 9]
No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit
occupancy of any rental unit within the Borough of South Bound Brook
which is not registered and licensed in accordance with this section.
§ 20-7.10. License. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 10]
Upon the filing of a completed registration form, and payment of the
prescribed fee, and a satisfactory inspection the owner shall be entitled to
the issuance of a license commencing on the date of issuance and expiring
on the same date of the next calendar year. A registration form shall be
required for each rental unit, and license shall issue to the owner for each
rental unit, even if more than one rental unit is contained in the property.
§ 20-7.11. Fees. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 11]
At the time of the filing of the registration form, and prior to the issuance
of a license, the owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in accordance
with the following:
a. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and rooming/
boarding houses in order that they may promote the purposes of this
section to safeguard the health, safety, welfare of the occupants of
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses and of the
general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses at all
reasonable times. The owner or occupant of every rental facility, rental
unit and rooming/boarding house shall give the inspecting officer free
access to the rental facility, rental unit and rooming/boarding house at
all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections, examinations
and surveys.
b. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental unit
and rooming/boarding house access to any part of such rental facility,
rental unit and rooming/boarding house at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this section or any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.
c. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this section, an inspecting officer shall conduct an
inspection as hereinbefore provided.
a. An Annual Registration fee of $30 per year, (per unit);
b. A Reinspection fee of Fifteen dollars;
c. If the owner of the property is a Senior Citizen who resides in a unit of
the property and rents out the remaining unit and would otherwise
§ 20-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-7.11
AO:287
§ 20-7.12. Providing Registration Form to Occupants and Tenants.
[Ord. No. 2000-11 § 12]
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the registration form required by this section. This particular
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel, or guest house registered with
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act as
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the registration certificate in a conspicuous place within the rental
unit(s).
§ 20-7.13. Maximum Number of Occupants; Posting. [Ord. No.
2000-11 § 13]
§ 20-7.14. Taxes and Other Municipal Charges; Payment
Precondition for Registration and License. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 14]
No rental unit may be registered and no license shall issue for any property
containing a rental unit unless all municipal taxes, water and sewer charges
and any other Municipal assessments are paid on a current basis.
§ 20-7.15. Other Rental Unit Standards. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 15]
All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code and the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code.
§ 20-7.16. Occupants' Standards. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 16]
qualify under the State of New Jersey property tax deduction under
New Jersey statute 54:4-8.41, there shall be no fee;
d. If any fee is not paid within 30 days of its due date, a late fee surcharge
of $30 will be assessed.
a. The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each rental unit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant
or registered tenant to allow a greater number of persons than the
posted maximum number of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight
the rental unit for a period exceeding 29 days. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Subsection
20-7.18.
b. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the Borough as
required in this section may reside in the licensed premises. It shall be
unlawful for any other person to reside in said premises and any owner,
agent, tenant, or registered tenant allowing a non-registered party to
reside in said premises shall be in violation of this section and shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of Subsection 20-7.18.
a. Occupants. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the
Borough Clerk as provided in the ordinance may reside in the licensed
§ 20-7.11 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-7.16
AO:288
§ 20-7.17. Revocation of a License; Procedure. [Ord. No. 2000-11
§ 17]
premises. It shall be unlawful for any other person to reside in said
premises, and this provision may be enforced against the landlord,
tenant, or other person residing in said premises.
b. Nuisance Prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a manner
which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the
surrounding properties and property owners or of the public in general,
such that it shall constitute a nuisance as defined in the ordinances of
the Borough of South Bound Brook.
c. Compliance with Other Laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities
and the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of South Bound Brook and
with all applicable State and Federal laws.
d. Penalties. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Subsection
20-7.18.
a. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner
may be subject to the revocation or suspension of the license issued
hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
1. Conviction of a violation of this section in the Municipal Court or
any other Court of competent jurisdiction.
2. Determination of a violation of this section at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection b.
3. Continuously renting the unit or units to a tenant or tenants who
are convicted of a violation of the Noise Ordinance of the Borough.
4. Continuously permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants as defined, in this section.
5. Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
b. Procedure; Written Complaint; Notice; Hearing.
1. A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a license may
be filed by any one or more of the following: Chief of Police,
Construction Code Official, Housing Inspector, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or any other persons or office authorized to
file such complaint. Such complaint shall be in writing and filed
with the Borough Clerk or designee. The complaint shall be specific
and shall be sufficient to apprise the licensee of the charges so as to
permit the licensee to present a defense. The individual(s) filing the
§ 20-7.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-7.17
AO:289
complaint may do so on the basis of information and belief and
need not rely on personal information.
2. Upon filing of such written complaint the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Borough Council and a date
for a hearing shall be scheduled which shall not be sooner than 10
nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Borough Clerk or designee
shall forward a copy of the complaint and a notice as to the date of
the hearing to the licensee and the agent, if any, at the address
indicated on the registration form. Service upon the agent shall be
sufficient.
3. The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Borough Council unless, in its discretion, the Borough Council
determines that the matter should be heard by a Hearing Officer
who shall appointed by the Borough Council. If the matter is
referred to a Hearing Officer, such officer shall transmit his
findings of fact and conclusions of law to the Borough Council
within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. Borough Council
shall then review the matter and may accept, reject, or modify the
recommendations of the Hearing Officer based on the record
before such hearing officer. In the event that the matter is not
referred to a Hearing Officer and is heard by Borough Council, then
the Borough Council shall render a decision within 30 days of the
conclusion of the hearing. Following the hearing, a decision shall
be rendered, dismissing the complaint, revoking or suspending the
license, or determining that the license shall not be renewed or
reissued for one or more subsequent license years.
4. A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
5. The Borough Attorney or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
c. Defenses.
1. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental license by
demonstrating that the owner has taken appropriate action and has
made .a good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances
giving rise to the revocation proceeding including but not limited to
the institution of legal action against the tenant(s), occupant(s) or
guests for recovery of the premises; eviction of the tenant(s) or
otherwise.
§ 20-7.17 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-7.18
AO:290
§ 20-7.18. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § 18]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of South Bound Brook or such other
court having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation subject to
the penalty provisions of this section.
§ 20-8. (RESERVED)
§ 20-9. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
§ 20-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2009-06]
This section requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Borough of South Bound Brook so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and prescribes penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 20-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2009-06]
As used in this section:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Borough of South
Bound Brook or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying storm water.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport storm water from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect storm water runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 20-7.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-9.3
AO:291
§ 20-9.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2009-06]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 20-9.4. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 2009-06]
Storm drain inlets identified in Subsection 20-9.3 shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, solid and
floatable materials means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection c.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Subsection 20-9.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect storm
water from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body under
that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and storm water basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
(7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two (2.0) inches across the
smallest dimension.
§ 20-9.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 20-9.4
AO:292
§ 20-9.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2009-06]
This section shall be enforced by the Borough of South Bound Brook Code
Enforcement Department.
§ 20-9.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2009-06]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each storm drain inlet
that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
Chapter 21
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
[Prior history includes Ord. Nos. 5-82, 5-82A and 11-89.]
§ 21-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 21-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and one
and one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 20-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.1
AO:293
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of Borough of South Bound
Brook, of New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 21-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 21-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
a. The flood hazard areas of Borough of South Bound Brook are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 21-1.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 21-1.4
AO:294
§ 21-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 07-2009]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Building Construction
Officer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or VO
zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a
one percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the flood
plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 21-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2
AO:295
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
§ 21-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 21-2
AO:296
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 21-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2
AO:297
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by
a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition
before damage would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means
flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or more separate
occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time
of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure during a
10-year period, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
Substantial improvement also means cumulative substantial improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage",
regardless of the actual repair work performed or repetitive loss. The term
does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
b.
§ 21-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 21-2
AO:298
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 21-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 21-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of South Bound Brook, Somerset County, New
Jersey.
§ 21-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2007-09]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of South Bound Brook,
Community No. 340445, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 21-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute an offense. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both,
for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of South
Bound Brook from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.
§ 21-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 28, 2007.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Somerset County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdiction) as shown on Index and panel numbers 0166, 0167; whose
effective date is September 28, 2007.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 12 Main Street,
South Bound Brook, NJ 08880-1491.
§ 21-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3.5
AO:299
§ 21-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 21-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of South
Bound Brook, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.
§ 21-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 21-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
27-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Building Construction Officer and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
flood proofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood
proofing criteria in subsection 21-5.2-2; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 21-3.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 21-4.2
AO:300
§ 21-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No.
2007-09]
The Building Construction Officer is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 21-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator.
Duties of the Building Construction Officer shall include, but not be limited
to:
§ 21-4.3-1. Permit Review. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-4.3-2. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. [Ord. No.
2007-09]
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with subsection 21-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of
Special Flood Hazard, Building Construction Officer shall obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer subsections
21-5.2-1, Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and 21-5.2-2,
Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
§ 21-4.3-3. Information to be Obtained and Maintained. [Ord. No.
2007-09]
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment
provisions of subsection 21-5.3a are met.
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
b. For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures:
1. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
2. Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in subsection
21-4.1c.
§ 21-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.3-3
AO:301
§ 21-4.3-4. Alteration of Watercourses. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-4.3-5. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
subsection 21-4.4.
§ 21-4.4. Variance Procedure.
§ 21-4.4-1. Appeal Board. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
a. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
a. The Board of Adjustment as established by Borough Council of the
Borough of South Bound Brook shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
b. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Building Construction Officer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
c. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of South Bound Brook, as provided in the ordinance.
d. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
§ 21-4.3-3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 21-4.4-1
AO:302
§ 21-4.4-2. Conditions for Variances. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program of that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
e. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 21-4.4-1d and the
purposes of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
f. The Building Construction Officer shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
a. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items 1-11 in
subsection 21-4.4-1d have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
§ 21-4.4-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.4-2
AO:303
§ 21-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 21-5.1. General Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
§ 21-5.1-1. Anchoring. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-5.1-2. Construction Materials and Methods. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-5.1-3. Utilities. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in subsection 21-4.4-1d, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
f. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
b. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to
be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
§ 21-4.4-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 21-5.1-3
AO:304
§ 21-5.1-4. Subdivision Proposals. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-5.1-5. Enclosure Openings. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 21-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 21-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters;
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
d. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five
acres (whichever is less).
§ 21-5.1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-5.2
AO:305
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 21-4.3-2, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
§ 21-5.2-1. Residential Construction. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-5.2-2. Nonresidential Construction. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 21-5.2-3. Manufactured Homes. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated to or
above base flood elevation;
b. Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement elevated to the level of the base flood
elevation; and
b. Within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM all new construction
and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified) and, require adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
c. Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
d. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
e. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in subsection 21-4.3-3b2.
a. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with subsection
21-5.1-1b.
§ 21-5.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 21-5.2-3
AO:306
§ 21-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 2007-09]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
21-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
Chapter 22
LICENSING OF BODY PIERCING AND TATTOO BUSINESSES
§ 22-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #3-99, § I]
ARTIST — Shall mean a person who does tattooing or body piercing.
BODY PIERCING — Shall mean the placing of a permanent or temporary
foreign object in a person's body, such as ears, nose, lips, genitals, nipples,
or parts thereof, for a decorative or other nonmedical purpose by a person
not directly under the supervision of a licensed physician.
BODY PIERCING AREA — Within a body piercing establishment shall mean
the immediate vicinity where body piercing is performed.
BODY PIERCING ARTIST — Shall mean a person engaged in the practice of
body piercing.
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean the building or structure
where body piercing is practiced or conducted.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Shall mean written approval from the
Health Officer or his authorized representative that said tattooing or body
b. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base
flood elevation.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 21-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 21-5. Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 21-5.2-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1
AO:307
piercing establishment has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this
chapter.
FACILITY — Shall mean a place where either tattooing or body piercing is
performed.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the appointed licensed Health Officer or
his authorized representative.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any individual, firm, company, corporation or
association that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing or body
piercing is performed and any individual who performs or practices the art
of tattooing or body piercing on the person of another.
TATTOO, TATTOOED OR TATTOOING — Shall refer to any method of
placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the
skin with ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin
by the aid of needles or any other instruments designed to puncture the
skin.
TATTOO ARTIST — Shall mean one who engages in tattooing.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean the location wherein tattooing is
performed.
§ 22-2. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. #3-99, § II]
The standards in this chapter apply to both temporary and permanent body
piercing and tattoo establishments.
§ 22-3. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #3-99, § III]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed without first obtaining a license from the South Bound Brook
Board of Health to engage in such business in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
b. An application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount
of $175. Any change of ownership shall require a new application and
license with payment of fees therefore. All applicants shall submit plans
for the establishment to the South Bound Brook Health Department
prior to initiation or construction.
c. The renewal license fee for engaging in the business of operating a
tattoo or body piercing establishment within South Bound Brook shall
be $10 per year. All licenses shall expire on the last day of March
annually. If renovations of the tattoo or body piercing establishment
occur, plans must be submitted to the South Bound Brook Health
Department and the applicant will be required to comply with Section
22-5. The late fee for failure to renew the license shall be $50 a month if
not paid by the final due date of April 30 annually.
§ 22-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 22-3
AO:308
§ 22-4. GENERAL PROVISIONS. [Ord. #3-99, § IV]
d. The provisions of this chapter and all licensing fees shall be due
immediately upon enactment of this chapter.
e. The provision accompanied by the license fee herein-after fixed shall
set forth:
1. Local and permanent addresses and telephone numbers of
applicant and manager.
2. If applicant is a corporation, the name, address and telephone
numbers of its registered agent and officers.
3. Certification that all dyes and inks used in tattooing are non-toxic
and FDA approved.
4. Applicant to comply with O.S.H.A. Bloodborne Pathogen Standard
and Medical Waste Disposal Regulations.
a. Age. It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone or any tattoo or
body business to tattoo or body pierce an individual under 18 years of
age without consent signed by the parent or legal guardian and
witnessed by the operator. The operator shall be responsible for
maintaining the original consent form and copies of all consent
information for a period of two years beyond the recipient's twenty-first
(21) birthday. The operator shall obtain a copy of a photo ID of the
individual being tattooed.
b. Each person wishing a body piercing or tattoo must fill out an
application which will include name, date of birth, address and
telephone number of the client as well as the location(s) of the tattoo or
body piercing and the name of the operator. All records are to be
maintained for a minimum of two years and shall be available to the
Health Officer or his authorized representative upon request.
c. If the applicant is suspected to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs
or any other behavioral modifying substance, the operator must refuse
the applicant. If an applicant is suspected of having an infectious
disease in a communicable stage, the operator shall refuse service.
d. Written guidelines shall be established for the care of the body site.
Each client shall receive a written copy of the guidelines for care of
body piercing or tattoo sites. Care instructions must include the
following minimum recommendations for body piercing:
1. Wash the body piercing gently with mild soap and water and pat
dry;
2. Apply an antibacterial cleaner at least twice daily;
3. Avoid swimming or soaking of the body piercing until healed;
§ 22-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-4
AO:309
§ 22-5. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #3-99, § V]
4. Avoid scratching, picking or touching of the body piercing;
5. If redness or swelling develops, contact your doctor.
a. Each facility shall have a bathroom accessible to the public and staff.
Each bathroom shall be equipped with a commode and a sink with the
sink being connected to hot and cold running water. Soap and sanitary
towels, or other approved hand drying devices, shall be available at the
sink at all times. Common towels are prohibited. In addition to the
above, each cubicle or work station must be provided with a sink
connected to hot and cold running water. This area shall also be
provided with soap and appropriate hand dying facilities.
b. The chair or seat reserved for the person receiving the body piercing or
tattoo shall be of a material that is smooth and easily cleanable and
constructed of material that is nonabsorbent. Any surfaces on the chair
that become exposed to blood or body fluids must be cleaned and
sanitized prior to use by the next customer.
c. The worktable or counter used by the operator shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent.
There shall be a covered junction between the table/counter and the
wall if the table/counter is to be placed against the wall. This table/
counter must be cleaned and sanitized, utilizing a method approved by
the South Bound Brook Health Department, between customers.
d. The walls in the work area shall be smooth and easily cleanable and
constructed of a nonabsorbent material.
e. The floor in the work area shall be of a durable material that is
nonabsorbent and is smooth and easily cleanable. Floors shall be kept
clean.
f. Lighting within the work area shall be adequate so as to provide a
minimum of 100 footcandles in all areas.
g. The work area reserved for the application of the tattoo or piercing
shall be separated from other areas of the establishment by walls or
durable partitions extending at least six feet in height and so designed
to discourage any persons other than the customer and the operator
from being in the work area.
h. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or
body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized, utilizing a method approved
by the South Bound Brook Health Department.
i. All products used in cleaning, sanitizing and sterilizing procedures
must be clearly marked and stored in an acceptable manner in
accordance with the Hazard Communications Regulations. Smaller
§ 22-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 22-5
AO:310
§ 22-6. REGULATION. [Ord. #3-99, § VI]
working containers filled on-site from larger containers must be clearly
marked with the name of the product.
j. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided and waste disposed of at
appropriate intervals in a safe manner.
k. All medical waste shall be disposed of according to state standards. All
records shall be kept on site and shall be available for inspection. All
medical waste records shall be maintained for at least three years after
manifest as required by N.J.A.C. 7:26-3A21.
l. The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
a. Operator.
1. Hepatitis B pre-exposure vaccination or proof of immunity is
required for all operators. Any accidental needle stick shall be
reported to the South Bound Brook Health Department. If a person
cannot obtain the vaccination for medical reasons, he shall submit
to the Board of Health a letter from his physician certifying that the
individual does not have Hepatitis B and the vaccination is
contraindicated. This certification shall be annually renewed and
shall be available upon request during inspection.
2. All future operators shall pass an examination showing knowledge
of sterile technique and universal precautions to assure that
infection and contagious disease shall not be spread by work
practices. Once a year under the auspices of the Board of Health a
course leading to certification may be given for any person seeking
to be a tattooist or body piercer. In lieu of the above, documentation
of education or training previously received shall be satisfactory if
determined to be of equivalent quality by the Health Officer.
3. Before working on each patron, each artist shall scrub and wash
his/her hands thoroughly with hot water and an E.P.A. approved
germicide-cleaning material using his/her individual hand brush.
Fingernails shall be kept clean and short.
4. Disposable gloves shall be worn by the artists during preparation
and application to prevent contact with blood or body fluids.
Universal precautions as required by 29 CFR 1910.1030 Section d1
shall be followed. All materials shall be disposed of in accordance
with Section 22-10 of this chapter after contact with each patron.
Hands shall be washed immediately after removal of gloves. Any
skin surface that has contact with blood shall be washed
immediately. Medical waste shall be disposed in compliance with
the latest state regulations.
§ 22-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-6
AO:311
§ 22-7. SKIN PREPARATION. [Ord. #3-99, § VII]
§ 22-8. TECHNIQUE. [Ord. #3-99, VIII]
5. Immediately after treating a patron, the operator shall advise the
patron on the care of the tattoo or body area pierced and shall
instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of
infection. Printed instructions regarding these points shall be given
to each patron as described in Section 22-4, paragraph d of this
chapter.
6. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or body
piercing which become known to the operator shall be reported to
the Health Officer by the person owning or operating the
establishment or by the artist within 24 hours.
a. Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for the skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to applicable
requirements of Sections 22-9 and 22-10 of this chapter after each use
and a new blade shall be used for each patron.
b. Following shaving, the area shall be thoroughly cleaned and scrubbed
with tincture of green soap or its equivalent and warm water. Before
working on the patron's skin, the area shall be treated with 70% alcohol
and allowed to air dry.
c. No piercing of the tongue shall be permitted.
d. No piercing or tattooing shall be done on skin surface that has rash,
pimples, boils, and infections or manifests any evidence of unhealthy
conditions.
e. Ear piercing guns may not be used for body piercing, but may only be
used for piercing ear lobes. If the ear-piercing gun is reused, it must be
cleaned and sanitized between patrons. An ear-piercing gun may only
be used to apply studs in a patron's ears, following manufacturer's
instructions. The use of an ear-piercing gun to apply a stud or any other
jewelry to other areas of the body is prohibited.
f. Satisfactory lubricants or antiseptic ointments shall be applied to the
tattoo area prior to tattooing. The ointment shall be applied in a
satisfactory manner, disposing of the utensil after spreading.
Collapsible tubes of ointment or jelly may also be used.
a. Tattooing.
1. Design stencils shall be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an E.P.A.
approved germicide effective against tuberculosis for at least 20
minutes or disposed of following each use. Effective against TB is
the standard because it then is more effective against HBV and HIV.
§ 22-6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 22-8
AO:312
§ 22-9. NEEDLES AND INSTRUMENTS. [Ord. #3-99, § IX]
2. Only nontoxic dyes or pigments may be used. Premixed sterile
materials are preferred. Premixed dyes shall be used without
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula. It shall be the
responsibility of the operator to provide certification to the South
Bound Brook Health Department of the nontoxicity of the dyes or
inks at the time of license application and renewal.
3. Single service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used
for each patron and the container disposed of immediately after
completing work on each patron. Any dye in which the needles are
dipped shall not be used on another person.
4. The completed tattoo shall be washed with sterile gauze and a
solution of tincture of green soap or its equivalent, then disinfected
with 70% alcohol. The area shall be allowed to air dry and
antiseptic ointment applied and spread with sterile gauze and
sterile dressing attached.
b. Body Piercing.
1. Jewelry Preparation. Jewelry or an insertion taper that has been
autoclaved and never worn must be placed in a medical
antibacterial prep soak for 10 minutes and dried thoroughly before
insertion. Jewelry previously worn by the patron must be soaked in
a medical antibacterial prep soak for 10 minutes in a separate
container that is disposed of or sterilized immediately after the
service. Jewelry worn by a person other than the patron must be
cleaned and sterilized before insertion.
2. Linen Cleaning and Storage. Cloth towels robes and similar items
used in conjunction with body piercing must be laundered in a
washing machine with hot water, laundry detergent and chlorine
bleach between uses. A closed, dustproof container must be
provided for the storage of clean towels and linen. A hamper or
similar container must be provided for the storage of soiled towels
and linen.
a. Only single-service sterile needles and needle bars shall be used for
each patron.
b. If solder is used in manufacturing needles, needle bars or needle tubes,
it must be free of lead.
c. Any needle or sharp object that penetrates the skin shall be
immediately disposed of in accordance with Sections 22-5 and 22-10 of
this chapter and applicable state laws.
d. Needle tubes shall be soaked with soapy water, then scrubbed with a
clean brush and then rinsed clean. Needle tubes shall be sterilized,
§ 22-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-9
AO:313
§ 22-10. DISPOSAL OF WASTES. [Ord. #3-99, § X]
§ 22-11. HOLDERS OF OTHER LICENSES. [Ord. #3-99, § XI]
Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be construed so as to affect the
practice of medicine or any other recognized profession or occupation by a
person duly licensed by the State of New Jersey to engage in such practice,
profession or occupation and whose license would lawfully authorize the
piercing of the body.
§ 22-12. PENALTY PROVISIONS. [Ord. #3-99, § XII]
stored in sterile bags and maintained in a dry, closed area as required
by this chapter.
e. Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using indicator
bags or strips. Sterilization shall be by steam sterilization. The sterilizer
shall be well maintained with a tight fitting gasket and a clean interior.
The manufacturer's operation instructions and sterilization
specifications shall be at hand. The sterilizer shall conform to the
sterilization cycle. Proper functioning of sterilization cycles shall be
verified by the weekly use of biologic indicators (i.e. spore tests). A
bound logbook of these weekly test results shall be available, and a test
may be required to be done during any inspections. A loose-leaf log
book or one that permits additions or deletions shall not be used.
f. If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the South Bound
Brook Health Department shall be notified within 24 hours. In an
emergency situation, the South Bound Brook Health Department may
approve alternative sterilization techniques.
g. Needles and bars shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal. Tattoo
artists shall take precautions to prevent injuries from contaminated
needles or tubes.
a. All used needles, needle bars or other tools used in the tattooing
process, as well as gloves, gauze and other materials contaminated with
blood or body fluids shall be sterilized in accordance with Sections
22-5k and 22-9 of this chapter and then discarded in a disposable rigid
container. In lieu of this requirement, contracting with an authorized
service for the disposal of infectious waste shall be acceptable. All
medical waste regulations shall be adhered to.
b. All noninfectious waste shall be disposed of in accordance with Section
22-5j of this chapter.
a. A penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation
of this chapter. Each day that the violation exists is considered to be a
separate offense.
b. Reasonable counsel fees incurred by the Board of Health in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be paid by the defendant. The amount
§ 22-9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 22-12
AO:314
§ 22-13. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. #3-99,
§ XIII]
In addition to being subject to the penalties provided in Section 22-12 of this
chapter, any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
by the Borough Council for any misstatement in any application or for any
violation of this chapter. No license shall be revoked or suspended until
the licensee has been afforded a hearing before the Council of the Borough
of South Bound Brook. Notice of the filing of a complaint which seeks to
suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter shall be served
on the defendant personally or on the manager, registered agent or officer
of the corporation by certified mail or personal delivery to the business
establishment's address or house address of a responsible party. The notice
will establish a date for a hearing to be held not more than 15 days from the
date of such notice, at which time the defendant shall have the right to be
represented by counsel, call witnesses, cross-examine witnesses produced
in support of the complaint, as well as such other rights necessary in order
to insure due process. Should any license be revoked or suspended, no part
of the license fee shall be returned.
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
Chapter 24
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
STORMWATER CONTROL ORDINANCE
§ 25-1. SCOPE AND PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
of such reimbursement fees and costs shall be determined by the Court
hearing the matter.
c. This chapter shall preempt any municipal ordinance inconsistent
herewith.
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural Best Management Practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
§ 22-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-1
AO:315
§ 25-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Section 25-2.
c. Applicability.
1. This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by South Bound Brook.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
Development approval shall also conform to the Flood Plain
Management Plan as developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
for the protected area (Redevelopment zone).
§ 25-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-2
AO:316
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Shall mean those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — Shall mean the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and
CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The County review
agency may either be:
A County planning agency; or
A County water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development means: any activity that requires a State permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
§ 25-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-2
AO:317
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT PLAN — Shall mean the plan that was
adopted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for the Green Brook Flood
Control Project.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, Borough of South Bound Brook, or political subdivision of
this State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the
§ 25-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-2
AO:318
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the State's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to State resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 25-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-2
AO:319
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — Shall mean a zone designated by the
New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 25-3. GENERAL STANDARDS. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
a.
b. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
c. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
d.
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in Section 25-4. To the maximum extent practicable,
these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
§ 25-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-4
AO:320
§ 25-4. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with Section 25-10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150.
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Section 25-4f and g:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Section 25-4f and g may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternative analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Section 25-4f and g to the
maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Section 25-4f and g, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under paragraph d3 above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Section 25-4f and g that were not achievable on-site.
§ 25-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-4
AO:321
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Section 25-4f
and g shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Section 25-4e into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in paragraph 2 below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post-construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Section 25-4e3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
§ 25-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-4
AO:322
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under Section 25-4e2(i)(2) above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Section 25-4e3(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
§ 25-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-4
AO:323
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Section 25-4g1 are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
(i) A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8)
inches long and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(ii) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Section 25-4g1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Section 25-4f and g
shall meet one of the following requirements:
(a) Be dedicated to a government agency as approved by the
appropriate reviewing agency; or
(b) Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office; or
(c) Subjected to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 25-7, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This paragraph contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
§ 25-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-4
AO:324
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Section 25-5, either:
(i) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
(ii) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the
2-year storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to paragraph (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(i) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(ii) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
§ 25-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-4
AO:325
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at Section 25-5, complete one
of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10- and
100-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80 percent,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
§ 25-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-4
AO:326
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (3)
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at Section 25-2 shall be submitted
to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and
approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and
any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional one-quarter (1/4) acre of impervious surface
is being proposed on a development site. The requirement to
reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge
regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed
under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically
exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water
quality design storm is one and one-quarter (1.25) inches of rainfall
in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the
distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as
reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may
take into account the implementation of nonstructural and
structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time (Minutes) Cumulative Rainfall (Inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
§ 25-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-4
AO:327
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time (Minutes) Cumulative Rainfall (Inches)
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 25-7, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 25-7. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the
BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of
calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any
approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
§ 25-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-4
AO:328
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device See Section 25-6c
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Section 25-4f and g.
§ 25-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-4
AO:329
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 25-7.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A special water resource protection area shall be provided
on each side of the waterway, measured perpendicular to
the waterway from the top of the bank outwards or from
the centerline of the waterway where the bank is not
defined, consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation
allowed to follow natural succession is provided. The width
of the special water resource protection area shall be as
required in the NJ Stormwater Best Management
Practices manual, as amended.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
§ 25-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-4
AO:330
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Section 25-4g8 has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to paragraph
g8 shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
§ 25-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-4
AO:331
§ 25-5. CALCULATION OF STORMWATER RUNOFF AND
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE. [Ord. No. 06-25]
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in paragraph g8(a)(1) above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Paragraph g8 does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Section 25-5a1(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Section 25-5a1(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
§ 25-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-5
AO:332
§ 25-6. STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURAL STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT MEASURES. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
§ 25-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-6
AO:333
§ 25-7. SOURCES FOR TECHNICAL GUIDANCE. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of Section 25-8d.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Section 25-8.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by Section
25-4 of this chapter.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Section 25-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at paragraphs 1 and 2 below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
§ 25-6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-7
AO:334
§ 25-8. SAFETY STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
BASINS. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
a. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. The
Flood Plain Management Plan was prepared by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers for the Green Brook Flood Control Project for residual basin
design.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full
§ 25-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-8
AO:335
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Section 25-9c, a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the permanent water
surface, and the second step shall be located one to one and
one-half (1 1/2) feet above the permanent water surface. See
Section 25-8d for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, County or
§ 25-8 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-8
AO:336
§ 25-9. REQUIREMENTS FOR A SITE DEVELOPMENT
STORMWATER PLAN. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Section 25-9c below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
3. The applicant shall submit 12 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Section 25-9c of this chapter.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
§ 25-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-9
AO:337
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of 1"=100' or greater,
showing 2-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines,
steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands
and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces,
existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of
property lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections 25-3
through 25-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
§ 25-9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-9
AO:338
§ 25-10. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Section 25-4.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Section 25-10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Sections 25-9c1 through 6 of this chapter
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in Section 25-1c of this chapter shall
comply with the requirements of Sections 25-10b and c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person(s) responsible for
preventative and corrective maintenance (including replacement).
§ 25-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-10
AO:339
Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures are
available in the NJ Stormwater Best Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for
example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having
the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
25-10b2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and
any future revisions based on Section 25-10b7 below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
25-10b2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development,
including a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenancerelated
work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
25-10b2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance
plan at least once per year. Any adjustments to the management
plan or deed shall require notification and approval from the
applicable board prior to the filing of a revised deed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
25-10b2 above shall retain and make available, upon request by
any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by Section 25-10b6 and 7 above.
9. The requirements of Section 25-10b3 and 4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
§ 25-10 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-10
AO:340
§ 25-11. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who assists in the commission of such violation
shall each be guilty of a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be liable to a minimum fine of at least $100 for each violation up to a
maximum of $1,000 for each violation or to imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both such fines and imprisonment.
§ 25-12. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the chapter by the County
review agency if the County review agency should fail to act.
§ 25-13. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 2007-03]
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
When the ownership of the stormwater management facility is by
a Homeowners Association for residential development and the
owner of the property of non-residential use, the posting of a
two-year maintenance surety shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
40:55D-53. The guidelines for developing a maintenance and
inspection program are provided in the NJ Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual and the NJDEP Ocean County
Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management Facilities
Maintenance Manual dated June 1989, available from the NJDEP
Watershed Management Program shall be provided as required by
the Bound Brook Land Use Board in its resolution of approval.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
c. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Borough of South Bound
Brook from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance
guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 for development
required by the ordinance.
§ 25-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-13
AO:341
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this chapter.
§ 25-14. through § 25-15. (RESERVED)
§ 25-16. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO STORM SEWERS. [Ord. No.
2007-04]
a. Purpose. This section prohibits illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of South
Bound Brook, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory. The definitions below are the same as or based on
corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
South Bound Brook, unless that discharge is authorized under a
NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General
Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Non-physical connections
may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Non-domestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by [insert
name of municipality] or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater. NOTE: In municipalities with
combined sewer systems, add the following: "MS4s do not include
combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed
to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport
stormwater from streets and other sources."
§ 25-13 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-16
AO:342
§ 25-17. IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE. [Ord. No. 2007-04]
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other
than heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however
contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes,
but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact
cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
c. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Borough of South Bound Brook any
domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or
other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
d. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department
and/or other Municipal Officials of Borough of South Bound Brook.
e. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
a. Purpose. An ordinance to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of
materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of South Bound Brook, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
§ 25-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-17
AO:343
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Borough
of South Bound Brook or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater. NOTE: In municipalities with
combined sewer systems, add the following: "MS4s do not include
combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed
to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport
stormwater from streets and other sources."
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
c. Prohibited Conduct. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by Borough of South Bound Brook is prohibited. The spilling,
dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a
manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
d. Exceptions to Prohibition.
1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
2. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
3. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact
cooling water).
4. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
5. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
6. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
7. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
8. Flows from fire fighting activities.
9. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
§ 25-17 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 25-17
AO:344
Chapter 26
FAIR SHARE HOUSING
§ 26-1. FAIR SHARE HOUSING REGULATIONS.
§ 26-1.1. Fair Share of Low and Moderate Income Housing. [Ord.
No. 2004-04]
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(c) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited
to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
e. Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Police
Department and/or other Municipal Officials of Borough of South Bound
Brook.
f. Penalties. Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the
provisions of this ordinance, after being duly notified, shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $500.
a. South Bound Brook's fair share obligation will be divided equally
between low and moderate income households as per N.J.A.C.
5:93-2.20.
b. Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to low
income tax credit regulations:
1. At least half of all units within each inclusionary development will
be affordable to low income households; and
2. At least half of all rental units will be affordable to low income
households; and
3. At least one-third of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 will be affordable to low income households.
c. Inclusionary developments that are not age-restricted will be
constructed in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
§ 25-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-1.1
AO:345
1. The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units is at least
10% and not greater than 20% of the total low and moderate
income units; and
2. At least 30% of all low and moderate income units are two bedroom
units; and
3. At least 20% of all low and moderate income units are three
bedroom units; and
4. Low and moderate income units that are age-restricted may utilize
a modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of
bedrooms will equal the number of age-restricted low and
moderate income units within the inclusionary development.
d. In conjunction with realistic market information, the following criteria
will be used in determining maximum rents and sale prices:
1. Efficiency units will be affordable to a one person household; and
2. One bedroom units will be affordable to 1.5 person households; and
3. Two bedroom units will be affordable to three person households;
and
4. Three bedroom units will be affordable to 4.5 person households;
and
5. Median income by household size will be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b); and
6. The maximum sales prices of low and moderate income units within
each inclusionary development will be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income. In averaging an
affordability range of 55% for sales units, the municipal ordinance
will require moderate income sales units to be available for at least
three different prices and low income sales units to be available for
at least two different prices.
7. For both owner-occupied and rental units, the low and moderate
income units will utilize the same heating source as market units
within an inclusionary development; and
8. Low income units will be reserved for households with a gross
household income less or equal to 50% of the median income
approved by COAH; moderate income units will be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than 80% of the
median income approved by COAH as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(g); and
9. The regulations outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15 and 9.16 will be
applicable for purchased and rental units.
e. For rental units, developers and/or municipal sponsors may:
§ 26-1.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 26-1.1
AO:346
1. Establish one rent for a low income unit and one for a moderate
income unit for each bedroom distribution; and
2. Gross rents, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, will be
established so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly income of
the appropriate household size as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(f). The
tenant-paid utility allowance will be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by HUD for use in New Jersey.
3. The maximum rents of low and moderate income units within each
inclusionary development will be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income. In averaging an affordability
range of 52% for rental units, developers and/or municipal
sponsors of rental units may establish one rent for a low income
unit and one rent for a moderate income unit for each bedroom
distribution.
f. For sale units:
1. The initial price of a low and moderate income owner-occupied forsale
housing unit will be established so that after a down payment
of 5%, the monthly principal, interest, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance, property taxes (based on the restricted value
of the low and moderate income unit) and condominium or
homeowner fee do not exceed 28% of the eligible gross monthly
income; and
2. Master deeds of inclusionary development will regular
condominium or homeowner association fees or special
assessments of low and moderate income purchasers at 100% of
those paid by market purchasers. This percentage is consistent
with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(e). Once established
within the master deed, the percentage will not be amended
without prior approval from COAH; and
3. South Bound Brook will follow the general provisions concerning
uniform deed restriction liens and enforcement through certificates
of occupancy or reoccupancy on sale units as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3;
and
4. South Bound Brook will require a certificate of reoccupancy for any
occupancy of a low or moderate income sales unit resulting from a
resale as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3(c); and
5. Municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding sale units
will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.5—9.8. Municipal rejection of
repayment options for sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.9; and
6. The continued application of options to create, rehabilitation or
maintain low and moderate income sale units will be consistent
with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.10; and
§ 26-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-1.1
AO:347
7. Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on
sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.11; and
8. The regulations detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.12—9.14 will be
applicable to low and moderate income units that are for sale units.
g. In zoning for inclusionary developments the following is required:
1. Low and moderate income units will be built in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d):
Minimum % of Low/Moderate
Income Units Completed
% of Market Housing
Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100
90
100
2. A design of inclusionary developments that integrates low and
moderate income units with market units is encouraged as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(f).
h. A development fee ordinance was not adopted by South Bound Brook.
i. To provide assurances that low and moderate income units are created
with controls on affordability over time and that low and moderate
income households occupy these units, South Bound Brook will
designate the Somerset County Office of Community Development with
the responsibility of ensuring the affordability of sales and rental units
over time. Somerset County Office of Community Development will be
responsible for those activities detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a).
1. In addition, the Somerset County Office of Community will be
responsible for utilizing the verification and certification
procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b) in placing households in
low and moderate income units; and
2. Newly constructed low and moderate income sales units will
remain affordable to low and moderate income households for at
least 30 years.
The Somerset County Office of Community Development will
require all conveyances of newly constructed units to contain the
deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH and referred
as Technical Appendix E as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93; and
3. Housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential
structure will be considered a new housing unit and will be subject
§ 26-1.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 26-1.1
AO:348
Chapter 27
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
to 30-year controls on affordability. Somerset County Office of
Community Development will require COAH's appropriate deed
restriction and mortgage lien.
j. Regarding rehabilitated units:
1. Rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing units that are
improved to code standard will be subject to affordability controls
for at least six years; and
2. Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard will be subject to affordability controls for at least 10
years; and
k. Regarding rental units:
1. Newly constructed low and moderate income rental units will
remain affordable to low and moderate income households for at
least 30 years. The Somerset County Office of Community
Development will require the deed restriction and lien and deed of
easement referred as Technical Appendix H as found in N.J.A.C.
5:93; and
2. Affordability controls in accessory apartments will be for a period
of at least 10 years, except if the apartment is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.15, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years (N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.9); and
3. Alternative living arrangements will be controlled in a manner
suitable to COAH, that provides assurances that such a facility will
house low and moderate income households for at least 10 years
except if the alternative living arrangement is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.15, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years (N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8).
l. Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
incorporates the need to eliminate unnecessary cost generating
features from South Bound Brook's land use ordinances. Accordingly
Sound Bound Brook will eliminate development standards that are not
essential to protect the public welfare and to expedite or fast track
municipal approvals/denials on certain affordable housing
developments. South Bound Brook will adhere to the components of
N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1-10.3.
m. South Bound Brook has a fair share obligation of 19 units of which one
is new construction. This ordinance will apply to all developments that
contain proposed low and moderate income units and any future
development that may occur.
§ 26-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-1
AO:349
§ 27-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-1]
This chapter shall be known by and may be referred to by the short title of
the Historic Preservation Regulations of the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 27-2. ESTABLISHMENT OF A SYSTEM OF HISTORIC
PRESERVATION REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-2]
§ 27-3. INTENDED PURPOSES. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-3]
These historic preservation regulations are intended to effect and
accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of especially
noteworthy examples or elements of the Borough's environment in order:
a. There is hereby created in and for the Borough of South Bound Brook a
commission to be known as the Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission, referred to in this ordinance as the Commission.
b. In adopting this chapter, it is the intention of the Council of the Borough
of South Bound Brook to create an agency which will work with and
advise the Planning/Zoning Board on the effect of development
applications on designated historic landmarks or improvements within
an historic district. In addition, the Commission shall review all
development activities involving the exterior of an historic landmark or
an improvement within an historic district.
c. This chapter does not require or prohibit any particular architectural
style; rather its purpose is to preserve the past by making the past
compatible with and relevant to the present. To that end, new
construction upon or near a landmark should not necessarily duplicate
the exact style of the landmark; it must be compatible with and not
detract from the landmark.
d. Historic districts or landmarks nay be established as an overlay zoning
district to the Borough of South Bound Brook zoning map according to
the criteria enacted by this chapter.
a. To safeguard the heritage of South Bound Brook by preserving
resources within the Borough which reflect elements of its cultural,
social, economic and architectural history;
b. To encourage the continued use of historic landmarks and to facilitate
their appropriate use;
c. To maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for the
historic and architecturally significant buildings, structures, site
objects, or districts within the Borough of South Bound Brook;
d. To stabilize and improve property values within the district and foster
civic pride in the built environment;
e. To promote appreciation of historic landmarks for education, pleasure
and the welfare of the local population;
§ 27-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-3
AO:350
§ 27-4. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-4]
As used in this chapter:
ADDITION — Shall mean the construction of a new improvement as part of
an existing improvement when such new improvement changes the exterior
architectural appearance of any landmark.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean the person designated by the
Borough Council to handle the administration of historic project review
applications as well as the coordination of building permit applications as
referenced in the ordinance.
AFFECTING A LANDMARK OF HISTORIC DISTRICT — Shall mean any
development activity which alters the exterior architectural appearance of
an historic landmark or any improvement within an historic district.
ALTERATION — Shall mean any work done on any improvement which (1) is
not an addition to the improvement, and (2) constitutes a change by addition
or replacement in the exterior architectural appearance of an improvement.
BUILDING — Shall mean a structure created to shelter human activity.
DEMOLITION — Shall mean partial or total razing or destruction of any
landmark or of any improvement within an historic district.
DISREPAIR — Shall mean the condition of being in need of repairs; a
structure or building in disrepair.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — Shall mean a geographically definable area, urban
or rural, small or large, possessing a significant concentration, linkage,
or continuity of sites, buildings, structures and/or objects which viewed
collectively:
f. To encourage beautification and private reinvestment;
g. To manage change by preventing alterations and new construction not
in keeping with the district;
h. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources;
i. To recognize the importance of individual historic landmarks located
outside of a district by urging property owners and tenants to maintain
their properties in keeping with the requirements and standards of this
chapter;
j. To encourage the proper maintenance and preservation of historic
settings and landscapes;
k. To encourage appropriate alterations of historic landmarks;
l. To enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity, continuity and
interest in the Borough;
m. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts and to invite
and encourage voluntary compliance.
§ 27-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-4
AO:351
HISTORIC LANDMARKS(S) — Shall mean any buildings, structures, sites,
objects or districts which possess integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship and association and which have been determined,
pursuant to the terms of this chapter to be:
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMISSION — Shall mean the
body which, for the purposes of this chapter, acts as the historic
preservation commission cited in the Municipal Land Use Law N.J.S.A.
40:5513-1, et seq.
IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any structure or any part thereof installed
upon real property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the
a. Represent a significant period(s) in the development of the town; or
b. Have a distinctive character resulting from their architectural style; or
Because of their distinctive character can readily be viewed as an area
or neighborhood distinct from surrounding portions of the town.
Resources within an historic district shall be classified as either key,
contributing, or non-contributing which are defined as:
Key – Shall mean any buildings, structures, sites or objects which, due to their
significance, would individually qualify for landmark status.
CONTRIBUTING — Shall mean any building, structures, sites or objects which
are integral components of the historic district either because they date from
a time period for which the district is significant, or because they represent an
architectural type, period, or method for which the district is significant.
NON-CONTRIBUTING — Shall mean any buildings, structures, sites or objects
which are not integral components of the historic district because they neither
date from a time period for which the district is significant nor represent an
architectural type, period, or method for which the district is significant.
c.
Of particular historic significance to the Borough of South Bound Brook
by reflecting or exemplifying the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state or community; or
a.
Associated with the historic personages important in national, state or
local history; or
b.
The site of an historic event which had a significant effect on the
development of the nation, state or community; or
c.
An embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of architecture or engineering; or
d.
Representative of the work or works of a locally, regionally or nationally
important or recognized builder, designer, artist or architect; or
e.
Significant for containing elements for design, detail, materials or
craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation; or
f.
g. Able or likely to yield information important in prehistory or history.
§ 27-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-4
AO:352
location of such construction of installation for a period of not less than 120
continuous days.
OBJECT — Shall mean a thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic, or
scientific value that may be, by nature of design movable yet related to a
specific setting or environment.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Shall mean repairing any deterioration,
wear or damage to a structure, or any part thereof, in order to return the
same as nearly practicable to its condition prior to the occurrence of such
deterioration, wear or damage. Ordinary maintenance -Shall further include
replacement of exterior elements or accessory hardware, including signs,
using the same materials having the same appearance.
OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICT — Shall mean a zoning district made up of
underlying zone districts or parts of some zone districts as shown on the
Borough Zoning Map. An overlay zone district controls certain standards
with the exception of bulk and use requirements, which are controlled by
the underlying zone district(s).
REPAIR — Shall mean any work done on any improvement which:
REPLACEMENT — Shall mean repairs affecting the exterior architectural
appearance of a structure.
REMOVAL — Shall mean to partially or completely cause a structure or
portion of a structure to change to another location, position, station or
residence.
SITE — Shall mean the place where a significant event or pattern of events
occurred. It may be the location of prehistoric or historic occupations or
activities that may be marked by physical remains; or it may be the symbolic
focus of a significant event or pattern of events that may not have been
actively occupied. A site may also be the location of a ruined building,
structure, or object of the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or
archeological significance.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any man-made work arranged in a definite
pattern of organization.
UNDERLYING ZONE DISTRICT — Shall mean a zoning district which forms
a constituent part of an overlay zone district. Underlying zone districts
control bulk and use requirements.
§ 27-5. APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-5]
The following regulations shall apply to all landmarks in a district and to
any other historic resources which are designated in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Section 27-9.
a. Is not an addition to the improvement; and
Does not change the exterior architectural appearance of any
improvement.
b.
§ 27-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-6
AO:353
§ 27-6. PERMITTED USES. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-6]
All uses permitted for an historic landmark or for structures within an
historic district shall be those designated by the Official Zoning Map. Such
uses shall not be altered by further designation as an historic district.
§ 27-7. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 2000-07
§ 1A-7]
The maximum building heights, maximum lot size, minimum coverage, etc.,
shall be as provided in the zoning ordinance for the respective zones, except
that the Planning/Zoning Board may grant variances and waivers from such
regulations where necessary to preserve historic characteristics.
§ 27-8. HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMISSION. [Ord.
No. 2000-07 § 1A-8]
a. The Historic Preservation Advisory Commission shall consist of nine
members and two alternates who shall serve without compensation,
except the commission members shall be reimbursed for reasonable
and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official
business, including attendance at annual training sessions and/or
programs that relate to historic preservation, within the guidelines of
the budget established by the Borough Council for the Commission.
b. The Commission positions shall be filled by people who are interested in
and qualified to contribute to the preservation of historic buildings,
structures, sites, objects, and districts. The Commission shall represent
the following categories:
Class A — persons whose qualifications are consistent with Appendix A,
N.J.'s Certified Local Government Guidelines approved, as amended by
National Park Service;
Class B — persons who are knowledgeable or have a demonstrated
interest in local history;
Class C — Persons who are residents of the Borough.
There shall be at least one member from each Class A and Class B;
these members may reside outside the municipality.
c. The Commission members and alternates shall be appointed by the
Mayor and shall serve for five year terms, except that of the first
members appointed, three members shall serve for three years, three
members shall serve for four years, three members shall serve for five
years. All members may, at the expiration of their terms be eligible for
appointment to five year terms. Vacancies shall be filled within 60 days
in the same manner in which the previous incumbent was appointed
and such vacancy appointment shall be only for the balance of the
unexpired term.
§ 27-6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-8
AO:354
d. The Commission shall adopt internal rules and procedures for the
transaction of its business, subject to the following:
1. The Commission shall elect from its members a President and a
Vice President.
2. A quorum for the transaction of all business shall be five members.
3. All Commission minutes and records are public records and all
Commission meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings
Act N.J.S.A. 10:4-7, et seq.
4. The Commission shall employ, designate or elect a secretary who
need not be a member of the Commission. The secretary shall keep
minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including
voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations
and decisions. All such materials shall be public record.
5. Commission meetings shall be scheduled a minimum of four times a
year or as often as required to fulfill its obligations to advise the
Planning/Zoning Board or Borough Council.
e. No Commission member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he or she has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest.
f. A member of the Borough of South Bound Brook Council shall be
designated as liaison between the Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission and the Council. No more than two members of the Council
may serve on the Commission at one time. If there are no Council
members on the Commission one shall be designated as liaison to the
Commission.
g. Duties. The Historic Preservation Advisory Commission shall be
responsible:
1. To review historical survey material and, if necessary, to update
said material at least every other year to incorporate any newly
acquired historical documentation and to reflect changes to a
resource's integrity or condition.
2. To recommend to the Planning/Zoning Board and the Borough
Council any additional sites to be designated as historic landmarks
in accordance with the procedures established in Section 27-9.
3. To conduct research on and, if necessary, to nominate any
additional significant resources to the State and National Register
of Historic Places. If the Borough is certified under the state's
Certified Local Government (CLG) Program, the Commission shall,
in accordance with the state's CLG guidelines, review and comment
on all State and National Register nominations for historic
resources within the Borough of South Bound Brook.
§ 27-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-8
AO:355
4. To advise the Planning/Zoning Board on how development and
zoning applications affect historic landmarks in accordance with
the procedure established in Section 27-11.
5. To review all proposed actions, including those involving building
permit applications, which affect the exterior architectural
appearance of historic landmarks or improvements within an
historic district. To advise the Planning/Zoning Board on the
approval of said requests in accordance with the procedure
established in Section 27-12.
6. To review all proposed actions and applications for actions
affecting the exterior architectural appearance of an historic
landmark or an improvement within an historic district and to make
recommendations to the Planning/Zoning Board in accordance with
the criteria outlined in Section 27-13.
7. To assist other public bodies in aiding the public in understanding
historic resources' significance and methods of preservation.
8. To advise the Borough Council on the relative merits of proposals
involving public lands to restore, preserve and protect historical
buildings, places and structures, including the preparation of long
range plan; therefor securing state, federal and other grants in aid
to assist therein and monitoring such projects once underway.
9. To secure the voluntary assistance of the public and (within the
limits of the budget established by the Borough Council for the
Historic Preservation Advisory Commission's operation) to retain
consultants and experts and incur expenses to assist the Historic
Preservation Advisory Commission in its work.
10. To cooperate with local, county, state, or national historic societies,
governmental bodies and organizations to maximize their
contributions to the intent and purposes of this chapter.
11. To request the Borough Council or its designated agent to seek, on
its own motion or otherwise, injunctive relief for violations of this
chapter or other actions contrary to the intent and purposes of this
chapter.
12. To advise and assist the Planning/Zoning Board during the
preparation and/or update of the Municipal Master Plan and the
historic preservation plan element of the Master Plan.
13. To prepare and distribute an historic guideline handbook to be
utilized for application reviews and foster appropriate
rehabilitation within the historic districts.
14. To consult with the South Bound Brook Historic and Preservation
Society on all matters pertaining to the protection of the Borough's
historic resources.
§ 27-8 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-8
AO:356
§ 27-9. DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS, HISTORIC
DISTRICTS. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-9]
15. To advise and assist property owners and other persons and groups
including neighborhood organizations who are interested in
historic preservation.
16. To undertake educational programs, including (I) the preparation
of publications aimed at stimulating interest in and sensitivity to
historic preservation and (2) the placing of historic markers on
structures.
17. To report at least annually to the Borough Council on the state of
historic preservation in the Borough and recommend measures to
improve same.
18. To collect and disseminate material on the importance of historic
preservation and techniques for achieving same.
19. To advise all municipal agencies regarding goals and techniques of
historic preservation.
20. To adopt and promulgate such regulations and procedures not
inconsistent with this chapter as are necessary and proper for the
effective and efficient performance of the duties herein assigned.
21. To perform any other lawful activities which shall be deemed
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
a. The Commission shall consider for landmark designation any buildings,
structures, objects, sites, and districts within the Borough which merit
landmark designation and protection, possessing integrity of location,
design, setting, materials, workmanship of association and being:
1. Of particular historic significance to the Borough of South Bound
Brook by reflecting or exemplifying the broad cultural, political,
economic, or social history of the nation, state, or community; or
2. Associated with historic personages important in national, state, or
local history; or
3. The site of an historic event which had a significant effect on the
development of the nation, state, or community; or
4. An embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period,
or method of architecture or engineering; or
5. Representative of the work of an important builder, designer, artist
or architect; or
6. Significant for containing elements of design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation; or
§ 27-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-9
AO:357
7. Able or likely to yield information important in prehistory or
history.
b. Based on its review or upon the recommendation of other municipal
bodies or of concerned citizens, the Commission may make a list of
additional landmarks recommended for designation. For each
landmark, there shall be a brief description of the landmark, of the
landmark's significance pursuant to criteria in Section 17-9a, a
description of the landmark's location and boundaries, and a map
siting. The Commission shall, by certified mail:
1. Notify each owner that his/her property is being considered for
historic landmark designation and the reasons therefor;
2. Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of such
designation, and advise him/her of their opportunities and rights to
challenge or contest such a designation;
3. Notify each owner of the public meeting to be held in accordance
with Section 27-9c.
c. The list of potential additional landmarks as well as the descriptions,
significance, location, boundaries, and map siting of each shall be
subject to review at a Commission public hearing. At least 10 days
before such a hearing, a preliminary list and map showing proposed
additional landmarks shall be published, together with notice of the
hearing, in an official newspaper of the municipality. At the hearing
interested persons shall be entitled to present their opinions,
suggestions and objections on the proposed recommendations for
landmark designation. The Commission shall then prepare a concise
report, including a list and a map of its recommendations for sites to be
designated as local landmarks. Copies of the report shall be delivered to
the Mayor, the Borough Council, the Planning/Zoning Board and the
Borough Clerk and a notice of action published by the Commission
Secretary in an official newspaper of the Borough. The published notice
shall state the Commission's recommendations and also that final
designation shall be made by the Borough Council at a public meeting
specified on a date not less than 15 nor more than 45 days from the date
of publication. The Borough Council shall then consider the designation
list and map and may approve, reject, or modify same by ordinance.
Once adopted, the designation list and map may be amended in the
same manner it was adopted. Upon adoption, the designation list and
map shall also be incorporated by reference into the municipal master
plan and zoning ordinance as required by State enabling legislation.
d. Copies of the designation list and official map as adopted shall be made
public and distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing development
applications and building permits. A certificate of designation shall be
served by certified and regular mail upon each owner included on the
list, and a true copy thereof shall be filed with the county clerk for
recording in the same manner as a certificate of lien upon real property.
§ 27-9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-10
AO:358
§ 27-10. ACTIONS REQUIRING REVIEW BY THE HISTORIC
PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMISSION. [Ord. No. 2000-07
§ 1A-10]
a. All permits and development applications involving all development
activities that affect an historic landmark or an improvement within an
historic district shall be reviewed by the Commission, except as set
forth in Section 27-10b. Such review shall be required for, but not
limited to, the following actions:
1. Demolition of an historic landmark or of an improvement within an
historic district.
2. Relocation of any improvement within an historic district or of any
historic landmark.
3. All changes in the exterior architectural appearance of any
improvement within an historic district or of any historic landmark
by addition, alteration or replacement.
4. Any new construction of an improvement in an historic district.
5. Site plans or subdivisions affecting an historic landmark or an
improvement within an historic district.
6. Zoning variances affecting an historic landmark or an improvement
within an historic district.
In making a recommendation on an application, the Commission shall be
aware of the importance of finding a way to meet the current needs of the
applicant. The Commission shall also recognize the importance of making
recommendations that will be reasonable for this applicant to carry out.
Before an applicant prepares his plans, he may bring a tentative proposal
to the Commission for informal review and comment.
b. Review by the Commission is not required:
1. When an historic landmark requires immediate emergency repair
to preserve the continued habitability of the landmark and/or
health and safety of its occupants or others. Emergency repairs
may be performed in accordance with Borough codes, without
necessity of first obtaining the Commission's review. Under such
circumstances, the repairs performed shall only be such that are
necessary to maintain the habitability oldie structure. A request for
the Commission's review shall be made as soon as possible and no
additional work shall be performed upon the structure until an
appropriate request for approval is made and obtained in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. All work
done under this section shall conform to the criteria set forth in
Section 27-13 and the guidelines for review of applications as
adopted by the Planning/Zoning Board in accordance with Section
27-3.
§ 27-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-10
AO:359
2. For changes to the interior of structures.
3. For ordinary repairs and maintenance which do not constitute a
change to the appearance of the structure. The following are the
only activities which do not require Commission review according
to this criteria:
(a) Repair of existing windows and doors, using the same material.
Installation of storm windows that are compatible with the
architectural period or design of the subject structure.
(b) Maintenance and repair of existing roof material, involving no
change in the design, scale, material or appearance of the
structure.
(c) Repair of existing roof structures, such as cupolas, dormers
and chimneys, using the same materials, which will not alter
the exterior architectural appearance of the structure.
(d) Replacement in kind of existing shingles, clapboards, or other
siding maintaining the architectural integrity of the structure.
(e) Maintenance and repair of existing shingles, clapboards or
other siding, using the same materials that are being repaired
or maintained.
(f) Exterior painting of existing structures.
(g) Repairs to existing signs, shutters, outdoor displays, fences,
hedges, street furniture, awnings, off-street driveway and
parking materials and sidewalks, using the same material for
those items noted above being repaired.
c. In the event that the Zoning Officer/Construction Official of the
Borough of South Bound Brook shall determine that a building permit
and/or development application involving any development activity that
would affect an historic landmark or an improvement within an historic
district is not needed, then the property owner and/or tenant of the
property on which changes, alterations or improvements are proposed
to be made shall make application directly to the Commission. Such
applications shall be made to the Commission regarding:
1. All changes in the exterior architectural appearance of any
improvement within an historic district or of any historic landmark
by addition, alteration or replacement.
The Commission shall hear such applications, employing its procedures
used for all other applications, and will render its findings in accordance
with those procedures. The findings of the Commission, in such cases, shall
be enforceable by the Zoning Officer/Construction Official.
§ 27-10 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-11
AO:360
§ 27-11. PROCEDURES FOR THE COMMISSION'S REVIEW OF
DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No. 2000-07
§ 1A-11]
§ 27-12. PROCEDURES FOR THE COMMISSION'S REVIEW OF
BUILDING PERMITS AND ALTERATIONS. [Ord. No. 2000-07
§ 1A-12]
a. For all applications presented to the Planning /Zoning Board which
affect an historic landmark or an improvement within an historic
district, the property owner shall submit an "Historic Landmark Project
Review Application" to the Planning/Zoning Board along with the
request for the Board's approval. Such an application shall pertain
solely to the proposed site review or zoning request. If building permits
are required, these actions will be reviewed separately by the
Commission in accordance with procedures outlined in Section 27-12.
b. The Planning/Zoning Board will forward to the Commission a complete
set of all application materials as well as the Historic Landmark Project
Review Application. The Commission shall be allowed at least 14 days
from the day it receives a complete application to prepare its
recommendation to the Planning/Zoning Board. Said recommendations
shall be in the form of a written report which shall be forwarded to the
Board.
c. The Commission's recommendation shall focus on how the proposed
undertaking would affect a landmark's historic or architectural
significance as outlined in Section 27-4. In considering the
Commission's recommendations, the Planning/Zoning Board shall be
guided by the review criteria established in Section 27-13.
a. Prior to undertaking any action affecting the exterior architectural
appearance of an historic landmark or an improvement within an
historic district, the property owner shall complete and submit to the
Commission's administrative officer an Historic Landmark Project
Review Application.
b. If the proposed undertaking requires a building permit, the
administrative officer shall notify the applicant that he or she must
submit an Historic Landmark Project Review Application to the Historic
Preservation Advisory Commission. This includes, but is not limited to,
permits for new construction, demolition, alterations, additions, or
replacements affecting the exterior architectural appearance of an
historic landmark or an improvement within an historic district.
c. The Commission's administrative officer shall review the application for
technical completeness. Any application found to be incomplete shall be
returned to the applicant within 10 days of receipt of the application.
d. When an application is found to be technically complete, the
administrative officer shall schedule the application to be reviewed at
§ 27-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-12
AO:361
the Commission's next regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant shall
be notified of the meeting date and shall be allowed an opportunity to
speak at the meeting.
e. The Commission, through its administrative officer, shall recommend to
the construction official either the approval or denial of the application
and shall explain in writing the reasons for their recommendation. The
Commission's recommendation shall focus on how the proposed
undertaking would affect a landmark's historic or architectural
significance as outlined in Section 27-4.
f. An application involving demolition or removal shall be referred by the
administrative officer to the Planning/Zoning Board. The Commission's
recommendation to the Planning/Zoning Board shall specifically include
whether postponement should be considered by the Planning/Zoning
Board in accordance with Section 27-14. If the Planning/Zoning Board
votes to postpone, the Commission shall undertake such investigation
and take such actions as the Planning/Zoning Board requests.
g. If the proposed undertaking involves a request for a building permit,
the administrative officer shall upon receipt of the Commission's
recommendation, but no later than 45 days from the date that a
complete application is received by the Commission, issue the
appropriate directive to the construction official. Failure to report
within the 45-day period shall be deemed to constitute a report in favor
of issuance of the permit and without the recommendation of conditions
to the permit. In considering the Commission's recommendations, the
construction official shall be guided by the review criteria established
in Section 27-13 and shall follow the recommendation of the
Commission unless for good cause his/her opinion shall differ. In such
case, the Zoning Officer/Construction Official shall state his/her
reasons in writing.
h. If the proposed undertaking will change the exterior architectural
appearance of any improvement within an historic district or of any
historic landmark by addition, alteration or replacement, but does not
require a building permit and/or Planning/Zoning Board review, the
property owner or designated representative shall complete and submit
to the Commission's administrative officer an Historic Landmark
Project Review Application.
i. The Commission's administrative officer shall review the application for
technical completeness. Any application found to be incomplete shall be
returned to the applicant within 10 days of receipt of application.
j. When an application is found to be technically complete, the
administrative officer shall schedule the application to be reviewed at
the Commission's next regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant shall
be notified of the meeting date and shall be allowed an opportunity to
speak at the meeting.
§ 27-12 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-12
AO:362
§ 27-13. CRITERIA FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No.
2000-07 § 1A-13; Ord. No. 2002-05]
In reviewing an application for its effect on an historic landmark or an
improvement within an historic district, the following criteria shall be used
by the historic Preservation Advisory Commission and the Planning/Zoning
Board and such criteria shall be consistent with the Secretary of Interior's
Standards of Rehabilitation. The criteria set forth in Section 27-13a relate
to all projects affecting an historic landmark or an improvement within an
historic district. The criteria set forth in Section 27-13b relate to specific
types of undertakings and shall be used in addition to the general criteria
set forth in Section 27-13a.
k. The Commission, through its administrative officer, shall recommend to
the Planning/Zoning Board either the approval or denial of the
application and shall explain in writing the reasons for its
recommendation. The Commission's recommendation shall focus on
how the proposed undertaking would affect a landmark's historic or
architectural significance as outlined in Section 27-4.
l. In considering the Commission's recommendations the Planning Zoning
Board shall be guided by the review criteria established in Section
27-13 and shall follow the recommendations of the Commission unless
for good cause its opinion shall differ. In such a case, the Planning/
Zoning Board shall state its reasons in writing.
a. In regard to all applications affecting an historic landmark or an
improvement within an historic district, the following factors shall be
considered:
1. The impact of the proposed change on the historic and
architectural significance of the landmark or the historic district.
2. The landmark's importance to the municipality and the extent to
which its historic or architectural interest would be adversely
affected to the detriment of the public interest.
3. The use of any structure involved.
4. The extent which the proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view of a landmark or structure within an historic district
from a public street.
5. If the application deals with a structure within an historic district,
the impact the proposed change would have on the district's
architectural or historic significance and the structure's visual
compatibility with the buildings, places and structures to which it
would be visually related in terms of the visual compatibility factors
set forth herein.
§ 27-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-13
AO:363
b. In regard to an application for new construction, alterations, additions,
or replacements affecting an historic landmark or an improvement
within an historic district, the following factors shall be considered:
1. Height. The height of the proposed buildings shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
2. Proportion of the Building's Front Facade. The relationship of the
width of the building to the height of the front elevations shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
3. Proportion of Openings Within the Facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
4. Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings on Streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
5. Rhythm of Solids to Voids on Facades Fronting on Public Places.
The relationship of solids to voids in such facades of a building shall
be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
c. In regard to an application for new construction, alterations, additions,
or replacements affecting an historic landmark or an improvement
within an historic district, the following factors shall be considered:
1. Relationship of Materials, Texture and Color. The relationship of
materials, texture, and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the building to which it is visually related.
2. Walls of Continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls, open
type fencing, evergreens, landscape masses, should form cohesive
walls of enclosure along a street to the extent necessary to
maintain visual compatibility of the main building with the
buildings and places which it is visually related.
3. Exterior Features. A structure's related exterior features such as
lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas
shall be compatible with the features of those structures to which it
is visually related and shall be appropriate for the historic period
for which the structure is significant. New signage shall also abide
by any supplemental historic design graphic standards that may be
developed by the Commission for the district.
§ 27-13 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-13
AO:364
It is not the intent of this chapter to discourage contemporary architectural
expression or to encourage new construction which emulates existing
buildings of historic or architectural interest or of a certain period or
architectural style; but rather to preserve the integrity and authenticity of
the historic preservation districts and to insure the compatibility of new
structures therein.
d. In regard to an application to demolish an historic landmark or an
improvement within an historic district, the following factors shall be
considered:
1. Its historic, architectural, cultural or scenic significance in relation
to the criteria established in Section 27-4.
2. If it is within an historic district, the significance of the structure in
relation to the historic character of the district and the probable
impact of its removal on the district.
3. Its potential use for those purposes currently permitted by the
zoning ordinance.
4. Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of alternatives
to the proposal.
5. Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical and architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
6. The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that its removal could be
reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
7. The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing the real estate values,
generating business, attracting tourists, attracting new residents,
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design, or
making the municipality an attractive and desirable place in which
to live.
8. If it is within an historic district, the probable impact of its removal
upon the ambience of the historic district.
e. In regard to an application to move any historic landmark or to move
any structure within an historic district, the following matters shall be
considered:
1. The historic loss to the site of original location and the historic
district as a whole.
2. The reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure at its
present site.
§ 27-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-13
AO:365
§ 27-14. EFFECT OF PROJECT APPROVAL, DENIAL, APPEAL. [Ord.
No. 2000-07 § 1A-14; Ord. No. 2002-05]
3. The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the protection of
interest and values referred to in this chapter.
4. Or the proposed new location is within a district, visual
compatibility factors as set forth in Section 27-13b.
5. The probability of significant damage to the landmark structure
itself.
6. When it is to be removed from the Borough of South Bound Brook,
the proximity of the proposed new location to the Borough,
including the accessibility to the residents of the Borough and
other citizens.
a. Approval by either the Zoning Officer/Construction Official or the
Planning Zoning Board in accordance with the procedures in Sections
27-11 and 27-12 shall be deemed to be final approval pursuant to this
chapter. Such approval shall neither range nor prevent the filing of any
collateral application or other proceeding required by any other
municipal ordinance to be made prior to undertaking the action
requested concerning the landmark or improvement in an historic
district.
b. Denial of approval for a development application or of a building permit
shall be deemed to bar the applicant from undertaking the activity
which would affect the landmark or improvement in an historic district
which was the subject of the denied application.
c. The Planning/Zoning Board, upon affirmative vote of a majority of its
full membership, may postpone demolition of a landmark for up to one
year. The Commission and the Planning/Zoning Board may utilize this
time period to consult with the Somerset County Cultural and Heritage
Commission, The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
or other similarly qualified organizations to ascertain how the town may
preserve the building and/or the premises. The Commission shall be
empowered to assist the owner in developing plans to preserve the
structure when moving or demolition thereof would be a great loss to
the Borough. When an applicant wishes to demolish a landmark, a
building or a structure on a landmark site or a building or structure in
an historic district, the Commission shall negotiate with the applicant to
see if an alternative to demolition can be found. No municipal official
shall issue a demolition permit for a landmark without review from the
Commission and Planning/Zoning Board approval. If it determines to
postpone demolition, the Planning/Zoning Board may request that the
Borough Council initiate such actions as may lead to the preservation of
the premises within the one year hiatus.
§ 27-13 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-14
AO:366
In its review of an application to demolish a site, the Commission may
require the applicant to prepare a financial analysis which may include
any or all of the following:
1. Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, and party from
whom purchased, including a description of the relationship,
whether business or familial, if any, between the owner and the
person from whom the property was purchased;
2. Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to
the most recent assessment;
3. For depreciable properties, a pro forma financial statement
prepared by an accountant or broker of record;
4. All appraisals obtained by the owner in connection with his/her
purchase or financing of the property, or during his/her ownership
of the property,
5. Bona fide offer of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any;
6. Any consideration by the owner as to viable, adaptive uses for the
property.
The Commission shall study whether the site or property in the historic
district can be put to reasonable beneficial use, under existing zoning,
without the approval of the demolition application.
Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, the Planning/Zoning Board
may require the applicant to provide documentation of the resource
proposed for demolition. Such documentation may include photographs,
floor plans, measured drawings, archeological survey, and any other
comparable form of documentation stipulated by the Commission.
During the demolition, either members of the Commission or the Somerset
County Cultural and Heritage Commission shall be present to save,
protect, and/or receive valuable parts of the building. There shall be an
ability on the part of the Commission to conduct a dig at the site, if
necessary. The site shall be properly restored after demolition, to include
grading and landscaping.
d. When the Commission determines that an application before it be
denied or its approval made subject to specific condition; which are
found to be unacceptable to the applicant, then an appeal therefrom
shall lie to the Planning/Zoning Board of Adjustment. Should, as a result
of the subsequent decision by the Planning/Zoning Board, the applicant
wish to seek further redress, then such appeal shall be filed for review
directly to any court of competent jurisdiction according to law and
pursuant to the laws of the court.
e. The granting or denial of approval for a building permit by the
construction official may be appealed to the Planning/Zoning Board in
§ 27-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-14
AO:367
§ 27-15. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-15]
the same manner as if the appeal were taken pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72 from any action by the administrative officer.
a. Any person who shall undertake an activity which would cause a change
in the exterior architectural appearance of any improvement within an
historic district or of any historic landmark by addition, alteration or
replacement without obtaining the review of the Historic Preservation
Advisory Commission, shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
b. Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer/Construction Official
shall personally serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is
occurring a notice describing the violation in detail and giving the
owner 10 days to abate the violation by restoring the landmark or
improvement to the condition it was in prior to the violation occurring.
If the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality with
the notice, a copy shall be posted on the site and a copy sent to the
owner at his last known address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
c. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 days of service or
posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer/Construction
official shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint, returnable in
the municipal court, charging violation of this chapter and specifying
the wrongful conduct of the violator. Each separate day the violation
exists shall be deemed to be a new and separate violation of this
chapter.
d. The penalty for violation shall be as follows:
1. For each day up to 10 days - Not more than $100.00 per day.
2. For each day 11 days to 25 days - Not more than $150.00 per day.
3. For each day beyond 25 days - Not more than $200.00 per day.
e. If any person shall undertake an activity which would cause a change in
the exterior architectural appearance of any improvement within an
historic district or of any historic landmark by addition, alteration or
replacement without first having obtained approval of the Historic
Preservation Advisory Commission, he/she shall be required to
immediately stop the activity, apply for approval, and take any
necessary measures to preserve the landmarks affected pending a
decision. If the project is denied, he/she shall immediately restore the
landmark its pre-activity status. The Zoning Officer/Construction
Official is hereby authorized to seek injunctive relief regarding a stop
action on restoration in the Superior Court, Chancery Division, not less
than 10 days after the delivery of notice pursuant to Section 27-15b
hereof. Such injunctive relief shall be in addition to the penalties
authorized under 27-15d.
§ 27-14 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 27-15
AO:368
§ 27-16. LOCAL HISTORIAN. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-16]
§ 27-17. GENERAL. [Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1A-17]
f. In the event that any action which would permanently affect an historic
landmark or historic district, or a demolition to remove the landmark is
about to occur without approval having been issued, the Zoning Officer/
Construction Official is empowered to apply to the Superior Court of
New Jersey for injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent such actions.
g. The Historic Preservation Advisory Commission secretary, in the
absence of the Zoning Officer/Construction Official or at such times as
may be permitted by law or as directed by the Mayor, shall perform all
of the duties of the Zoning Officer/Construction Official that were
granted to said officer by this chapter.
a. Pursuant to PI,. 1979, c.59 (40:10A-1 et seq.), there is hereby
established the position of Local Historian in the Borough of South
Bound Brook, whose term shall be for one (I) year.
b. The Local Historian shall have the following powers and
responsibilities:
1. To carry out an historical program, including but not restricted to
collecting, preserving and making available materials relating to
the history of the Borough of South Bound Brook. The historian
shall store such materials in such manner as to ensure their
preservation and shall notify the Governing Body of any materials
which should be acquired for preservation. Upon leaving the
position, the Local Historian shall turn over all materials and
records and reports into the possession of the successor appointed
or to the Governing Body until a successor shall be appointed;
2. To make an annual report to the Governing Body, stating all the
work performed and accomplished during that year. The Local
Historian shall transmit a copy of such report to the New Jersey
Historical Commission;
3. May research, write and cause to have published a municipal
history and may recommend appropriate historical materials for
publication;
4. May assist the Historical Preservation Advisory Commission, as
well as advise the Governing Body, concerning the acquisition,
administration and use and disposition of any landmark or historic
site, including such places in his/her jurisdiction included on the
State and National or Local Registrar of Historical Places;
5. Shall assist in projects of commemoration, including the erection of
monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
c. The Local Historian shall serve without compensation.
§ 27-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-17
AO:369
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 29
TEMPORARY SIGNS
§ 29-1. TEMPORARY SIGNS.
§ 29-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #16-98]
§ 29-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. #16-98]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TEMPORARY SIGN — Shall mean a sign, poster, advertisement, bill, placard
or banner displayed for the purpose of relaying information expressing an
opinion or publicizing an event which is rendered moot or otherwise loses
its information quality by the passing of an event which is the subject
matter of such sign, poster, advertisement, bill or placard. Said event shall
include by way of description but not limitation general and special political
elections, not to exceed 50 square feet per establishment.
§ 29-1.3. Posting and Removal; Violations and Penalties. [Ord.
#16-98]
No temporary signs shall be affixed by tacking, pasting or otherwise
mounting upon utility poles, light standards, trees or the like unless in
accordance with the following regulations:
a. No duties or powers of the Historic Preservation Advisory Commission
shall supersede or infringe on the powers of other Borough boards and
committees.
a. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a system of regulation for
the posting of signs temporary in nature, utilized throughout the
Borough of South Bound Brook by requiring that such signs and posters
and the like be removed within a specific period of time following the
event which is the subject matter of such sign or poster.
b. Such regulation is intended to protect the public interest by preventing
the unwanted accumulation of unsightly signs or posters no longer
serving an informational purpose due to the passing of the stated event
and tending to degrade the aesthetic environment and litter public and
private property.
a. Temporary signs located in the public right-of-way shall not be across,
over or extending on to the paved portion of any public roadway.
§ 27-17 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 29-1.3
AO:370
§ 29-1.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #16-98]
The Municipal Zoning Officer shall have the responsibility of regulating and
enforcing this section, including the issuance of complaints for violations
thereof to be adjudicated in the Municipal Court of the Borough of South
Bound Brook.
Chapter 30
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 30-1. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 30-1.1. Establishment. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 1; Ord. #1-96 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(c), the Borough of South Bound Brook
hereby creates a nine member Planning Board which Planning Board shall
have the right to exercise, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions, all of the powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Class I. The Mayor.
Class II. One of the officials of the Borough other than a member of the
Borough Council to be appointed by the Mayor; provided that if there is an
Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental Commission
who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if there is both
a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education among the Class IV members.
Class III. A member of the Borough Council to be appointed by it.
Temporary signs shall not be installed in such a manner as to interfere
with or obstruct access or vision along any such right-of-way.
Permission must be granted for signs hung across the street.
b. Each temporary sign must be clearly marked with the name of the
person or organization responsible for the removal of such signs.
c. It shall be unlawful to allow temporary signs to remain posted for a
period of more than seven days after the event or election which is the
subject matter of such sign. Signs may be displayed for a total number
of days, not to exceed 30 days.
d. It shall be the responsibility of the person whose name appears on such
temporary sign to remove such within the aforestated period.
e. Upon violation of any portion of this section, the person responsible for
the removal of such signs shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10
nor more than $50 per sign. Each violation shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 29-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-1.1
AO:371
Class IV. Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except
that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A.1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board member
unless there be among the Class IV members of the Planning Board both
a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board
of Education, in which case the member of the Environmental Commission
shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
§ 30-1.1A. Powers of Planning Board as Joint Board. [Ord. #1-96,
§§ 2-5]
§ 30-1.2. Terms. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 2]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his official
tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall
be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or a Class
IV member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall
be for three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter
shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration
of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four years after
a. The Class I and Class III members of said Planning Board shall not
participate in consideration of applications for the Board which involve
relief pursuant to subsection D of section 57 of Public Law 1975,
Chapter 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70).
b. All powers and responsibilities previously established and given to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment by ordinance and statute are hereby
specifically transferred to the newly created Planning Board.
c. The previously established Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby
terminated and abolished as of the effective date of this ordinance.15
d. Any pending applications before the Zoning Board of Adjustment as of
the effective date of this ordinance shall be transferred as of that date
to the Planning Board.
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance, Ordinance No. 1-96 was adopted February 13, 1996.
§ 30-1.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 30-1.2
AO:372
their appointment as determined by resolution of the Borough Council,
provided however that no term of any member shall exceed four years and
further provided that nothing herein shall affect the term of any present
member of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter all Class
IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years except as otherwise
herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made.
§ 30-1.3. Vacancies. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 3]
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 30-1.4. Organization of Board. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 4]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 30-1.5. Planning Board Attorney. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 5]
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 30-1.6. Experts and Staff. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 6]
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not
however exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Borough Council.
§ 30-1.7. Powers and Duties Generally. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 7]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A.1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers and
duties:
a. To make and adopt and amend a Master Plan for the physical
development of the municipality including any areas outside its
boundaries, which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to
the planning of the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of Chapter 31, Land Development
Regulations, and in accordance with the provisions of that chapter, and
§ 30-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-1.7
AO:373
§ 30-1.8. Time. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 8]
the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291, P.L. 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
c. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
d. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulations.
e. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
f. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto
and recommend same to the Borough Council.
g. To consider and make report to the Borough Council within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(a), and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
Council, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b).
h. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to subsection 57c of Chapter 291, P.L. 1975,
from lot area, lot dimensional set-back and yard requirements
provided that such relief from lot area requirements shall not be
granted for more than one lot.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to the
request for a variance.
i. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Borough Council for the aid and assistance of the
Council or other agencies or officers.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of the "Map Filing Law," or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any
such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board before it will be accepted for filing by the County
§ 30-1.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 30-1.8
AO:374
§ 30-1.9. Applications; Procedure for Filing. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I,
§ 9; Ord. 2/8/77, Art. I, § 9]
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of C.291, P.L. 1975 shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Planning Board. Applicant shall file at least 14 days before
the date of the monthly meeting of the Board four copies of a sketch plat;
four copies of applications for minor subdivision approval; four copies of
application for major subdivision approval; or four copies of an application
for site plan review, conditional use approval or planned development. At
the time of filing the application but in no event less than 10 days prior to
the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps
or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any
Recording Officer. Minor subdivision shall mean a subdivision of land
that does not involve 1. The creation of more than three lots fronting
on an existing street; 2. Plan development; 3. Any new street; or 4.
Extension of any off-tract improvement.
b. Preliminary Approval Major Subdivisions. Upon submissions of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
c. Ancillary Powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in subsection 30-1.7h, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 95 days after submission by the
developer of a complete application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application
and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
d. Final Approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have
been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer.
The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
§ 30-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-1.9
AO:375
rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of
the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 30-1.10. Advisory Committee. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 10; Ord. No.
2005-03 § 4]
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person shall have no power to vote or take other action required of the
Board. Such person shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 30-1.11. Environmental Commission. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I, § 1]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 30-2. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 30-2.1. through § 30-2.4. (Reserved)16
§ 30-2.5. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. II, § 5]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 30-2.6. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. 12/14/76,
Art. II, § 6]
a. Where an Advisory Committee on Community Character has been
appointed, site plan and zoning compliance matters may be referred to
the Committee by the Planning Board or Zoning Officer. Certification of
compliance by the Committee may serve in lieu of formal findings or
other determination upon ratification by the approving authority in the
case of site plan review or zoning compliance.
16.Editor's Note: Former subsections 30-2.1 through 30-2.4 pertaining to the establishment,
composition and the staff of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance 12/14/76, Art. II §§ 1-4, was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 1-96. Pursuant to Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1-96, all powers and
responsibilities previously established and given to the Zoning Board of Adjustment are
specifically transferred to the Planning Board.
§ 30-1.9 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 30-2.6
AO:376
§ 30-2.7. Appeals and Applications. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. II, § 7]
a. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
b. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority, in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board, to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter, or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof, and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction, applicable to legislative
enactments.
c. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein, and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by Statute, the
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in Chapter
291, P.L. 1975, or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided,
and it shall furnish to any person requesting the same a copy of its rules
and information as to how appeals or applications may properly be filed
with the Board for its decision thereon.
a. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party. Each appeal shall be taken within the 65 days prescribed by the
Statute by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal was taken, together with three copies of the notice with the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. The notice of appeal shall specify
the grounds for the approval. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
b. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer, shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Three
copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or
application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for
hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps, or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of
the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of
the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
c. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action, in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
§ 30-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2.7
AO:377
§ 30-2.8. Power to Reverse or Modify Decisions. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art.
II, § 8]
In exercising the above mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of C.291, P.L. 1975 or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from,
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 30-2.9. Expiration of Variance. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. II, § 9]
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or
structures, or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by the variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within 12 months
from the date of publication of the notice of judgment or determination of
the Board of Adjustment; and the structure, building or alteration, shall be
completed within 24 months from the date of publication of the notice of
judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment, except however, that
the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from
the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment
to the governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding. For good cause,
the Board of Adjustment may, upon application in writing stating the
reasons therefor, extend either the 12 months or the 24 months.
Should the applicant fail to obtain the necessary permit or permits within
such 12 month period, or having obtained the same should he fail to
commence work thereunder within such 12 month period, it shall be
conclusively presumed that the applicant has waived, withdrawn and
abandoned his application, and all permissions, variances and permits shall
be deemed automatically rescinded by the Board of Adjustment.
Should the applicant commence construction or alteration within the 12
month period and fail to complete such construction or alteration within
the 24 month period, the Board of Adjustment may upon 10 days notice
in writing to the applicant rescind or revoke the granted variance or the
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after
the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
§ 30-2.7 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 30-2.9
AO:378
issuance of the permit or permits, or other action authorized, if the Board
of Adjustment finds that no good cause appears for the failure to complete
within such 24 month period and if the Board of Adjustment further finds
that conditions have so altered or changed the interval sense the granting
of the variance, permit or action, that revocation or rescission of the action
is justified.
§ 30-2.10. Powers Granted by Law. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. II, § 10]
The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law to:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement
of the Zoning Chapter.
b. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the map or Zoning
Chapter, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which such
Board is authorized by the Zoning Chapter to pass.
c. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions, or by reason of other extraordinary and exceptional
situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of
any regulation in the Zoning Chapter would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship
upon the owner of such property, to grant upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application, so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, provided,
however, that no variance shall be granted under the paragraph to
allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such structure or
use, and further provided that the proposed development does not
require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall
review a request for a variance pursuant to the subsection 47a of the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, Chapter 291, P.L. 1975.
d. Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the full
authorized membership of the Board [i.e., five votes].
No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of
this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning Chapter.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
§ 30-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2.11
AO:379
§ 30-2.11. Additional Powers. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. II, § 11]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall in addition to the powers specified in
subsection 30-2.10 have power given by law to:
§ 30-2.12. Time for Decisions. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. II, § 12]
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days
after the date:
§ 30-3. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING
BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 30-3.1. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 1]
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 30-3.2. Meetings. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 2]
a. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood
control basin or public area reserved on the official map.
b. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board subdivision or site plan
approval pursuant to Article 6 of Chapter 291, P.L. 1975 or conditional use
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the Board is reviewing an
application for approval of a use variance pursuant to subsection 14-2.10d of
this chapter.
a. An appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative office; or
b. The submission of a complete application for development to the Board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
Failure of the Board to render a decision within such 120 day period or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a
decision favorable to the applicant.
a. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack of
applications for development to process.
§ 30-2.11 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 30-3.2
AO:380
§ 30-3.3. Minutes. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 3]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter by
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 30-3.4. Fees. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 4]
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their administrative
staffs which is not otherwise provided by ordinance may be provided for and
adopted as part of the rules of the Board and copies of the rules or of the
separate fee schedule shall be available to the public. Existing fee schedules
are hereby saved from repeal, and are incorporated herein as if set forth at
length.
§ 30-3.5. Hearings. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 5]
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of C.291, P.L. 1975.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, Chapter 231, P.L. 1975.
a. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the "County and Municipal Investigations Law"
C.38, P.L. 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 30-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3.5
AO:381
§ 30-3.6. Notice Requirements for Hearing. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III,
§ 6]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the
municipal agency in question, the application shall give notice thereof as
follows:
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
e. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
a. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the Borough at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
b. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within two hundred (200')
feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing
and whether located within or without the municipality in which
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by:
1. Serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the current tax
duplicate or his agent in charge of the property; or
2. Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the current tax duplicate. A return receipt is
not required.
Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a
vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept on behalf of the corporation.
c. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within two hundred (200') feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the
notice required to be given pursuant to subsection 30-3.6b to the
owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located within
two hundred (200') feet of the subject premises.
§ 30-3.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 30-3.6
AO:382
§ 30-3.7. List of Property Owners Furnished. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III,
§ 7; Ord. 2/8/77, § 7]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12e, the Administrative Officer
shall within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt
of payment of a fee of $10 make and certify a list from the current tax
duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to subsection 30-3.6b of this chapter.
§ 30-3.8. Decisions. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 8]
d. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing County road or proposed road shown or
the official County map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
County land or situate within two hundred (200') feet of a municipal
boundary.
e. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of
C.291, P.L. 1975.
g. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an
affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
h. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
i. Form of Notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
§ 30-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3.8
AO:383
§ 30-3.9. Publication of Decision. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 9]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Borough. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Planning Board of Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, without separate charge to the applicant. The notice shall be sent
to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any
decision.
§ 30-3.10. Payment of Taxes. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III, § 10]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that
taxes or assessments are delinquent on the property, any approvals or
other relief granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the
prompt payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate
provision for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will
be adequately protected.
§ 30-4. APPEALS.
§ 30-4.1. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. 12/14/76,
Art. IV, § 1]
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Chapter or
official map. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days by filing a notice of
appeal in the manner set forth in subsection 30-2.7a and in accordance with
the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.
§ 30-5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 30-5.1. Definitions of Terms. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. V, § 1]
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in Chapter 291,
P.L. 1975, such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
b. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the Borough Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
§ 30-3.8 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 30-5.1
AO:384
definition of such term found in the statute, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 30-5.2. Short Title. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. V, § 5]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of South Bound Brook."
§ 30-5.3. Copy to Be Filed with County Planning Board. [Ord. 12/14/
76, Art. V, § 6]
A copy of these provisions is filed with the County Planning Board as
required by law. The Clerk shall file with the County Planning Board copies
of all other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the
Subdivision, Zoning and Site Plan Review ordinances.
Chapter 31
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 31-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. I]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Land Development
Regulations" of the Borough of South Bound Brook, Somerset County, New
Jersey.
§ 31-2. PURPOSE. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. II]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations, and
standards to guide land subdivisions and site plan review in the Borough in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291, Laws of New
Jersey 1975.
§ 31-3. PROOF OF PAYMENT OF TAXES OR ASSESSMENTS FOR
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. III]
Any applicant for local municipal approval under this chapter shall submit,
in writing, proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are
due or delinquent on the property for which any subdivision, site plan, or
planned development is made prior to the application being heard by the
approving authority.
§ 31-4. CONTRIBUTION FOR OFF-TRACT WATER, SEWER,
DRAINAGE, AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. IV]
The approving authority may require a developer, as a condition for
approval of a subdivision or site plan, to pay his pro-rata share of the cost
of providing only reasonable and necessary street improvements and water,
sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor, located outside
the property limits of the subdivision or development that are necessitated
§ 30-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-4
AO:385
or required by construction or improvements within such subdivision or
development. The approving authority shall base its determinations
regarding proportionate or pro-rata shares to be paid by an owner or
developer on the circulation and comprehensive utility service plans
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, subsections 19b(4) and 19b(5).
Any such determination shall be made after a full hearing and after
consideration of time and cost factors as well as the affect of the proposed
improvements on adjoining properties.
§ 31-5. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. V]
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, all definitions are those enumerated in the Municipal
Land Use Law, Ch. 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975.
§ 31-6. SIMULTANEOUS REVIEW. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. VI; Ord. 2/8/
77, § 1]
The Planning Board is designated as the "Approving Authority" and the
Construction Official is hereby designated as the "Administrative Officer"
for the purposes of this chapter. The Planning Board is designated as the
"Approving Authority" under this chapter. The approving authority shall
have the power to review and approve or deny conditional uses or site plans
simultaneously with a review for subdivision approval without the developer
being required to make further application or the approving authority being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the approving authority, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by the developer in conjunction with a site plan or subdivision,
notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for
such conditional use.
§ 31-7. INFORMAL DISCUSSION. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. VII]
a. An informal submission is optional. Any person may appear at a regular
meeting of the approving authority for informal discussion with
reference to an informally prepared plat of sufficient accuracy to be
used for purpose of discussion. The purpose of such a discussion will be
to review overall development concepts in order to assist the applicant
in the preparation of subsequent plans. No decision will be made and no
formal action taken on an informal discussion.
b. All sketch plats containing proposals and/or designs for drainage,
streets and development layouts are for discussion and classification.
The data included on an informal submission of a site plan shall include
sufficient basic data to enable the approving authority and the applicant
to comment upon design concepts such as building location, ingress
and egress, parking, major natural features that will have to be
recognized or may influence certain design criteria, and the applicant's
basic intent for water, sewerage, and storm drainage facilities. Informal
§ 31-4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-7
AO:386
§ 31-8. PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION OF SKETCH PLAT. [Ord. 12/
14/76, Art. VIII]
If an informal discussion has not been held on a proposal as outlined above,
a sketch plat submission is recommended for a major site plan or major
subdivision. Whether or not an informal discussion was held on a minor site
plan, minor subdivision or planned development a sketch plat is required in
order to record in the public record the planned classification and to take
final action on the application.
§ 31-8.1. Filing Procedure. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. VIII; Ord. 2/8/77,
§ 1]
The developer shall file with the administrative officer at least two weeks
prior to the meeting of the approving authority, 12 black and white copies
of the sketch plat, four completed copies of the application form, two
completed copies of the sketch plat check list, two completed copies of
the County Planning Board application form, five copies of covenants, deed
restrictions and easements, three copies of deeds for any lands offered to
the Borough, and the applicable fee.
§ 31-8.2. Action by the Approving Authority. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art.
VIII]
submissions are sketches to scale of possible plan(s) for the
development of an area. They are not binding on the Borough or upon
the developer and do not necessitate accurate engineered drawings.
a. The approving authority shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the submission
as a complete application no later than its first regular meeting
following the two week review period. If incomplete, the material shall
be returned to the developer for a resubmission at least two weeks
prior to a subsequent meeting. If complete, the approving authority
shall classify the application as a minor or major development and shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 45
days of the date of submission to the administrative officer or such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. The decision shall
be in writing and shall be sent to the applicant and published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the community.
b. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required but not yet received, the Borough approving authority
in taking action shall grant conditional approval pending County
approval.
c. Before any approved sketch plat of a major subdivision or site plan or
any approved final plat of a minor subdivision or site plan is returned to
the developer, the administrative officer shall have sufficient signed
copies of the plat (and deed if a deed is also prepared) to forward a copy
§ 31-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-8.2
AO:387
to each of the following retaining one copy for the approving authority's
file:
1. Borough Engineer.
2. Construction Official.
3. Tax Assessor.
4. County Planning Board.
5. Borough Clerk.
6. Borough Board of Health.
d. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
Borough approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with
such approval, including any conditions imposed by the approving
authority, and in conformity with the provisions of the "Map Filing Law,"
P.L. 1960, C.141 (46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the County
Recording Officer, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor.
Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority (or the Vice
Chairman or Assistant Secretary in their absence, respectively). In
reviewing the application for development for a proposed minor
subdivision the approving authority may accept a plat not in conformity
with the "Map Filing Act," P.L. 1960, C.141 (46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided
that if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided
herein by plat rather than deed such plat shall conform with the
provisions of the Act.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the County Recording Officer
shall notify the approving authority of the filing of any plat within seven
days of the filing.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
date of minor subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor
subdivision shall have been duly recorded.
e. When the approving authority determines that any proposed
development may create, either directly or indirectly, an adverse effect
on either the remainder of the property being developed or nearby
property, the approving authority may require the developer to revise
the plat. Where the remaining portion of the original tract is of
sufficient size to be developed or subdivided further, the developer may
be required to submit a sketch plat of the entire remaining portion of
the tract or indicate to submit a sketch plat of the entire remaining
portion of the tract to indicate a feasible plan whereby the design of the
proposed development together with subsequent subdivisions or
§ 31-8.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-8.2
AO:388
§ 31-9. SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art.
IX]
Preliminary plats are required for all major site plans and major
subdivisions.
§ 31-9.1. Filing Procedure. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. IX, § 1]
Any developer shall submit to the administrative officer at least two weeks
prior to the meeting of the approving authority, 16 black on white copies
of the preliminary plat; four completed copies of the application form for
preliminary approval; two completed copies of the preliminary plat check
list; two completed copies of the County Planning Board application form;
five copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions and easements,
applying to the land being developed; and the application fee.
§ 31-9.2. Action by the Approving Authority. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. IX,
§ 2]
development will not create, impose, aggravate, or lead to any such
adverse effect(s).
f. If classified as a major development and either approved or approved
with conditions as a major development or approved as a minor
development, a notation to that effect including the date of the
approving authority's action shall be made on all copies of the plat and
shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the approving
authority (or the Vice Chairman or Assistant Secretary in their absence,
respectively), except that the minor plat shall not be signed until all
conditions are incorporated on the plat. All conditions on minor
developments shall be complied with within 90 days of the meeting at
which conditional approval was granted, otherwise the conditional
approval shall lapse. If classified as a major development, sketch plat
modifications are not required. Any conditions shall be incorporated on
the preliminary plat.
a. The approving authority shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the submission
as a complete application. If rejected, the applicant shall be notified
within 45 days of submission. If accepted as an application, a public
hearing date shall be set and notice given as required State Law (Ch.
291, Laws of New Jersey 1975).
b. Upon submission of a plat and before approval of a plat, the
administrative officer shall submit one copy of the plat and supporting
data to the County Planning Board, Township Engineer, Environmental
Commission, and any other agency or person as directed by the
approving authority for their review and action. Each shall have 30 days
from receipt of the plat to report to the approving authority. In the event
of disapproval, such report shall state the reasons therefor. If any
agency or person fails to report to the approving authority within the 30
§ 31-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-9.2
AO:389
day period, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved by them.
Upon mutual agreement between the County Planning Board and the
approving authority, with approval of the applicant, the 30 day period
for a County Planning Board report may be extended for an additional
30 days and any extension shall so extend the time within which the
approving authority is required to act.
c. If submission is accepted as a subdivision, the approving authority shall
grant or deny preliminary approval of a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots
within 45 days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the
approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may
be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the approving authority
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the
subdivision.
d. If the submission is accepted as a site plan, the approving authority
shall grant or deny preliminary site plan approval within the following
time periods unless some further time has been consented to by the
developer.
1. A site plan for 10 acres of land or less: within 45 days of the date of
submission.
2. A site plan of more than 10 acres of land: within 95 days of the date
of submission.
Before any action is taken on any preliminary site plan containing more
than 10 acres or for a site plan containing a flood hazard area, the
approving authority shall conduct a public hearing as established in this
chapter. Action may be taken on a preliminary site plan for 10 acres of
land or less without a public hearing unless, in the opinion of the approving
authority, the proposed use, proposed intensity of development, location of
the tract, traffic conditions, or environmental concerns for a property of 10
acres or less are of sufficient concern that the approving authority desires
to receive the public's comments. Where a public hearing is scheduled for
a site plan, no action shall be taken until completion of the public hearing
and the scheduling and notifications for the hearing shall be in accordance
with this chapter.
e. If the approving authority required any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements in either a site plan or subdivision as proposed
by the developer and that plan has been the subject of a hearing, an
amended application for development shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for
development. The approving authority shall, if the proposed
development complies with this chapter, grant preliminary approval.
§ 31-9.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-9.2
AO:390
§ 31-10. SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT.
§ 31-10.1. Filing Procedures. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. X, § 1]
f. The approving authority may approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions the application. Such action shall not take place until after
any required public hearing has been conducted. The decision shall be
in writing and shall be sent to the applicant and published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. If the approving
authority grants preliminary approval, its Chairman and Secretary and
Borough Engineer shall sign each page of the plat indicating the
approval. If the plat is conditionally approved, it shall not be signed
until all conditions are complied with. If all conditions are not complied
with within 180 days from the date of the meeting at which a plat was
conditionally approved, the conditional approval shall lapse.
1. The general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements, layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and off-tract improvements,
any requirements peculiar to site plan approval, except that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Borough from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as related to public health and safety.
2. The applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat; and
3. The applicant may apply for and the approving authority may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
4. In the case of a development for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights referred to in paragraphs
a, b and c above for such period of time, longer than three years, as
shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable
taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval;
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section(s) awaiting final approval;
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if
the design standards have been revised, such revised
standards may govern.
§ 31-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-10.1
AO:391
§ 31-10.2. Action by the Approving Authority. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. X,
§ 2]
a. The developer shall file with the administrative officer at least two
weeks prior to the meeting of the approving authority one mylar, two
cloth and 10 black on white paper prints of the plat and four completed
copies of the application form for final approval, four completed copies
of the final plat check list, two completed copies of the County Planning
Board application form, the performance guarantee including off-tract
improvements, if any, any maintenance guarantees, and the applicable
fee.
b. Letters directed to the Chairman of the approving authority and signed
by a responsible officer of the water company, sewer authority and gas,
telephone and electric utility that has jurisdiction in the area approving
each proposed utility installation design and stating who will construct
the facility.
c. An indication by the applicant as to whether all taxes are paid to date on
the property.
d. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Borough
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities and other
improvements (both in the development and off tract improvements) in
exact location and elevation, that he has examined the drainage
erosion, storm water control, and excavation plans and found that the
interests of the Borough and of nearby properties are fully protected
and identifying those portions of any improvements already installed
and that the developer has either:
1. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and the preliminary plat approval with a maintenance
guarantee accompanying the final plat; or
2. Posted a performance guarantee in accordance with this chapter
and the preliminary plat approval for all partially completed
improvements or improvements not yet initiated.
a. The approving authority shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications, and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established by ordinance for final
approval, the conditions of preliminary approval, and in the case of a
major subdivision, the standards prescribed by the "Map Filing Law"
46:23-9.9 et seq., provided that in the case of a planned development
the approving authority may permit minimal deviations from the
conditions beyond the control of the developer since the date of
preliminary approval without the developer being required to submit
another application for development for preliminary approval.
b. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer, or
§ 31-10.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-10.2
AO:392
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. An
approved final plat shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of
the approving authority (or the Vice Chairman or Assistant Secretary
in their absence, respectively). Failure of the approving authority to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the approving
authority to act shall be issued on request of the application, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
c. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6, the Borough approving
authority shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt
of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.
d. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall
not be changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval.
If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the approving authority may extend such period of protection
for extensions of one year, but not to exceed three extensions. Upon
granting of final approval, the rights conferred upon the applicant by
the granting of preliminary approval shall be terminated upon final
approval.
e. In the case of a subdivision or site plan of 150 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights referred to in the above
paragraph d for such period of time, longer than two years as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable taking into
consideration:
1. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval;
2. Economic conditions; and
3. The comprehensiveness of the development.
The developer may apply for thereafter, and the approving
authority may thereafter grant an extension of final approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
approving authority to be reasonable taking into consideration:
4. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval;
5. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed;
§ 31-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-10.2
AO:393
§ 31-11. PLAT DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 31-11.1. Plat Conformity. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XI, § 1]
No development application shall be accepted unless submitted in plat form
and no plat shall be accepted for consideration unless it conforms to the
following requirements as to form, content and accompanying information,
and complies with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-1 et seq. (Map Filing
Law), as amended. All plats shall be drawn by a land surveyor as required
by law, licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, and shall bear the
signature, seal, license number and address of the land surveyor except that
plats submitted under the "Informal Discussion" provisions of Section 31-7
6. Economic conditions; and
7. The comprehensiveness of the development.
f. Upon final approval, the applicant shall provide:
1. Three sets of final plans and one signed linen and one mylar of the
final plan to the Borough Engineer.
2. One mylar and opaque linen copies to the County Clerk per law.
3. One linen to the Borough Clerk.
4. One signed paper print to the Planning Board, Building Inspector,
Tax Assessor, County Planning Board and such other Borough,
County, or State officials or other individuals as directed by the
Board.
5. One set of final plans to the approving authority.
g. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. The
approving authority may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by
the County Recording Officer until it has been approved by the
approving authority as indicated on the instrument by the signature of
the Chairman and Secretary of the Approving Authority or a certificate
has been issued as to the failure of the approving authority to act within
the required time. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary shall
not be affixed until the developer has posted the required guarantees. If
the County Recording Officer records any plat without such approval,
such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the
Borough, the plat shall be expunged from the official records. It shall be
the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the approving
authority in writing within seven days of the filing of any plat,
identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing, and official
number.
§ 31-10.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-11.1
AO:394
and sketch plats of minor subdivisions and minor site plans are exempt from
this requirement. All drawings of improvements shall be signed and sealed
by a licensed Professional Engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 31-11.2. Minor Subdivision Plat for Classification and Approval.
[Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XI, § 2]
A sketch plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at an accurate scale of not
less than one (1") inch equals one hundred (100') feet in order to include the
entire tract on one sheet and shall be based on a certified boundary survey.
Plats shall be presented on sheet(s) of one of the following dimensions:
Thirty by forty-two (30" x 42") inches, twenty-four by thirty-six (24" x 36")
inches, eighteen by twenty-four (18" x 24" inches, fifteen by twenty-one (15"
x 21") inches, twelve by eighteen (12" x 18") inches, nine by twelve (9" x
12") inches or eight and one-half by thirteen (8 1/2" x 13") inches. The plat
shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of Section 31-7 and
shall include a key map with North arrow showing the entire subdivision
and its relation to surrounding areas at a scale of not less than one (1") inch
equals one thousand (1,000') feet, together with the following information:
a. The boundary and acreage of the original tract measured to the nearest
0.01 of an acre; the number, acreage and configuration of all lots being
created; the area of each lot correct to 0.1 of an acre, all existing and
proposed lot lines correct to one (1') foot.
b. All existing buildings and structures and their use(s), with the shortest
distance from existing building(s) to any proposed or existing lot line,
and wooded areas, rock out-crops, streams, lakes, drainage rights-ofway
and streets within the limits of the tract(s) being subdivided and
within two hundred (200') feet thereof, including the location, width
and direction of flow of all streams, brooks, drainage structures and
drainage rights-of-way. Any existing features to be removed or
relocated shall be indicated. Flood hazard area lines and wetlands and
swamps within the tract shall be shown, as well as contours at sufficient
intervals to determine the general surface drainage.
c. The existing and proposed rights-of-way, with dimensions of all
easements, sight triangles and all streets within the premises and
within two hundred (200') feet thereof, together with existing
driveways, street names and the purpose of any easement. The type of
street surface material and existing utilities within two hundred (200')
feet of the tract shall be shown, including at least one street
intersection, using the foreshortened tie distance when same is remote
from the property in question.
d. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number for the tract and all adjacent
lots; the name of the owner and all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent Borough tax records; date, title, graphic
scale, North arrow and space for the subdivision application number;
Zoning district(s), and if the property lies in more than one Zoning
§ 31-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-11.2
AO:395
§ 31-11.3. Preliminary Plat of Major Subdivision. [Ord. 12/14/76,
Art. XI, § 3]
The preliminary plat shall be titled as such and shall be clearly and legibly
drawn by a licensed New Jersey engineer and/or land surveyor and shall
be based on a certified boundary survey by a licensed New Jersey land
surveyor, at a scale of not less than one (1") inch equals fifty (50') feet, and
shall include a key map with North arrow showing the entire subdivision
and its relation to surrounding areas at a scale of not less than one (1")
inch equals one thousand (1,000') feet. Plats shall be presented on sheets
of one of the following dimensions: thirty by forty-two (30" x 42") inches,
twenty-four by thirty-six (24" x 36") inches, eighteen by twenty-four (18"
x 24") inches, fifteen by twenty-one (15" x 21") inches, twelve by eighteen
(12" x 18") inches, nine by twelve (9" x 12") inches or eight and one-half by
thirteen (8 1/2" x 13") inches. If more than one sheet is required to show
the entire subdivision, a separate composite map shall be drawn showing
the entire subdivision and the sheets on which the various sections are
shown, and each detail sheet shall include a key map showing its relation
to the whole tract. The plat shall consist of as many separate maps as are
necessary to properly evaluate the site and the proposed work. The plat
shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of Section 31-7 and
shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
district, the plat shall indicate all the Zoning district lines; and the
name, address, phone number and signature of the owner, subdivider
and person preparing the plat.
e. When on-lot water and/or on-lot sewage disposal are proposed, the plat
shall be accompanied by the results of percolation tests. A minimum of
two percolation tests shall have been located on each proposed septic
tank and appropriate additional locations in the leaching field and shall
be approved by the Board of Health. The percolation tests shall include
all required data, including but not limited to the date of the tests, the
location of each test shown on the plat, soil log at least ten (10') feet
below finished grade, groundwater level, the rate of percolation, the
weather conditions prevailing at the time of the test(s) as well as for the
preceding 48 hours, and the layout and grades for the proposed septic
field. The tests shall be performed at applicant's expense. Each
proposed lot shall show the location of the proposed individual water
supply and its location relative to the sewage disposal system.
a. A title containing the name of the subdivision; the name of the Borough,
County and State; Tax Map sheet, block and lot number; date of
preparation and most recent revision; North arrow; written and graphic
scales; the names, addresses, phone numbers and signatures of the
owner, subdivider and person(s) who prepared the plat(s) including the
seal of the latter; the names of all property owners within two hundred
(200') feet of the extreme limits of the subdivision; and space for the
subdivision application number.
§ 31-11.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-11.3
AO:396
b. The boundary and acreage of the original tract measured to the nearest
0.01 of an acre; the number, acreage and configuration of all lots being
created; the area of each lot correct to 0.1 of an acre; all existing and
proposed lot lines correct to one (1') foot.
c. A map showing existing and proposed elevations and contour lines over
the entire area of the proposed subdivision together with watercourses
and an indication of the final disposal of the surface waters. All
elevations shall be related to two permanent bench marks identified on
the plan. Contours shall be shown at not more than two (2') foot
intervals for areas with less than a 10% slope, five (5') foot intervals for
areas with ten to twenty (10% — 20%) percent slopes, and ten or twenty
(10' — 20') foot intervals for areas with slopes in excess of 20%. For
tracts containing slopes in more than one category, the subdivider shall
show contour lines at the most restrictive interval throughout the tract
unless specifically waived by the approving authority in lieu of some
other satisfactory contour interval and topographic data to meet the
objectives of this chapter.
d. The locations and dimensions of railroad rights-of-way, bridges and
natural features, such as soil types, wooded areas, lakes, rock
outcroppings and views within the subdivision, and the locations of
individual trees outside wooded areas having a minimum caliper of six
(6") inches. The proposed location of shade trees to be provided by the
subdivider shall also be shown. Soil types shown shall be based on
United States Soil Conservation categories.
e. All existing and proposed watercourses, including lakes, ponds and
marsh areas, accompanied by the following information or data:
1. When a running stream with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile or
greater is proposed for alteration, improvement or relocation, or
when a structure or fill is proposed over, under, in or along such a
running stream, evidence of approval, required alterations, lack of
jurisdiction or denial of the improvement by the New Jersey
Division of Water Policy and Supply or such agency having
jurisdiction shall accompany the application.
2. Profiles and cross sections at fifty (50') foot intervals of
watercourses, at an appropriate scale, showing the extent of the
flood fringe area, top of bank, normal water level and bottom
elevations of all watercourses on or within five hundred (500') feet
of the subdivision.
3. When ditches, streams, brooks or watercourses are to be altered,
improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing slopes and the
measures to control erosion and siltation during construction, as
well as typical ditch sections and profiles, shall be shown on the
plan or accompany it.
§ 31-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-11.3
AO:397
4. The total upstream acreage in the drainage basin of any
watercourse running through or adjacent to a subdivision including
the distance and average slope upstream to the basin ridge line.
5. The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest downstream
drainage structure and the acreage of that portion of the
subdivision which drains to the structure, including the distance
and average slope downstream to the structure.
6. The location and extent of drainage and conservation easements
and floodway and flood hazard area limits.
7. The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds on or within five hundred (500') feet of the
subdivision.
8. Plan, profile drawings and computation for any storm drainage
systems, including:
(a) All existing and/or proposed storm sewer lines on site or within
five hundred (500') feet of the subdivision, showing size, profile
and slope of the lines, the location of each inlet, manhole or
other appurtenance and the pipe material type, strength class
or thickness and bedding type.
(b) The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, detention basins, flood control
devices, sedimentation basins and other water conservation
devices.
f. The names, locations and dimensions of all existing streets within a
distance of two hundred (200') feet of the subdivision, including at least
one street intersection and showing existing driveways and any
connection proposed by the subdivision to existing streets, sidewalks
and bike routes outside the subdivision: plans, cross sections, centerline
profiles, proposed grades and standard details of all proposed
streets, including full details of other utility improvements within or
adjacent to the street right-of-way, including sanitary sewers, curbing,
sidewalks, storm drains and water, gas and electric facilities. Typical
street cross sections shall indicate the type and width of pavement and
the location of curbs, sidewalks, bike routes, sewers, drains, water and
gas mains, electric and telephone facilities and appurtenances and
shade tree planting. At intersections, the sight triangles, radii of
curblines and the location of street signs and traffic control devices
shall be clearly indicated. Horizontal scale shall not be less than one
(1") inch equals forty (40') feet.
g. The names, location, right-of-way widths and purpose(s) of existing and
proposed easements and other rights-of-way in the subdivision, and the
location and description of all existing or proposed boundary control
monuments and pipes.
§ 31-11.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-11.3
AO:398
§ 31-12. MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS; FINAL PLAT AND FINAL PLANS.
§ 31-12.1. Final Plat of Major Subdivision. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XII,
§ A; Ord. 2/8/77, § 2]
The final plat shall be prepared in compliance with the provisions of the
Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), as amended; and shall conform
to the following standards and particulars and be accompanied by final
plans in accordance with subsection 31-12.2.
h. All proposed lot lines, including existing lot lines to remain and those to
be eliminated, and all setback lines required by Chapter 34, Zoning,
with the dimensions thereof. Any lot(s) to be reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be identified and shall show proposed improvements,
such as but not limited to landscaping, grading, walkways and
recreation facilities, if any. Each block shall be numbered and the lots
within each block shall be numbered consecutively beginning with
number one, as acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
i. Locations of all existing structures and their use(s) in the tract and
within two hundred (200') feet thereof, showing existing and proposed
front, rear and side yard setback distances and an indication of all
existing structures and uses to be retained and those to be removed.
j. Plans and profiles of proposed on-site, off-site and off-tract
improvements and utility layouts (sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
erosion control and landscaping, storm-water control, sedimentation
basin, excavation, water mains, gas, telephone, electricity, etc.),
showing location, size, slope, pumping stations and other details as well
as feasible connections to any existing or proposed utility systems. If
private utilities are proposed, they shall comply fully with all Borough,
County and State regulations. If service is to be provided by an existing
utility company, a letter from that company shall be submitted, stating
that service will be available before occupancy of any proposed
structures. When on-lot water or sewage disposal is proposed, the plan
for such system shall be approved by the appropriate Borough and
State agencies and the results of percolation tests shall be submitted
with the preliminary plat in accordance with the procedures outlined in
this chapter.
k. Zoning district(s), and if the property lies in more than one Zoning
district, the plat shall indicate the Zoning district lines.
l. Minimum front, rear and side yard setback lines for the zone.
a. The plat shall be prepared and submitted on a sheet of standard size
(twenty-four by thirty-six (24" x 36") inches or thirty by forty-two (30" x
42") inches), including a margin of at least one-half (1/2") inch and be
drawn to a scale of one (1") inch equals one hundred (100') feet, except
that a scale of one (1") inch equals fifty (50') feet or larger shall be used
where necessary and at special details to provide fully intelligible and
§ 31-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-12.1
AO:399
legible information throughout. When the overall size of the
development or the owner's desire to submit final plans in sections will
result in more than one sheet, individual sheets or sections shall be
numbered, match lines or boundaries with adjacent sheets or sections
shall be provided and each sheet shall contain an acceptable key map
of the entire tract showing the relation and orientation of the subject to
adjacent sections and the total development.
b. The original plat shall be prepared in waterproof black ink on mylar
under the immediate supervision of and in accordance with the
computations of a land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey. The original and all submitted black-line prints, translucent
mylar, translucent linen and opaque linen copies shall be hand signed
and sealed by the responsible surveyor.
c. The fieldwork for the basic boundary survey shall be precise, with a
linear error of closure not to exceed one part in 10,000 before
adjustment. Angular error of closure shall not exceed 15 seconds times
the square root of n (where "n" equals the number of sides). Fieldwork
meeting these standards shall be adjusted and balanced by the compass
rule, transit rule or least square analysis, as considered appropriate by
the responsible surveyor. All existing boundary evidence for the
property in question and/or adjacent properties shall be clearly shown
in relation to the boundaries of the property in question. All exterior
boundaries shall be clearly identified by bearings precise to the nearest
one second of arc and distances precise to the nearest 0.01 of a foot.
Permanent concrete monuments conforming to State Statutes and
extending not less than thirty (30") inches below grade nor more than
one (1") inch above shall be indicated on the plat and precisely set in
the field along the tract boundary at all corners, sidelines of proposed
streets and beginning and ending points of all horizontal curves.
Inaccessible corners shall be provided with two offset reference
monuments clearly defined on the plat. Additional point-on-line
monuments as necessary shall be installed in the field and identified on
the plat whenever topographic conditions do not permit corner-tocorner
visibility. Unless specifically waived by the Borough Engineer for
due cause, the boundaries of all final plats shall be based on the United
States Geological Survey bearing datum and all boundary monuments
shall be coordinated on the New Jersey plan coordinate system, with
North and East coordinates for each monument and corner shown on
the plat. The gross tract area and the area of each interior parcel,
including parcels dedicated to public use, shall be calculated and shown
to the nearest thousandth (.001) of an acre of the nearest 10 square
feet.
d. The metes and bounds for all interior parcels, streets, and/or easements
dedicated to public use shall be calculated to the same order of
precision and shown on the plat as above described for the tract
boundary. Interior monuments shall be indicated on the plat and
installed in the field along one side of all street rights-of-way, at all
§ 31-12.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-12.1
AO:400
corners of parcels dedicated to public use and at such other additional
locations incident to topographic conditions and other factors as the
Borough Engineer may find essential to the public interest. Due to the
high potential for disturbance or destruction during construction, the
installation of interior monuments may be deferred until the completion
of final grading and seeding, subject to posting of acceptable
performance guaranty.
e. In addition to tract, lot and street boundary lines above described, the
final plat shall identify and provide precise metes and bounds for all
necessary easements, sight triangles and other reservations for public
or quasi-public use. The grantee of any such public or quasi-public
dedication shall be identified on the plat.
f. The following circular curve data shall be provided for all curvilinear
boundaries and street center lines: radius, central angle, tangent
distance, chord distance, chord bearing and arc length. Distances shall
be shown to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100') foot. Angles and
bearings shall be shown to the nearest one second of arc.
g. Block and lot numbers shall be shown on the final plat in accordance
with established standards and in conformity with the Borough Tax
Assessment Map as approved by the Borough Engineer.
h. Title block in the lower right-hand portion of the sheet shall include:
1. The name (and section, where applicable) of the plat.
2. The current tax assessment block(s) and lot(s) numbers.
3. The name of the Municipality, County and State.
4. Names and addresses of the owner, applicant and responsible
surveyor.
5. The date of preparation (and revisions, if any).
6. The plat scale.
7. Graphic scale.
i. Bearing datum North (map datum) and true North arrows shall be
provided, including the angular difference between map North and true
North.
j. All street names shall be shown, acceptable to the approving authority.
k. The plat shall contain the following endorsements:
1. Certification by the responsible surveyor that the map was
prepared under his supervision and is in compliance with State
Statute and local ordinances, such certification to be signed, sealed
and dated by the responsible surveyor.
§ 31-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-12.1
AO:401
§ 31-12.2. Final Plans Accompanying Final Plat. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art.
XII, § B]
2. Certification by the owner(s) that the plat is in accordance with
their free consent and express desires, including their consent to
filing, such certification to be signed, dated and sealed by the
owner(s) and witness(es). In the case of individual ownership,
signature shall be certified by a notary; if a partnership, by all
partners and certified by a notary; if a corporation, by an
authorized principal of the corporation, certified by the corporate
secretary and sealed with the corporate seal. The name and
position of each signing party shall be legibly printed below each
signature.
3. Signature block with places to be signed and dated by the
Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority.
4. Certification that all new streets and easements have been
approved by the Borough Council and that bonds have been given
to the Borough guaranteeing the completion of improvements to
same, such certification to be signed, dated and sealed by the
Borough Clerk.
5. Certification of compliance with "Map Filing Law," applicable local
ordinances and regulations, signed and dated by the Borough
Engineer.
6. Certification of compliance with State Statute and approval to file
in the County Clerk's office within 95 days of approval of such
certification to be signed, dated and sealed by the Borough Clerk.
7. Certification that bond has been given to the Borough guaranteeing
the future setting of monuments (if any not previously set), such
certification to be signed, dated and sealed by the Borough Clerk.
8. Other appropriate notes regarding the dedication of public or
private roads, easements, recreation areas, etc., and reference to
related deeds of conveyance, such notes to be signed, dated and
sealed by the owner.
9. Signature block for certification by the County Planning Board.
10. Recording block for use by the County Clerk with space to insert
map number, date and time of filing.
l. Minimum building setback lines shall be shown for each lot and other
sites. The names and block, lot and property lines of adjoining owners
shall be shown, as disclosed by the current tax assessment records.
a. Submission of the final plat shall be accompanied by final plans and
other relevant supporting materials, including the following:
§ 31-12.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-12.2
AO:402
§ 31-13. SITE PLAN REVIEW AND PLAT DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 31-13.1. Plat Conformity. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XIII, § 1]
No development application shall be accepted unless submitted in plat form
and no plat shall be accepted for consideration unless it conforms to the
following requirements as to form, content and accompanying information.
All plats shall be drawn by a land surveyor as required by law, licensed
to practice in the State of New Jersey, and shall bear the signature, seal,
license number and address of the land surveyor or except that plats
submitted under the "Informal Discussion" provisions of Section 31-7 and
sketch plats of minor site plans are exempt from this requirement. All
1. Plans, profiles and cross sections, as appropriate, for all new
streets, including all utilities and street improvements; public
utility easements; site grading and drainage, including detail plans
for storm water detention facilities or stream encroachment as
approved by the County Engineer and/or State Department of
Environmental Protection Division of Water Resources; and
sanitary sewerage plans.
2. Copies of all required permits or relevant agreements for proposed
utility improvements related to drainage, sewerage, gas, water,
electric, telephone or other facilities.
3. Copies of proposed deeds of conveyance for all new street, sight
triangles, easements, recreation parcels, school sites and/or other
land restrictions.
4. Design calculations for sanitary sewerage and storm drainage
facilities, signed, dated and sealed by the responsible project
engineer.
b. Plans shall be standard size (twenty-four by thirty-six (24" x 36") inches
or thirty by forty-two (30" x 42") inches) and shall be drawn to an
appropriate scale necessary to clearly show the scope and detail of the
proposed work sufficient for the Borough Engineer to make a
quantitative engineering analysis and to assure proper construction in
accordance with Borough Standards. A standard size cover sheet shall
be provided which shall include, as a minimum:
1. A key map, at a scale not greater than one (1") inch equals one
thousand (1,000') feet, of the property in question and all adjacent
local streets and watercourses within two thousand (2,000') feet of
the property boundaries.
2. A general location plan, at a scale not greater than one (1") inch
equals two hundred (200') feet, of the property in question,
showing proposed streets and utility systems.
3. Index for the complete set of plans.
§ 31-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-13.1
AO:403
drawings of improvements shall be signed and sealed by a licensed
Professional Engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 31-13.2. Minor Site Plan for Classification and Approval. [Ord. 12/
14/76, Art. XIII, § 2]
The minor site plan shall include the same data as required for a "Minor
Subdivision Plat for Classification and Approval" in Section 31-11, except
that the graphic scale shall be one (1") inch to ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or
fifty (10', 20', 30', 40', or 50') feet.
§ 31-13.3. Sketch Plat of a Major Site Plan. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art.
XIII, § 3]
The sketch plat shall show to scale the lot lines, proposed building(s),
proposed use(s), parking, loading, onsite circulation, driveways, wooded
areas, streams, approximate flood hazard area, contours based on U.S.G.S.
or similar available datum, approximate on-site or on-tract, storm water
detention facilities, and water and sewer service. The scale shall be one to
one hundred (1' — 100') feet.
§ 31-13.4. Preliminary Site Plan Plat. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XIII, § 4]
a. Each site plan shall be submitted at a scale not smaller than of one (1")
inch equals fifty (50') feet. All plans shall be signed and sealed by an
architect or engineer licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey,
including accurate lot lines certified by a licensed land surveyor,
submitted on one of the following standard sheet sizes: eight and onehalf
by thirteen (8 1/2" x 13") inches, twelve by eighteen (12" x 18")
inches, nine by twelve (9" x 12") inches, fifteen by twenty-one (15" x
21") inches, eighteen by twenty-four (18" x 24") inches, twenty-four by
thirty-six (24" x 36") inches or thirty by forty-two (30" x 42") inches. If
one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire territory of the tract, the
tract may be divided into sections to be shown on separate sheets of
equal sizes, all sheets with the same scale, with references on each
sheet to the adjoining sheets, provided that one sheet at a smaller scale
is attached which shows the entire project on one sheet of the same
size.
b. Each plan shall include the following data:
1. Name of the development.
2. Appropriate places for the signatures of the approving authority
Chairman and Secretary, the dates of official approving authority
actions and dates of the signatures.
3. A small key map giving the general location of the tract in relation
to the remainder of the community.
4. Zone district(s) in which the lot(s) is (are) located.
§ 31-13.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-13.4
AO:404
§ 31-13.5. General Purpose. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XIII, § 5; Ord. No.
2005-03]
Site plan approval shall include and shall be limited to:
5. North arrow.
6. Date of the original plan and each subsequent revision date.
7. Graphic scale.
8. Total tract acreage to one one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre.
9. An outbounds survey of the tract certified by a licensed land
surveyor.
10. Existing and proposed streets and street names.
11. Existing and proposed contour lines at five (5') foot intervals inside
the tract and within fifty (50') feet of the tract's boundaries.
12. Existing and proposed streams and easements.
13. Flood hazard areas based on 100 year plus storms.
14. All dimensions and areas needed to confirm conformity to this
chapter, such as but not limited to building area, lot lines, parking
and loading spaces, setbacks, buffers and yards.
15. The site in relation to all remaining contiguous lands in the
applicant's or owner's ownership.
16. All roads, driveways, watercourses and existing buildings within
two hundred (200') feet of the tract.
17. And, any and all other information and data necessary to meet any
of the requirements of Chapter 34, Zoning, not listed above.
a. Preservation of existing natural resources on the site.
b. Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading.
c. Screening, landscaping and location of structures.
d. Exterior lighting needed for safety reasons in addition to any
requirements for street lighting.
e. Civic design of public and quasi-public areas forming the streetscape
including building fascia, landscaping, walls, fencing, signs, outdoor
displays and window displays (Excluded are maintenance and repair
activity that do not change the appearance of approved features).
Acceptable design is to respect streetscape legibility and promote
visual interest and unique identity.
§ 31-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-13.6
AO:405
§ 31-13.6. Final Site Plan Plat. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XIII, § 6]
The final plat shall include all data required on the preliminary site plan
plat drawn to incorporate all changes required as a condition of preliminary
approval and drawn by persons and to specifications as required for a
preliminary plat.
§ 31-13.7. Site Plan Conformance. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XIII, § 7]
Failure to comply with any of the conditions of site plan approval
subsequent to the receipt of a Building Permit, Zoning Permit, or Certificate
of Occupancy, as the case may be, shall be construed to be a violation of the
Zoning Ordinance and shall be grounds for the revocation of any Building
Permit, Zoning Permit, or Certificate of Occupancy, as the case may be. If
the Construction Official finds that any conditions of site plan approval have
not been met, he shall give the applicant 10 days written notice to comply
with the conditions and failure to comply with this 10 day period shall result
in the revocation of the Building Permit, Zoning Permit, or Certificate of
Occupancy, as the case may be.
§ 31-13.8. Surety Bond Required for Site Plan Improvements. [Ord.
#6-82, § 2]
Each developer who has received approval of a major site plan shall within
30 days of the date of the approval post a performance bond to cover 100%
of the site plan improvements and to ensure that the site plan improvements
are completed within one year of the date of final approval. The actual
amount of the surety bond shall be determined by the Borough Engineer.
§ 31-14. FEES AND CHARGES.17
§ 31-14.1. Fees. [Ord. #97-1 § 1]
The applicant or developer, shall, at the time of filing a submission, pay the
following nonrefundable fee to the Borough Clerk. Proposals involving more
than one use shall pay a fee equaling the sum of the fees for the component
elements of the submission. Proposals requiring a combination of approvals,
such as subdivision, site plan, variance, conditional use, or the like, shall
pay a fee equal to the sum of the fees for all elements.
§ 31-14.2. Development Application Fee Schedule. [Ord. #97-1 § 1]
a. 1. Application for minor subdivision: $200
2. Application for extension for filing: $50
b. 1. Application-sketch plan: $200
17.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance 12/14/76 Art. XIV
and Ord. No. 6-82.
§ 31-13.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-14.2
AO:406
1-3 lots $50
4-10 lots $100
11-50 lots $300
Plus
50+ lots $400
c. 1. Application preliminary major subdivision- with sketch plat
approval: $350
1-3 lots $50
4-10 lots $400
11-50 lots $800
Plus
50+ lots $1,600
2. Subdivision without sketch plat approval: $500
1-3 lots $100
4-10 lots $800
11-50 lots $1,600
Plus
50+ lots $3,200
3. Application for extension of preliminary approval: $100
d. 1. Application for final major subdivision: $200
1-3 lots: $50
4-10 lots: $100
11-50 lots: $300
Plus
50- + lots: $400
2. Application for extension of preliminary approval: $100
e. Application for preliminary site plan (nonresidential)
1. Building area - 10,000 sq. ft. or less: $550
2. Building area more than 10,000 sq. ft. to 50,000 sq. ft.: $1,100
3. Building area more than 50,000 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft.: $2,200
4. Building area more than 100,000 sq. ft.: $3,300
5. Application for extension of preliminary approval: $100
f. Application for final site plan (nonresidential)
1. Building area - 10,000 sq. ft. or less: $300
2. Building area more than 10,000 sq. ft. to 50,000 sq. ft.: $600
3. Building area more than 50,000 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft.: $1,200
§ 31-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-14.2
AO:407
§ 31-14.3. Variance Application Fee Schedule. [Ord. #97-1 § 1]
4. Building area more than 100,000 sq. ft.: $1,800
5. Application for extension of final approval: $100
g. Application for preliminary site plan (residential): $350 plus $10/unit
h. Application for final site plan (residential): $200 plus $10/unit
i. Soil removal/fill permit: $50
j. Driveway permit: $50 plus $20 for each inspection
k. Minor Site Plan: $200
l. Resubmission of Plans. On the applications where substantially similar
plans are resubmitted within three months from the date of the original
submission, the fee shall be equivalent to 1/2 the current fee for said
submission.
m. Certification of Approval (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56): $25
n. Zoning permits (as required by Chapter 34 entitled "Zoning") Section
34-15: $$25
a. Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a):
1. Residential: $150
2. Other: $150
b. Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b):
1. Residential: $150
2. Other: $150
c. Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c):
1. Residential: $200
2. Other: $200
d. Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d):
1. New use or structures:
(a) Residential: $200 for the first dwelling unit. If more than one
unit, then add $25 for each additional unit.
(b) Nonresidential: $300
e. Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34: $150
f. Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36: $150
§ 31-14.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-14.3
AO:408
§ 31-14.4. Transcripts. [Ord. No. 97-1 § 1]
Where a transcript is required on the filing of an appeal to the Borough
Council, and the transcript has not been previously prepared and available,
the appellant, at the time of filing the appeal, shall, in addition to the appeal
filing fee, deposit with the Administrative Officer the estimated costs of the
transcript as a deposit to cover the costs thereof. Such deposits shall be
at the rate of $50 for each hour of the hearing comprising the matter. If
such deposit shall not be sufficient, the appellant shall pay the difference
prior to the appeal being heard; if the deposit shall exceed the costs of the
transcript, the difference shall be refunded to the appellant.
§ 31-14.5. Establishment of Escrow Fund for the Payment of
Professional Fees. [Ord. #97-1 § 1]
g. Only one fee is to be charged for a single application regardless of its
complexity, and such fee will be the highest fee chargeable under the
above schedule.
h. On appeals under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76(b), the filing fee shall be the sum
of the applicable fees by class of development application and
variance(s), if applicable.
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their
administrative staffs which is not otherwise provided by ordinance may
be provided for and adopted as part of the rules of the Board and copies
of such rules or of the schedule shall be available to the public.
a. General.
1. In addition to the submission of application filing fees (which are
charged to cover general Borough administrative costs), as set
forth hereinbefore, development applications which meet the
criteria established herein shall be accompanied by a deposit of
escrow funds in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
2. Said escrow funds shall be utilized to cover the Borough costs of
professional charges for review of applications, review and
preparation of documents and inspections of developments under
construction and review by outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of expertise of the
professional normally utilized by the Borough. All plan review and
inspection fees or charges must be set by resolution by the
Planning Board or Borough governing body. The only charge that
shall be added to any such charges shall be actual out-of-pocket
expenses of any such professionals or consultants, including
normal and typical expenses incurred in processing applications
and inspecting improvements.
§ 31-14.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-14.5
AO:409
(a) Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an
application for development presently pending before the
approving authority or upon review of compliance with
conditions of approval, or review of requests for modification
or amendments made by the applicant.
(b) A professional shall not review items which are subject to
approval by any State governmental agency and not under
municipal jurisdiction except to the extent consultation with a
State agency is necessary due to the effect of State approvals
in the subdivision or site plan.
(c) Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on
a subdivision or site plan or required by an approving
resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements under
construction shall charge only for inspections that are
reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the
work and such inspections shall be reasonably based on the
approved development plans and documents.
3. Sketch Plat, Preliminary Site Plan and/or Subdivision Approval
Inclusive of Minor Site Plan:
Nonresidential Escrow Amount
Less than 10,000 sq. ft. of building area $ 3,000.00
10,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. of building area $10,000.00
50,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. of building area $ 20,000.00
In excess of 100,000 sq. ft. of building
area
$25,000.00
Residential: Escrow Amount
1 to 3 lots or units $1,000.00
4 to 10 lots or units $2,000.00
11 to 25 lots or units $3,000.00
26 to 50 lots or units $5,000.00
51 to 100 lots or units $7,500.00
In excess of 100 lots or units $15,000.00
4. Final Plan Approval. One-third (1/3) for nonresidential use and onehalf
(1/2) for residential use of the original escrow fee paid at the
time of preliminary plan application.
5. Soil Removal/Fill Permit. An application fee of twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars shall accompany each application, to be utilized to offset the
general administrative costs of the application. In addition to the
application fee, the following sums shall be posted in escrow to
cover the Borough costs of professional and nonprofessional
§ 31-14.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-14.5
AO:410
services incurred during the review process and also for inspection
costs required during the construction process.
(a) The sum of five hundred ($500.00) dollars where the
application is for the addition, removal or movement of
between one hundred (100) and nine hundred ninety-nine
(999) cubic yards of soil, except in matters pertaining to the
construction of residential swimming pools and other work
related directly thereto where the fee shall be two hundred
fifty ($250.00) dollars.
(b) The sum of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars where the
application is for the addition, removal or movement of
between one thousand (1,000) and four thousand nine hundred
ninety-nine (4,999) cubic yards of soil or more.
(c) The sum of two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars where the
application is for the addition, removal or movement of five
thousand (5,000) cubic yards of soil or more.
(d) No escrow fee shall be required for applications of less than
one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil.
6. Variance.
(a) Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a):
(1) Residential: $500.00
(2) Other: $1,000.00
(b) Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b):
(1) Residential: $500.00
(2) Other: $1,000.00
(c) Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c):
(1) Residential variances which concern subdivisions, site
plans, isolated lots and lots not fronting on improved roads
(all other residential variances shall have no escrow
requirement): $500.00
(2) Other: $1,000.00
(d) Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d):
(1) New use or structures:
(i) Residential: $500.00
(ii) Nonresidential - see escrow required under paragraph
a3 herein.
§ 31-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-14.5
AO:411
(2) Extension, alteration or repair of existing use or structure:
(i) Residential: $500.00
(ii) Nonresidential - see escrow required under paragraph
a3 herein.
(e) Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34: $1,000.00
(f) Appeals filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36: $1,000.00
(g) Any application involving more than one (1) of the above
categories shall deposit cumulative amounts.
b. Procedural Requirements.
1. An applicant to the Joint Planning/Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
deposit all escrow funds called for in the within subsection before
the applicant's appearance before that Board. No meeting or
hearing with the applicant shall be held by the Board until all
escrow funds and required fees have been deposited in accordance
with this subsection. The escrow sums must be in the form of cash,
certified check or money order. All deposits of escrow funds shall
be made to the official designated by the Borough Council.
2. Additional escrow funds may be required when the escrow has
been depleted to twenty (20%) percent of the original escrow
amount or that in the opinion of the escrow official or
administrative officer, additional funds are necessary. The official
designated by the Borough Council shall notify the applicant when
escrow funds have been so depleted. Professionals being paid from
the escrow funds shall notify the Board as to additional costs
anticipated to be incurred. If an escrow account contains
insufficient funds to enable the Borough or approving authority to
perform required application reviews or improvement inspections,
the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall provide the
applicant with a notice of insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In
order for work to continue on the development or the application,
the applicant shall within fourteen (14) days, post a deposit to the
account in an amount to be agreed upon by the Borough and the
applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety
inspections shall be made and charged back against the
replenishment of funds.
3. All disbursements to consulting professionals and applicable
charges from Borough employed professionals for services involved
in processing an application which requires the deposit of escrow
funds shall be charged against the escrow account.
4. The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall make all payments
to professionals for services rendered pursuant to the formal
procedures prepared. All vouchers submitted by consulting
§ 31-14.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-14.5
AO:412
professionals relative to said application shall specify the name
of the person performing the service, the actual hours spent on
the project (to one-quarter (1/4) hour increments), the services
performed, the name of the project, the hourly rate being charged
and the date the work was performed.
(a) All consulting professionals shall submit billing vouchers on a
monthly basis in accordance with the schedules developed by
the Chief Financial Officer. The professional shall send an
informational copy of the voucher to the applicant
simultaneously with submission to the Borough. Any vouchers
submitted thirty (30) days or longer from date of the signing of
the plats or subdivision plans may be void.
(b) The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall prepare and
send to the applicant a monthly statement which shall include
an accounting of funds listing all deposits, interest earnings,
disbursements and the cumulative balance of the escrow
account.
5. All charges by Borough employed professionals, enumerated
herein above, shall be submitted on a voucher by the Borough
employee to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough containing
the same information as required on a voucher, on a monthly basis.
The charge for Borough employed professionals shall not exceed
two hundred (200%) percent of the sum of the products resulting
from multiplying (1) the hourly base salary of each of the
professionals by (2) the number of hours spent by the respective
professionals on review of the application for development or the
developer's improvements, as the case may be. For other
professionals, the charge to the deposit shall be at the same rate as
all other work of the same nature by the professional for the
Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants or developers.
6. The following close-out procedures shall apply to all deposits and
escrow accounts established under the provisions of P.L. 1975,
c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and shall commence after the
approving authority has granted final approval and signed the
subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review
escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been
approved as provided in Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53), in the case of improvement inspection escrows and
deposits.
(a) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Borough and the approving
authority, and to the relevant Borough professional, that the
application or the improvements, as the case may be, are
completed.
§ 31-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-14.5
AO:413
(b) After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a
final bill to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough within
thirty (30) days, and shall send a copy simultaneously to the
applicant.
(c) The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall render a
written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to which
the deposit was put within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the
final bill.
(d) Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account,
including interest, shall be refunded to the developer along
with the final accounting.
7. No resolution approving any development application which is
subject hereto shall be passed by the Joint Planning/Zoning Board
of Adjustment until all fees and escrow sums required hereunder
have been paid in full.
8. In the event that an applicant disputes the charges made by a
professional for services rendered to the Borough in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, and inspection of improvements or any other charges
made pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), the
applicant shall notify in writing the Borough Council with copies to
the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional. The governing body or its designee shall, within a
reasonable time period, attempt to remediate any disputed
charges.
(a) If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant,
the applicant may appeal to the County Construction Board of
Appeals established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c.217
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127) any charge to an escrow account or a
deposit by any municipal professional or consultant, or the cost
of the installation of improvements estimated by the Borough
Engineer pursuant to Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4).
(b) An applicant or its authorized agent shall submit the appeal in
writing to the County Construction Board of Appeals. The
applicant or its authorized agent shall simultaneously send a
copy of the appeal to the Borough, approving authority, and
any professional whose charge is the subject of the appeal.
(c) The County Construction Board of Appeals is required by law
to hear the appeal, render a decision thereon and file its
decision with a statement of the reasons therefor with the
Borough or approving authority not later than ten (10)
business days following the submission of the appeal, unless
such period of time has been extended with the consent of the
applicant. The decision may approve, disapprove or modify the
§ 31-14.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 31-14.5
AO:414
§ 31-15. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. 12/14/76, Art. XV;
Ord. No. 3-96]
Any developer, owner, or other person who, prior to final approval transfers,
sells, or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part
of a subdivision on which the approving authority is required to act, such
persons shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5,
and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate
violation. In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in a subdivision are
not such that a structure on the land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit, the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
professional charges appealed from and a copy of the decision
shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail to the party
making the appeal, the Borough, the approving authority and
the professional involved in the appeal.
(d) During the pendency of any appeal, the Borough or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear and decide the
application for development and to inspect the development in
the normal course and shall not withhold, delay or deny
reviews, inspections, signing of subdivisions plats or site plans,
the reduction or the release of performance or maintenance
guarantees, the issuance of construction permits or
Certificates of Occupancy or any other approval or permit
because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this
section.
(e) The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough may pay charges
out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an
appeal has been filed.
(f) If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough shall reimburse the deposit or escrow
account in the amount of any such disallowed charge or refund
the amount to the applicant.
(g) If the charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or
consultant who is not in the employ of the Borough, the
professional or consultant shall reimburse the Borough in the
amount of any such disallowed charge.
a. For injunctive relief.
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale.
§ 31-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-15
AO:415
Chapter 32
(RESERVED)
Chapter 33
(RESERVED)
Chapter 34
ZONING
§ 34-1. TITLE, PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
§ 34-1.1. Short Title. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 101; Ord. 1/13/87, § 101]
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
South Bound Brook."
§ 34-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 102; Ord. 1/13/87, § 102]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. The provisions of this
chapter are intended to achieve the following goals and objectives:
In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a
lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that
remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or successors, to
secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any
such action must be brought within two (2) years after the date of the recording
of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of the land, or within six (6)
years if unrecorded.
a. To regulate the density of population and to conserve the value of
property and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout
the Borough;
b. To avoid undue concentration of population by regulating and limiting
the use of land, the height and bulk of buildings wherever erected;
c. To allow for the expansion of the Borough's economic and tax bases;
d. To provide the opportunity for a variety of housing types;
e. To preserve environmentally sensitive lands;
f. To provide additional areas of open space and recreation for existing
and future residents of the Borough;
§ 31-15 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-1.2
AO:416
§ 34-1.3. Scope. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 103; Ord. 1/13/87, § 102]
The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall be held paramount
to any corresponding or similar but less restrictive provisions and
requirements of any existing law, ordinance, rule regulation, deed
restriction or private covenant affecting lands and premises in the Borough.
§ 34-2. (RESERVED)
§ 34-3. ZONE DISTRICTS.
§ 34-3.1. Zone Districts. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 201; Ord. 1/13/87, § 201;
Ord. No. 2005-03 § 3]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of South Bound Brook is hereby
divided into eight Zone Districts known as:
R-1 Single Family Residence District
R-2 Single Family Residence District
R-3 Single and Two-Family Residential District
R-4 Garden Apartment Residence District
O-R Office-Residential District
B Business District
LI Light Industrial District
I Industrial District
BC-CDO Borough Center Civic Design Overlay District
HD-CDO Historic Dublin Civic Design Overlay District
§ 34-3.2. Map Schedule. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 202; Ord. 1/13/87, § 202]
The Zone Map delineating the above Districts and the Schedule of
Requirements summarizing the required conditions for each District printed
thereon are hereby declared to be a part of this chapter. The Zone District
boundary lines are intended generally to follow street center lines, existing
g. To limit and determine the size of yards, courts and other open spaces;
h. To lessen congestion on Borough roads and promote convenient and
efficient circulation patterns;
i. To secure safety from fire and other dangers;
j. To provide for adequate light, air and convenience of access;
k. To promote the utilization of solar energy systems in order to maximize
the utilization of a safe and available energy source; and
l. To promote the purpose of the State of New Jersey Municipal Land Use
Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 34-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-3.2
AO:417
lot lines, center lines of railroad rights-of-way, and the like, as indicated on
the Zone Map. Where a Zone District boundary line does not coincide with
any such line as above set forth, its location or relation to another boundary
line is indicated on the Zone Map by means of figures expressing distance in
feet from a street sideline or other boundary line. In cases of uncertainty or
disagreement as to the true location of any Zone District boundary line, the
determination thereof shall lie with the Board of Adjustment, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55-39(b).
§ 34-4. (RESERVED)
§ 34-5. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 3/12/74, §§ 301—334; Ord. 1/13/87,
§§ 301—339]
As used in this chapter:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — Shall mean a building or structure, on the same
lot with and subordinate to a principal building, occupied and devoted
exclusively to an accessory use. Where an accessory building is attached to
a principal building by a breezeway, roof or the like, such accessory building
shall be considered part of the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE — Shall mean a use naturally and normally incident and
subordinate to the principal and primary use upon any premises.
ADULT BOOK STORE — Shall mean an establishment or business having
as a predominant part of its stock in trade, books, magazines, periodicals,
photographs, pictures, films, devices, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating
to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," and limited
in sale of such sexual matters to adults.
AUTO BODY SHOP — Shall mean any building structure, lot, or land in or
upon which motor vehicle painting and/or body work is pursued.
ALTERATION OF BUILDING OR CHANGE OF USE — Shall mean any
change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams, girders, interior partitions, as well as any change in doors
or windows, or any addition to or diminution of a building. A change of use
is a change from the use permitted in one Zone District to use permitted
in another Zone District, any removal of a building from one location to
another, or the conversion of any building, or any part thereof, from a use
permitted in one Zone District to a use permitted in another Zone District.
ATTIC — Shall mean the open, nonhabitable space between the ceiling
beams of the top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building.
BASEMENT — Shall mean an interior space, or a portion of an interior
space, having a floor level below the lowest outside elevation of ground at
the foundation wall of the structure in which it is contained.
BUFFER AREA — Shall mean an area within a property or site generally
adjacent to and parallel with the property line. "Buffer areas" shall be
provided at a width specified by municipal ordinance and shall in no case
§ 34-3.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-5
AO:418
be less than twenty (20') feet in width when the subject site borders a
Commercial or Industrial Zone. "Buffer areas" shall be located completely
within the applicant's property and consist of either natural existing
vegetation or the combined use of trees, shrubs, berms, fences, or walls
designed to continuously limit view of the site from adjacent sites or
properties. Plantings shall consist of massed evergreen and deciduous trees
and shrubs, planted and maintained in such a fashion that they will produce
within two growing seasons a continuous visual screen at least six (6')
feet in height. The quantity of natural screening existing on the property
shall be taken into consideration upon evaluation of the site plan. No other
above ground construction or use shall be allowed within the boundaries
of a buffer area except as to provide access to the property via a vehicle
driveway or pedestrian sidewalk.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Shall mean ownership of two or more
contiguous lots of real property by one person or by two persons owning
such property in the same form of joint ownership.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a permanent building or portion thereof
providing sleeping room(s), bathroom(s) and kitchen facilities for the use of
one or more persons. "Dwelling units" - shall be differentiated one from the
other as follows:
FAMILY — Shall mean up to three persons unrelated by blood, marriage
or adoption or any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or
adoption living privately together as a single housekeeping unit and using
certain rooms and cooking facilities in common.
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the aggregate area of all floors in a building
enclosed by an exterior wall, excluding, however, attic and basement floors,
open porches, breezeways and garages, provided however, any basement
area in any Nonresidential Zone that is used for sales or display and is open
to the public shall be construed as floor area.
GARDEN APARTMENTS — Shall mean a building or group of buildings
situated on one lot and containing separate dwelling units for no less than
four nor more than 12 dwelling units per structure.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — Shall mean the distance from the highest roof
point to the average elevation of the ground level at the foundation wall of
the building.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — Shall mean a detached building
designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
a.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Shall mean a building designed for or
occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other.
b.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — Shall mean a building used or designed
as a residence for three or more families living independently of each
other and doing their own cooking therein, including apartment houses
but not including motels.
c.
§ 34-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-5
AO:419
INSTITUTIONAL USES — Shall mean nonprofit institutions limited to
churches, church-owned cemeteries, public or private schools covering
grades kindergarten through grade 12, hospitals for humans, municipallyowned
or operated buildings or structures used for public purposes.
LOT — Shall mean a parcel of land, the location, dimensions and boundaries
of which are set forth on the latest Borough Tax Map. Despite what may be
disclosed on the current Borough Tax Map, however, if contiguous lots are
in common ownership and are either:
MUNICIPAL USE — Shall mean any use by the Borough of South Bound
Brook of any property owned or leased by it.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use which is being lawfully
exercised within a structure or on land at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, or any amendment thereto, and which does not conform with the
regulations and requirements of the Zone District in which it is located after
the adoption of this chapter or any such amendment.
Lots which are not approved pursuant to South Bound Brook's 1954
Subdivision Ordinance or any amendments thereto;
a.
Lots which are substandard and fail to meet the minimum lot size
requirements of the Zone in which they fall then, for the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter, the lots shall be construed to
be one lot.
CORNER LOT — Shall mean a lot at the junction of and having
frontage on two or more intersecting streets. A corner lot is also a
lot bounded on two or more sides by the same street. The greater
frontage of a corner lot is its depth, and its lesser frontage is its
width.
1.
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the mean distance between the front
and rear property lines of any lot.
2.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the shortest straight line distance
between the two sidelines of any lot. If a lot shall not have parallel
sidelines, the average of such widths taken at ten (10') foot
intervals and parallel to the front street sideline throughout the
depth of the lot shall constitute the average width of the lot.
3.
LOT AREA — Shall mean the total square unit contents of any lot
as measured within the lot lines.
4.
LOT FRONTAGE — Shall mean, in the case of a lot running through
from one street to another, the front of such lot shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, be considered that frontage upon which
the majority of the buildings in the same block front, but in case
there has been no clearly defined frontage established, the owner
may, when applying for a Building Permit, specify on his permit
application which lot line shall be considered the front lot line.
5.
b.
§ 34-5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-5
AO:420
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES — Shall mean those zones set forth in
subsection 34-3.1 of this chapter known as the B and I Zone Districts.
OCCUPANCY OR OCCUPIED — Shall mean any dwelling unit, if one or
more persons or a family customarily reside in the dwelling unit overnight.
In nonresidential buildings, the installation, storage or use of equipment,
merchandise or machinery in any commercial, public or industrial building
- Shall be construed as constituting occupancy of the building.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or
private use or enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space, provided that such areas may be improved
with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and
other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural
openness of the land.
PARKING AREA — Shall mean an open area other than a street or other
public road or way used for the parking of motor vehicles, including access
drives or aisles for ingress or egress thereto and therefrom.
PARKING SPACE — Shall mean a rectangular space nine (9') feet wide
and twenty (20') feet long used for an accommodation for off-street motor
vehicle parking which - shall have an area of not less than 180 square feet
per vehicle, exclusive of access drives or aisles. All parking spaces - shall be
provided with adequate means of ingress and egress which - shall be kept
open and unobstructed at all times and which - shall be designed to provide
surface driveways or aisles to meet the following minimum standards:
Longitudinal (end to end)
parking
12 foot widths
30 degree angle parking 11 foot widths
45 degree angle parking 13 foot widths
60 degree angle parking 18 foot widths
90 degree angle parking 24 foot widths
PERSON — Shall mean and include any person, individual, business entity,
partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind
or nature.
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE — Shall mean the primary or
predominant use of any lot. A principal structure is one devoted to the
principal use.
PRIVATE GARAGE — Shall mean a detached accessory building, or a portion
of a principal building, used primarily for the storage of motor vehicles
owned or used by the occupant of the principal building to which the garage
is an accessory.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean any artificially constructed basin
or other structure for the holding of water for use by the possessor, his
family or guests, for swimming, diving and other aquatic sports and
§ 34-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-5
AO:421
recreation. The term "swimming pool" does not include any plastic, canvas
or rubber pool temporarily erected upon the ground capable of holding not
more than 500 gallons of water.
PUBLIC GARAGE OR GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Shall mean any
building, structure, lot or land in or upon which a business, service or
industry involving the fueling, storage, maintenance, washing or servicing
and storage in connection therewith, of motor vehicles is maintained,
conducted, operated or rendered.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed or
otherwise dedicated to a public body for recreational or conservational
uses.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Shall mean telephone and electric lines,
poles, equipment and structures, water or gas pipes, mains, valves or
structures, or sewer pipes, valves or structures, maintained, operated and
conducted for the service, convenience, necessity, health and welfare of the
general public, whether owned by any arm or creature of the local, State or
Federal government or by any privately owned public utility corporation.
RESIDENTIAL ZONES — Shall mean those zones set forth in subsection
34-3.1 of this chapter and known as the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and O-R Zone
Districts.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — Shall mean a building or structure
designed for and lawfully accommodating only one family.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP — Shall mean ownership of a single lot without any
abutting property owned by the owner of said lot in which the ownership is
by one person, or jointly by two or more persons, whether as joint tenants,
tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common.
SIGNS — Shall mean and include any device, freestanding or attached to
a building or structure, or erected, painted, represented or reproduced
upon or in any building or structure, which displays, reproduces or includes
any letter, word, name, number, model, insignia, design, device or
representation used for one or more of the following purposes: To identify
the premises or occupant or owner of the premises; to advertise any trade,
business, profession, industry, service or other activity; to advertise any
product or item; to advertise the sale or rental or use of all or any part of
any premises, including that upon which it is displayed; to direct vehicular
or pedestrian traffic other than State, County or municipal highway and
roadway markers; and shall include any announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration or any representation used to advertise
or intended to advertise or promote the interests of any person.
STORY — Shall mean that portion of a building included between the
surface of any one floor, exclusive of any basement, and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then that portion of
the building included between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next
above it.
§ 34-5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-5
AO:422
STREET SIDELINE — Shall mean the outermost line of the whole area
devoted to street purposes on either side thereof. "Street sideline" is
synonymous with street right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean an object consisting of one or more fabricated
or natural materials which is constructed, erected or placed below, upon
or above ground level and shall include any building, edifice, construction
or piece of work, or any part thereof, or any combination of related parts,
including an object attached thereto.
TERMS — Shall mean, in the construction of this chapter, that the present
tense shall include the future, the singular number shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is always used in its mandatory
and not its permissive sense. The words "Zone" and "District" are
synonymous, and the words "building" and "structure" are synonymous. The
word "used" shall include the words "arranged, designed, or intended to be
used."
YARDS — Shall mean:
§ 34-6. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 34-6.1. Zoning Affects All Structures, Buildings and Land, and the
Uses Thereof. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 401; Ord. 1/13/87, § 401]
No land or premises may be used and no building or structure may be
erected, razed, moved, extended, enlarged, altered or used for any purpose
other than a purpose permitted by this chapter for the Zone District in
FRONT YARD — Shall mean an open, unoccupied space (unless
occupied by a use hereinafter specifically permitted) extending across
the full width of any lot and lying between the front street sideline and
the nearest lines of any building on the lot; provided, however, that
where there is a proposed widening of the right-of-way of any street
as shown on the Master Plan of the Borough, the front yard setback
requirement shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line as
shown on the Master Plan rather than from the existing front street
sideline. No steps shall extend into any street right-of-way in any Zone
District. Front steps extending not more than sixty (60") inches from
the front line of any building and within the required front yard shall
not be construed as part of the building unless the top step or platform
is fully enclosed.
a.
REAR YARD — Shall mean an open, unoccupied space (unless occupied
by an accessory building or use hereinafter specifically permitted)
extending across the full width of any lot between the rear line of any
principal building thereon and the rear lot line of said lot.
b.
SIDE YARD — Shall mean an open, unoccupied space (unless occupied
by a use hereinafter specifically permitted) extending from the rear
front yard line to the front rear yard line of any lot between either side
lot line and the sideline of the principal building nearest thereto.
c.
§ 34-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-6.1
AO:423
which the land, premises, building or structure is located, and all uses and
construction shall be in conformity with the regulation provided for the
Zone District in which such land, premises, building or structure is located.
§ 34-6.2. Building Permits and Plans; Zoning Permits and
Certificates of Occupancy. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 402; Ord. 1/13/87, § 402]
No Building Permit or Zoning Permit and no Certificate of Occupancy shall
be issued by the Construction Official for any use other than a one or two
family residence except upon application therefor in conformity with all the
provisions of Section 34-15 of this chapter. No sign erection permit shall
be issued by the Construction Official except upon application therefor in
conformity with the terms of Section 34-14 of this chapter.
§ 34-6.3. Subdivision of Lot. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 403; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 403]
Whenever a new lot or lots is, or are, formed from a part of any other lot or
lots, the assembly or separation shall be effected in such a manner as not to
violate any of the requirements of this chapter and shall be in accordance
with Chapter 31, Land Development Regulations.
§ 34-6.4. Yards. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 404; Ord. 1/13/87, § 404]
§ 34-6.5. Accessory Buildings or Structures. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 405;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 405]
No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there
is not a principal building or structure.
a. There shall be provided for every lot front, rear and side yards as
required in the Zone District in which the lot is located.
b. All front yards must face upon a dedicated public street and shall be of
the size required for the particular Zone District in which the lot is
located, provided, however, that on streets less than fifty (50') feet in
width, the required front yard shall be increased by 1/2 the difference
between the width of the street and fifty (50') feet, and, provided
further, that any lot which abuts a street with a proposed right-of-way
greater than fifty (50') feet in width as shown on the Master Plan for
streets of the Borough of South Bound Brook, adopted pursuant to
N.J.R.S. 40:55-1.10 shall have a front yard setback measured from the
nearest line of the proposed building or structure to the proposed rightof-
way line shown on the Master Plan.
c. No open space which has been counted or included as a part of a side
yard, rear yard, front yard, court or other open space as required by
this chapter for one building may, by reason of change of ownership or
for any other reason, be counted or included in order to comply with the
yard, court or other open space requirements of any other building.
§ 34-6.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-6.5
AO:424
a. The following requirements shall be met in all Residential Zones:
1. No accessory building or structure shall have a ground area
greater than the ground area of the principal building or structure
on the same lot.
2. No accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the
principal building or structure or sixteen (16') feet, whichever
results in the lesser height.
3. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any front
yard.
4. All accessory buildings shall be located at least ten (10') feet from
any principal building situated on the same lot.
5. Accessory buildings may be built within any side yard if the
distance from any accessory building to the sideline of the lot is
equal to or greater than the required side yard setback for the
principal building on the lot, provided however, accessory buildings
built on corner lots must comply with subparagraph 7 below.
6. Accessory buildings built in any rear yard shall not be closer than
three (3') feet from any side or rear property line of the lot
containing the accessory building.
7. Accessory buildings on corner lots shall not be erected nearer to
any street sideline than the front yard setback required on the lot
adjacent to the rear lot line of the lot upon which the accessory
building is located.
b. The following requirements shall be met in all Nonresidential Zones.
1. No accessory buildings shall have a ground area greater than the
ground area of the principal building on the same lot.
2. No accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the
principal building or structure.
3. No accessory building shall be permitted in any front yard.
4. No accessory building shall be closer to the principal building on
the lot on which it is located than ten (10') feet or the height of the
accessory building, whichever is greater.
5. Accessory buildings may be built within any side yard if the
distance from the accessory building to the sideline of the lot is
equal to or greater than the required side yard setback for the
principal building on the lot.
6. Accessory buildings built in any rear yard shall not be closer than
three (3') feet from the rear property line of the lot containing the
accessory building.
§ 34-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-6.6
AO:425
§ 34-6.6. Second Principal Building on Same Lot Prohibited. [Ord.
3/12/74, § 406; Ord. 1/13/87, § 406]
§ 34-6.7. Required Area or Space. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 407; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 407]
No lot, yard, parking area or other open space shall be so reduced in area or
dimension as to make it less than the minimum required under this chapter.
No lot, yard, parking area or other open space which is already less than
the minimum required under this chapter shall be further reduced in area
or dimension.
§ 34-6.8. Garages in Residential Zones. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 408; Ord. 1/
13/87, § 408]
Garaging as an accessory use for not more than three motor vehicles may be
erected on a single lot in any Residential Zone District. Not more than one
boat, house trailer, other trailer, or truck with a maximum weight carrying
capacity of one and one-half (1 1/2) ton pickup or panel delivery owned
or used by a resident on the lot, may be garaged on the lot, provided,
however, that the boat, house trailer, other trailer, or truck shall be kept in
an enclosed garage when on the lot.
§ 34-6.9. Corner Lots. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 411; Ord. 1/13/87, § 411]
All corner lots shall meet the front yard requirements for the front yard
and 75% of the front yard requirements for the side yard abutting the side
street. For the purpose of administering this subsection the side of the lot
having the least amount of street frontage shall be construed as the front of
the lot.
§ 34-6.10. Nature and Extent of Uses of Land. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 412;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 412]
The control and regulation of the uses of buildings and structures by this
chapter shall apply equally to the nature and extent of the uses of the lot or
lots upon which they are erected.
§ 34-6.11. Outdoor Storage. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 413; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 413]
a. No lot shall contain more than one principal building or structure
except as permitted and regulated in the R-4 and R-5 Zone Districts.
a. Outdoor storage of any kind or nature, except storage of those items
customarily used in conjunction with a residential occupancy, is
prohibited in all Residential Zones.
b. In all Nonresidential Zones, outdoor storage is only permitted in the
side and rear yards as herein regulated. No article, equipment, vehicle,
supplies or materials shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the
§ 34-6.6 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-6.11
AO:426
§ 34-6.12. Visibility Requirements. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 414; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 414]
All trees adjoining street sidelines in all Zones shall have their branches
trimmed at all times to insure unobstructed vision eight (8') feet above
street pavement level. On any corner lot in any Residential Zone, no fence,
planting or shrubbery over thirty (30") inches in height above the level of
the pavement at the center of the street opposite the point in question, shall
be erected or maintained within twenty-five (25') feet of the intersection
formed by the projections of the two street sidelines at the corner.
§ 34-6.13. Planting and Fences on Street Property Lines. [Ord. 3/12/
74, § 415; Ord. 1/13/87, § 415]
No fence, hedge, shrubbery or planting on any lot in any Residential Zone
shall be permitted within three (3') feet from any street sideline. The
branches of all trees projecting beyond any such street sideline must be
trimmed at all times to insure unobstructed vision and clearance eight
(8') feet above ground or sidewalk level. Grass lawn or ground cover is
permitted to extend to the traveled roadway.
§ 34-6.14. Conversion of Existing Structures. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 416;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 416]
The conversion of existing structures to a use permitted in the Zone District
in which the structure is located is equally subject to the same regulations
as are new structures to be constructed in the Zone District.
§ 34-6.15. Access to Uses. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 417; Ord. 1/13/87, § 417]
No driveway shall be permitted to serve any use other than the permitted
use on the lot upon which the driveway is located.
§ 34-6.16. Mixed Occupancy. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 418; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 418]
The combined use of residential and business or industrial within one
structure is prohibited unless as hereinafter specifically permitted.
confines of any building unless and until the same is screened by special
planting or fencing, as approved by the Planning Board, and maintained
in good condition, so that it shall not be visible from any adjacent
property or public street, provided, however:
c. Where otherwise permitted by this chapter, the display, condition for
retail sales, of new and used motor vehicles as a permitted accessory
use in the Nonresidential Zone District shall not be required to be
screened by a planting or fence.
§ 34-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-6.17
AO:427
§ 34-6.17. Institutional Uses, Municipal Uses and Public Utility
Facilities. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 419; Ord. 1/13/87, § 419]
Any institutional use, municipal use or public utility facility may be located
in each of the Zone Districts created by this chapter. Before any Building
Permit or Certificates of Occupancy may be issued for any such use in any
Residential Zone District, however, a site plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board as required in Section 34-12 of this chapter.
Any use permitted under this subsection shall meet all yard, height and
area requirements for the Zone District in which it is located and off-street
parking and landscaping requirements shall be met as required by Section
34-13 of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection 34-6.19 of this
chapter. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit business
offices, storage yards or buildings generating plants or telephone exchange
buildings in any Residential Zone.
§ 34-6.18. Signs. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 420; Ord. 1/13/87, § 420]
No sign shall hereafter be permitted in the Borough unless it shall comply
with the requirements of Section 34-14 of this chapter.
§ 34-6.19. Height Exceptions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 421; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 421]
The height limitations required in each Zone District shall not apply to
church steeples. Church buildings, public school buildings and structures,
masts, flagpoles, residence receiving antennas, solar energy devices, or any
municipally owned, leased or operated buildings, structure or use shall not
exceed forty-five (45') feet in height above the average elevation of the
ground at the foundation of the structure.
§ 34-6.20. Fences and Retaining Walls. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 422; Ord. 1/
13/87, § 422]
No permit is required for the construction of any fence or wall which is four
(4') feet or less in height. Any fence or wall which exceeds four (4') feet in
height and is more than 10% solid shall be set back from any property line
a distance of at least one (1') foot unless the fence or wall is required to
screen off-street parking areas as required in Section 34-13 of this chapter.
No fence or wall shall exceed six (6') feet in height provided, however,
necessary retaining walls may exceed six (6') feet in height after a site plan
has been reviewed and approved by the Borough Planning Board. Fencing
enclosures of public utilities are exempted from the regulations of this
subsection.
§ 34-6.21. Projections and Encroachments. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 423;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 423]
Except as hereinafter specified, yards and courts required under this
chapter shall be entirely free of buildings or parts thereof:
§ 34-6.17 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-6.21
AO:428
§ 34-6.22. Curb Cuts. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 424; Ord. 1/13/87, § 424]
No curb cut shall be permitted in any Nonresidential Zone which is nearer
than twenty-five (25') feet to intersecting right-of-way lines on any corner
lot.
§ 34-7. PUBLIC GARAGES AND GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.
§ 34-7.1. Where Permitted. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 501; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 501]
Public garages and gasoline service stations are permitted in the "B" Zone
Districts as conditional uses. No permit for any public garage or gasoline
service station shall be issued unless and until all the requirements of this
section are met.
§ 34-7.2. Application for Permit. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 502; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 502]
Any person desiring to use any premises or to erect, construct or alter any
new or existing building or structure arranged, intended or designed to be
used as a public garage or gasoline service station shall make application
therefor in writing to the Construction Official of the Borough, who shall
forthwith forward the application to the Planning Board for site plan review
as required in Section 34-12 of this chapter. The application and supporting
papers or documents shall set forth the following information:
a. Cornices and eaves may project not to exceed two (2') feet over any
required yard or court.
b. Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental or structural features
may project six (6") inches into any required yard or court. An open fire
balcony or fire escape may project into a required yard not more than
four (4') feet.
c. Ground story bay windows may project not more than three (3') feet
into any required front yard, side yard or rear yard in the R-1, R-2 and
R-3 Zones.
a. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the premises and of
the building or buildings thereon and the building or buildings to be
erected or constructed thereon, the street entrances and exits or
driveways, and the precise locations of all tanks, pumps, lifts and other
machinery and equipment appurtenant thereto;
b. The width of the street or streets and of the sidewalk, parkway and
paved areas thereon upon which the premises may abut;
c. The location, nature of construction and present use of all buildings
within three hundred (300') feet of the lot lines of the premises for
which the application has been filed; and
§ 34-6.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-7.2
AO:429
§ 34-7.3. Distance from Public Assembly. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 503; Ord.
1/13/87, § 503]
The nearest lot line of the lot or parcel of land to be used as a public
garage or gasoline service station shall be at least three hundred (300') feet,
measured in a straight line, from the nearest lot line of any lot upon which is
located any building used as a theater, auditorium, or other place of public
assembly, capable of seating over 100 persons, or used as a church, hospital
for humans, college, school, public library, or institution for dependents or
children, or any public playground or athletic field.
§ 34-7.4. Mixed Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 504; Ord. 1/13/87, § 504]
No part of any public garage or gasoline service station, wherever located,
shall be used for any other purpose.
§ 34-7.5. Distance from Other Public Garage. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 505;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 505]
No part of any public garage or gasoline service station, nor any driveway
entrance or exit to or from the same, shall be located within three hundred
(300') feet of any lot line of any lot upon which is located any other public
garage or gasoline service station.
§ 34-7.6. Minimum Lot Area and Frontage. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 506;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 506]
The minimum lot size for any lot upon which any public garage or gasoline
service station is located shall be 10,000 square feet and the minimum
street frontage of the lot shall be one hundred (100') feet. If a public garage
or gasoline service station is located on a corner lot, the minimum street
frontage on each street shall be one hundred (100') feet.
§ 34-7.7. Entrance and Exit Driveways. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 507; Ord. 1/
13/87, § 507]
Entrance and exit driveways to and from any lot upon which is located a
public garage or gasoline service station shall have an unrestricted width of
not less than sixteen (16') feet or more than thirty (30') feet, shall be located
not nearer than ten (10') feet from any lot line and shall be so laid out as
to avoid the necessity of any vehicle leaving the property by backing out
across any public sidewalk, street, highway, right-of-way or portion thereof.
d. If the applicant is a person other than the owner of the premises, the
written consent of the owner or owners authorizing the filing of the
application.
§ 34-7.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-7.8
AO:430
§ 34-7.8. Paving Requirements. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 508; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 508]
The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor vehicles are
intended to be driven or parked on any lot upon which is located a public
garage or gasoline service station shall be paved with a bituminous or
concrete surface sufficient to meet Borough paving specifications applicable
to streets and roadways.
§ 34-7.9. Outdoor Repair Prohibited. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 509; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 509]
On any premises upon which a public garage or gasoline service station
is located, all services or repairs to or for motor vehicles, other than such
minor items as the changing and filling of tires or the sale of gasoline or
oil, shall be conducted within the confines of a building capable of being
wholly enclosed. Any vehicles stored outside overnight shall be so stored as
to meet the provisions of subsection 34-6.11 of this chapter.
§ 34-7.10. Setback Restrictions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 510; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 510]
No part of any building used as a public garage or gasoline service station
and no filling pump or other service appliance, whether for gasoline, oil or
any other combustible liquid or material, shall be erected within ten (10')
feet of any side or rear lot line and the ten (10') foot free area required
hereunder shall at all times be kept free, open and unobstructed for the
purposes of ready access by emergency fire and police vehicles.
§ 34-7.11. Storage of Flammable Materials. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 511;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 511]
At any public garage or gasoline service station, storage facilities for
gasoline, oil or other flammable materials in bulk over 75 gallons shall be
located wholly underground and no nearer than thirty (35') feet from any lot
line other than any street side line. No gasoline or oil pumps, oil or greasing
mechanism or other service appliance installed for use at such premises
shall be within fifteen (15') feet of any street side line and no gasoline pump
shall be located or permitted within any enclosed or semi-enclosed building.
§ 34-7.12. Expansion of Existing Public Garages or Gasoline Service
Stations. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 512; Ord. 1/13/87, § 512]
No permit for the alteration or expansion of any existing public garage
or gasoline service station shall be issued except upon compliance by the
applicant with all the provisions of this section.
§ 34-8. OUTDOOR EATING AND DRINKING AREAS.
§ 34-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-8.1
AO:431
§ 34-8.1. Accessory Use. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
Outdoor areas for consumption of food or beverages may be established
only where accessory to a principal eating or drinking establishment. Such
areas shall therefore be limited to seating areas with or without service.
Seating shall not exceed 30% of the indoor seating and not occupy more
than 30% of the indoor seating area.
§ 34-8.2. Enclosure. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
Outdoor consumption shall be confined to designated areas which shall be
physically delineated with ropes, low fences or other features. Temporary
delineation devices shall be situated on permanent surface markings visible
to inspection.
§ 34-8.3. Limitation to Quiet Dining. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
Due to the inherent inability to completely mitigate potential nuisance
impacts, activity shall be limited to quiet dining. There shall be no live
entertainment, music amplified above a conversational level, or video
entertainment. Alcoholic beverages may be served or consumed only with
meals. Outdoor areas shall not be open outside the hours of 7 a.m. to 10
p.m. All preparation and storage facilities shall be indoors.
§ 34-8.4. Design and Operation. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
The location, layout, design furnishing and operation of designated
consumption areas shall mitigate any and all potential disturbance to
occupants of R-2 residential dwellings. Appropriate screening shall be
provided to limit noise and views with special attention to overhead
screening which can be addressed with arbors or lattice ceilings. Electrical
illumination shall be subdued and indirect. No signage shall be visible offpremises.
§ 34-8.5. Safety. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
The design and operation of designated areas shall not be detrimental
to public health, safety, morals or the general welfare. There shall be no
obstruction of hydrants, fire sprinkler equipment, or fire exits and adequate
egress shall be subject to approval by fire officials. There shall be no
obstruction or walks, parking areas or utilities.
§ 34-8.6. Aesthetics. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
Designated areas shall be expressly subject to the character consistency
provisions of this Code. Furniture shall remain in a set-up condition and may
not be stacked for storage. Control and off-premises clean up practices shall
be sufficient to prevent off-site litter.
§ 34-8.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-8.7
AO:432
§ 34-8.7. Public Sidewalks. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
Use of public sidewalk areas shall be subject to licensing by the Borough
Council pursuant to Article IX. Such license applications shall include
evidence of Conditional Use Authorization, Site Plan Approval with an
express finding of Character Consistency and conformance with the Civic
Design Performance Standards of this Chapter. The width of public walks
shall be adequate for pedestrian traffic volumes and, in no case, be reduced
by more than 50% or to less than five feet.
§ 34-9. through § 34-10. (RESERVED)
§ 34-11. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
§ 34-11.1. Continuance of Nonconforming Uses or Structures. [Ord.
3/12/74, § 601; Ord. 1/13/87, § 601]
Any nonconforming use or structure which lawfully existed at the time
of the passage of this chapter18 may be continued and any such existing
nonconforming building or structure may be reconstructed or structurally
altered provided it shall meet the requirements of this section.
§ 34-11.2. Alteration, Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming
Uses or Structures. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 602; Ord. 1/13/87, § 602]
Nonconforming uses or structures in all Zone Districts shall conform to the
following requirements:
a. Any structure or use of land which is nonconforming because of use
shall not be enlarged or extended in any manner whatsoever.
b. There shall be no structural alterations made to any nonconforming
building or structure that is nonconforming because of use. Structural
alterations may be made in a building which is nonconforming because
it fails to comply with height, area, yard, off-street parking or other like
requirements of this chapter, so long as the structural alteration does
not extend or enlarge the nonconformance. This shall be construed to
mean the structural alteration shall comply with all use, height, yards,
off-street parking requirements, and all other provisions of this chapter.
c. A nonconforming use changed or altered to a conforming use may not
thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use, but nothing
hereinbefore stated shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe and lawful condition of any part of any building declared unsafe by
the Construction Official, the Chief of the Borough Fire Department or
the Borough Engineer.
d. In the event that there shall be cessation of operation of any
nonconforming use for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months, the
18.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance was adopted on March 12, 1974. The Zoning
Ordinance was revised by an Ordinance adopted on January 13, 1987.
§ 34-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-11.2
AO:433
§ 34-11.3. Restoration of Existing Buildings Which Are
Nonconforming Because of Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 603; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 603]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration or continuance of a
nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming because of its
use and which is partially destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or of
any public enemy, or the like, if the extent of the destruction be not more
than 50% of the true value based upon assessed value of the whole building
or structure at the time of the partial destruction. If, however, any such
building or structure shall be destroyed in the manner aforesaid to an extent
exceeding 50% of true value of the whole building or structure at the time
of the destruction, then the same may only be reconstructed and thereafter
used in such a manner as to conform to all the requirements, terms and
conditions of this chapter.
§ 34-11.4. Restoration of Existing Buildings Which Are
Nonconforming Because of Reasons Other Than Use. [Ord. 3/12/74,
§ 604; Ord. 1/13/87, § 604]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration or continuance of
a nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming because
it fails to comply with any height, area, yard, off-street parking or other
like requirements of this chapter, and which is partially destroyed by fire,
explosion, act of God, or of any public enemy, or the like; provided, however,
that any restoration of any such building or structure shall not enlarge the
previously existing nonconformance.
same shall be presumed an abandonment of such nonconforming use.
Any subsequent attempt to rely upon, exercise or reinstate such
abandonment of nonconforming use (the provisions of subsection
34-11.1 notwithstanding) shall be deemed a violation of the terms of
this chapter.
e. Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use of a structure or building for which a Building Permit
has been heretofore validly issued or if a variance has been authorized
by the Board of Adjustment or if construction has been started and
diligently prosecuted at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
f. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorization for or
approval of the continuance of the use of a building, structure or
premises in violation of any zoning ordinances, rules or regulations in
effect immediately preceding the time of the effective date of this
chapter unless made conforming by the enactment of this chapter.
g. Any nonconforming use that is nonconforming because it fails to comply
with height, area, yard, off-street parking or other like requirements of
this chapter, shall not be changed or altered to enlarge the
nonconformance.
§ 34-11.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-12
AO:434
§ 34-12. SITE PLAN REVIEW. [Ord. 3/12/74, §§ 701—704; Ord. 12/
14/76; Ord. 1/13/87, § 701]
Requirements for "Site Plan Review" are in the "Land Development
Ordinance," Chapter 31 of this Code.
§ 34-12.1. Scope of Review. [Ord. No. 2008-09]
Site plan review and approval shall encompass all of the mandatory areas
of review under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and 41 and all of the discretionary areas
of review under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39.
§ 34-13. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
§ 34-13.1. General Provisions for Off-Street Parking. [Ord. 3/12/74,
§ 801; Ord. 1/13/87, § 801]
All off-street parking areas for nonresidential uses permitted in Residential
Zones, and all off-street parking areas in Nonresidential Zones shall meet
all of the following requirements:
a. All off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with either a bituminous
concrete pavement with a minimum five (5") inch bituminous concrete
base and a two (2") inch asphalt wearing surface or a six (6") inch
reinforced concrete pavement and maintained in good condition, and
shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface waters to the
satisfaction of the Borough Engineer;
b. All parking spaces within any parking area shall be clearly marked and
maintained to show the parking arrangement within the parking area
with "hairpin" striping;
c. All lighting for off-street parking areas shall be so arranged and
shielded as to reflect the light downward and prevent any light from
shining directly on adjoining streets, Residential Zones and residential
buildings;
d. All parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side which abuts
or faces any premises situated in any Residential Zone by a fence, wall
or hedge at least five (5') feet in height, maintained in good condition, if
required by the site plan approved by the Planning Board; provided,
that such fence, wall or hedge may be waived by the Planning Board if,
because of topographic or other extraordinary or exceptional
conditions, the same shall not be necessary to protect any abutting or
facing premises situated in any Residential Zone;
e. If any fence, wall or hedge shall have been required for any parking
area under subparagraph d of this subsection, then the fence, wall or
hedge shall be protected by a concrete curb or bumper guard, or the
equivalent, which shall run parallel to the fence, wall or hedge, be at
least five (5") inches in height above the paved surface adjacent to the
fence, wall or hedge, and be sufficient distance therefor to protect the
§ 34-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-13.1
AO:435
§ 34-13.2. Required Parking in B and I Zones. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 802;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 802]
fence, wall or hedge from the impact of motor vehicles. Utility poles
or railroad ties shall not be used to meet required curbing or bumper
guards;
f. If any parking area shall have been permitted in any front yard the
Planning Board shall have the power to require a concrete curb,
bumper guard, or the equivalent, at least five (5") inches in height
above the paved surface, along and parallel to any landscaped area in
the front yard as sufficient to protect the same from the impact of motor
vehicles;
g. All such parking areas shall be used only for the parking of automobiles.
No commercial repair work or sales of any kind shall be conducted in
any parking areas. No sign other than entrance, exit, identification and
conditions of use signs shall be maintained in any parking area. No such
signs shall be larger than four square feet in area. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to permit any required parking area to be
used for the commercial storage of new or used motor vehicles by a new
or used car dealer or motor vehicle rental agency;
h. Each and every off-street parking area shall be subject to site plan
approval by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider the
effect of any parking area upon traffic safety and abutting properties
and shall ascertain that all requirements of this chapter are met;
i. All required parking shall be provided on the same lot as the principal
building the parking is serving;
j. Off-street parking is permitted in the rear yard. Off-street parking is
permitted in the side yard provided no parking area shall be closer to
the side property line than five (5') feet. Off-street parking is permitted
in any front yard provided the parking is at no point closer to the front
street property line than ten (10') feet.
No off-street parking as regulated in this section shall be permitted closer than
five (5') feet to any property line unless the parking area will abut an approved
parking area on the adjacent property.
a. In all B Zones, off-street parking shall not be required.
b. In all O-R Zones, off-street parking shall be provided for permitted
residential uses at a ratio of one and three quarters (1.75) usable offstreet
parking stall per dwelling unit. Office uses permitted in the O-R
Zone as set forth in this chapter shall be provided with off-street
parking at a ratio of one parking stall for each 200 square feet of floor
area, exclusive of any access drive or aisles within the parking area. In
cases of permitted home professional office uses in the O-R Zone, the
floor area devoted to office use shall be utilized in determining off-street
parking requirements specified by this subsection. Medical and dental
§ 34-13.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-13.2
AO:436
§ 34-13.3. Required Parking in Residential Zones. [Ord. 3/12/74,
§ 803; Ord. 1/13/87, § 803]
In all Residential Zone Districts, off-street parking shall be furnished for all
new buildings or additions to buildings at a ratio of two usable off-street
parking spaces for each new dwelling unit on the premises upon which
the dwelling unit is located. In all Residential Zone Districts permitted
nonresidential uses shall be provided with two off-street parking spaces
exclusive of any access drives or aisles within the parking area for every
200 square feet of floor area, or any fraction thereof, of any building used
for said use exclusive of a private garage. Any permitted nonresidential use
which is on the same lot with a permitted residential use shall be provided
with off-street parking for each of the uses and the computation for each use
shall be made separately and cumulatively. All off-street parking spaces as
required by this subsection shall be provided with adequate access drives
and aisles as defined in Section 34-5.
office uses in the O-R Zone as permitted by this chapter shall be
provided with off-street parking at a ratio of one parking stall per
doctor, plus an additional one parking stall for each 100 square feet of
floor area devoted to such medical or dental use.
c. In all I Zones and LI Zones, provision shall be made for one off-street
parking space exclusive of any access drive or aisles within the parking
area for every 600 square feet of floor area, or any fraction thereof, of
all buildings upon the premises exclusive of private garages. All parking
spaces shall be provided with access drives and aisles as defined in
Section 34-5. For the purpose of administering this subsection, any
basement area in any Nonresidential Zone that is used for sales or
display and is open to the public shall be construed as floor area. All
fractional spaces required under the terms of this section shall be
construed as whole spaces.
d. In all I Zones, for all primary intended uses as allowed in subsection
34-28.1 of this chapter provision shall be made for one off-street
parking space exclusive of any access drives or aisles within the
parking area for every 600 square feet of floor area, or any fraction
thereof, of all buildings upon the premises exclusive of private garages.
All parking spaces shall be provided with access drives and aisles as
defined in Section 34-5. For the purpose of administering this
subsection, any basement area in any Nonresidential Zone that is used
for sales or display and is open to the public shall be construed as floor
area. All fractional spaces required under the terms of this section shall
be construed as whole spaces.
e. In all I Zones, for all permitted conditional uses, provisions shall be
made for two and one-half (2 1/2) off-street parking spaces exclusive of
any access drives or aisles within the parking area for each dwelling
unit.
§ 34-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-13.4
AO:437
§ 34-13.4. Joint Parking Facilities. [Ord. 1/13/87, § 804]
Any owners of property in the O-R Zone District may meet the required
parking provisions of this section by participating in a joint parking program
involving two or more office or home professional uses; provided, however,
that plans for such a joint parking program shall have been approved by
the Planning Board, and, provided, further that the area for the parking
facilities shall equal the collected parking area requirements of the
participating properties to be served.
§ 34-13.5. Parking Improvement Exemptions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 805;
Ord. 1/13/87, § 805]
If any applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Planning Board that,
because of the nature of his operation or use, the parking requirements of
this section are unnecessary or excessive, the Planning Board shall have
the power to approve a site plan showing less paved parking area than
is required by this section; provided, however, that a landscaped area of
sufficient size to meet the efficiency shall be set aside and reserved for
the purposes of meeting future off-street parking requirements in the event
that a change of use of the premises shall make such additional off-street
parking space necessary. Anything in this section or in Section 34-15 to
the contrary notwithstanding, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be valid
except for the particular use for which it was issued and any change
on any premises previously improved under this subsection shall only be
permitted after a new site plan shall have been submitted to and reviewed
and approved by the Planning Board. All parts of any yards not used for offstreet
parking areas shall be adequately landscaped, subject to approval by
the Planning Board, and maintained in good condition.
§ 34-14. SIGNS.
§ 34-14.1. Signs in the Residential Zone Districts. [Ord. 3/12/74,
§ 902; Ord. 1/13/87, § 902]
In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 Zone Districts, only the following signs shall be
permitted:
a. One nameplate sign or customary sign for permitted uses, not more
than two square feet in area, which may be either a nonilluminated or
illuminated nonflashing sign, provided that the direct source of light is
shielded in such a manner that it is not visible from the street or any
adjoining residential property.
b. A nonilluminating temporary sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the
premises upon which it is placed, not exceeding 12 square feet in total
area, provided that it shall be removed within seven days after signing
the contract of sale or the signing of a sale transaction or the execution
of a lease. Signs as permitted by this section that are smaller than four
square feet need not obtain a permit.
§ 34-13.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-14.1
AO:438
§ 34-14.2. Signs in the B District. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 903; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 903]
In the B District and for all permitted office uses in the O-R District, no
sign shall be permitted which is not accessory to the business or office use
conducted on the property. Any such sign may be attached to any entrance
wall or wall facing on a street providing all the following requirements are
met:
c. A sign deemed necessary to the public welfare by the Borough Council.
d. A sign not more than eight square feet in area setting forth the name of
a school or place of worship on the same premises, and its coming
activities.
e. None of the signs permitted in the Residential Districts shall be erected
nearer any street or road than half the setback required for the
principal building to be erected on the plot, provided that nameplate
sign not more than 72 square inches in area as regulated above may be
placed anywhere within the front yard.
f. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, one sign no larger
than eight square feet is permitted as accessory to each garden
apartment development within the R-4 Zone.
a. No sign shall be lighted by means of intermittent illumination.
Illuminated nonflashing signs are permitted provided that floodlights
where used shall only be permitted where the direct source of light is
shielded in such a manner that it is not visible from the street or any
adjoining residential property.
b. The total sign area for any sign permitted on the face of any wall shall
not exceed one square foot of street frontage, with a maximum of fifty
(50') feet for each business establishment.
c. No sign shall extend or project above the highest elevation of the wall to
which it is attached.
d. Buildings located on corner lots shall be construed as having frontage
on both streets and signs as regulated in this section shall be permitted
accordingly.
In addition to the above requirements flat signs shall not extend farther than
fifteen (15") inches from the face of this building wall upon which it is attached,
provided, however, where a sign extends more than three (3") inches from the
face of the wall the bottom of the sign shall not be closer than ten (10') feet
from the ground level below the sign.
Signs for home professional office use as permitted in the O-R Zone shall be
regulated by the requirements of this subsection. Signs for residential uses
permitted in the O-R Zone shall be regulated by subsection 34-14.2.
§ 34-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-14.3
AO:439
§ 34-14.3. Signs in the I and LI Districts. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 904; Ord.
1/13/87, § 904]
In the Industrial District and the Light Industrial District, no sign shall be
permitted which is not accessory to the business conducted on the property
and further subject to the following requirements:
§ 34-15. BUILDING AND ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF
OCCUPANCY.
§ 34-15.1. Building Permits and Plans. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1001; Ord.
1/13/87, § 1001]
a. Signs attached to the wall of the principal building are permitted as
regulated in subsection 34-14.3.
b. Each industrial use is permitted one freestanding sign provided the sign
is not placed in the front half of the setback required for the principal
building.
c. The sign complies with the side yard requirements for the principal
building.
d. The length of the permitted sign is not over 20% of the width of the
building that the sign will set in front of, but in no case shall the length
of the sign exceed twenty (20') feet.
e. The height of the sign shall not exceed 1/2 the length as permitted
above, but in no case shall the height of the sign exceed ten (10') feet.
In addition to the above, this Zone also permits signs as regulated in subsection
34-14.2.
a. No building or structure or part thereof except a fence or wall as
regulated by subsection 34-6.20 shall be erected, razed, moved,
extended, enlarged, altered or demolished unless and until a permit has
been granted by the Construction Official therefor.
b. Application therefor shall be filed in triplicate with the Construction
Official by the owner, or his agent, and shall state the intended use of
the structure and the land.
c. The application shall be accompanied by detailed plans and
specifications and new buildings or additions to buildings shall be
accompanied by a plot plan sowing finished grades and existing grades,
open spaces, the established building lines within the block upon which
the land is located and such other information as may be required to
show that the proposed building or other structure shall comply with all
of the requirements of this chapter for the Zone District in which the
premises is located.
d. The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall show actual dimensions and
figures. All plans, specifications, and plot plans shall be signed by a
§ 34-14.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-15.1
AO:440
§ 34-15.2. Zoning Permits. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1002; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1002]
No land shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose
whatsoever unless and until a Zoning Permit therefor shall have been issued
by the Construction Official. A Zoning Permit shall be required for the use of
any premises which does not have upon it a building. Whenever there shall
be a change contemplated in the use of any premises which does not have a
building upon it, a new Zoning Permit therefor shall be required.
§ 34-15.3. Certificates of Occupancy. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1003; Ord. 1/
13/87, § 1003]
No building or structure hereafter erected or altered and no building in
which the occupancy or nature of use shall have been changed, shall be
occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever unless
and until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued therefor by
the Building Inspector. The issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall
negate the necessity of securing a Zoning Permit for the same premises.
The issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall supersede and revoke any
Zoning Permit already granted for the same premises.
§ 34-15.4. Time Limitation. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1004; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1004]
The Construction Official shall issue or deny a Zoning Permit within seven
days of the application therefor where site plan approval by the Planning
Board is not required and within seven days after affirmative action on
the site plan by the Planning Board where site plan approval is required.
The Construction Official shall issue or deny a Certificate of Occupancy
within seven days of the application therefor where site plan approval by
licensed architect or a licensed professional engineer of the State
of New Jersey, provided, however, that the owner of a single-family
residence may sign the plans in the event he has prepared them and
intends to occupy said premises and the owner shall file an affidavit to
that effect with said plans. A plot plan, but only a plot plan, may be
prepared and certified by a licensed land surveyor of the State of New
Jersey.
e. No Building Permit shall be issued for the erection, razing, moving,
extending, enlargement or alteration of any building or structure, or
any part thereof, unless and until the plans and intended uses therefor
indicate that such building or structure is designed to conform in all
respects to the provisions of this and all other applicable ordinances of
the Borough of South Bound Brook. No Building Permit shall be issued
for the erection, razing, moving, extending, enlargement or alteration
of any building or structure, or part thereof, in any R-4, LI or I Zone
District unless and until the requirements of Section 34-12 have been
met.
§ 34-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-15.4
AO:441
the Planning Board is not required, and within seven days after affirmative
action on the site plan by the Planning Board where site plan approval is
required.
§ 34-15.5. Prerequisite for the Issuance of Zoning Permits or
Certificates of Occupancy. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1005; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1005]
No Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the
Construction Official until he has ascertained that all the requirements of
this chapter and any other applicable Borough or State regulations and
ordinances, Board of Adjustment decisions, necessary resolutions of the
governing body of the Borough, and site plan as approved by the Planning
Board, have been and are fully complied with. All improvements shown on
any site plan shall have been installed on the premises in question before
any Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy, as the case may be, shall be
issued.
§ 34-15.6. Fees. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1006; Ord. 1/13/87, § 1006]
A fee for any Building Permit, Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy
shall be paid to the Borough at the time application is made therefor. Fee
for a Building Permit shall be that specified by the Building Code of the
Borough. The fee for a Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be
as follows:
Certificates of Occupancy
a. Nonresidential Units: $100 per unit
b. Single Family Dwelling $50 per unit
c. Two Family Dwellings $50 per dwelling unit
d. Multiple Family Dwellings and Apartment
Buildings
$50 per dwelling unit
e. Residential Units $50 per unit
Zoning Permits
$50 for all nonresidential uses not requiring a Building Permit or
Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 34-15.7. Terms and Conditions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1007; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1007]
A Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall specify the use of the
land, or building or buildings, as the case may be, and any terms or
conditions imposed thereunder. Any change in use shall be treated as a new
use and a new Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be required
therefor. Before any Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy, as the case
may be, shall be issued for any such change in use, all provisions of this
§ 34-15.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-15.7
AO:442
chapter shall be complied with in the same manner as if the new use were
an initial use of land or a new structure or building.
§ 34-15.8. Records. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1008; Ord. 1/13/87, § 1008]
It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to keep records of all
applications for Building Permits, Zoning Permits or Certificates of
Occupancy and of all such permits and certificates issued, together with a
notation of all special terms or conditions imposed thereunder. He shall be
responsible for the filing and safe keeping of all plans and specifications
submitted to him with any application, and the same shall form a part of
the records of his office and shall be available to all officials of the Borough.
Copies of any permits or certificates shall be furnished upon request to any
person who shall have a right thereto by law.
§ 34-15.9. Violations. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1009; Ord. 1/13/87, § 1009]
The use or occupancy of land or buildings prior to securement of a Building
Permit, Zoning Permit, or a Certificate of Occupancy, as the case may be,
when one is required, shall be a direct violation of this chapter and shall
subject the violator or violators to the penalties hereinafter prescribed.
§ 34-16. through § 34-17. (RESERVED)
§ 34-18. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
§ 34-18.1. Primary Intended Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1101; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1101]
This Zone District is designed for single-family residential use but permits:
a. All public buildings owned or leased by any unit of government and
public or institutional uses and public utilities but the procedure set
forth in subsection 34-6.17 above must be followed.
b. Signs conforming to subsection 34-14.1.
c. Accessory uses customarily incident to the above uses provided they do
not include any activity commonly conducted for gain unless
specifically permitted in this section.
d. Private garages as regulated in subsection 34-6.8.
e. Parking and parking facilities conforming to subsection 34-13.3 above.
f. Public parks and playgrounds.
g. Not more than two roomers or boarders per dwelling unit.
§ 34-15.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-18.2
AO:443
§ 34-18.2. Prohibited Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1102; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1102]
Any use other than those uses listed in subsection 34-18.1 is prohibited.
§ 34-18.3. Required Conditions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1103; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1103]
The following requirements must be complied with in the R-1 Residence
District:
§ 34-19. R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
§ 34-19.1. Primary Intended Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1201; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1201]
This Zone District is designed for single-family residential use and permits
any use as permitted and regulated in the R-1 Residence Zone.
§ 34-19.2. Prohibited Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1202; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1202]
Any use other than those uses listed in subsection 34-19.1 is prohibited.
§ 34-19.3. Required Conditions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1203; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1203]
The following requirements must be complied with in the R-2 Residence
District:
a. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
stories or thirty-five (35') feet in height, whichever is the lesser.
b. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than thirty (30') feet.
c. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards and no side yard shall be less
than ten (10') feet provided further that the aggregate width of the two
side yards combined must equal 30% of the lot width at the building
line.
d. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty-five (25') feet.
e. Minimum Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 7,500
square feet, with an average width of seventy-five (75') feet measured
within one hundred (100') feet of the front property line.
f. Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor
area of 1,200 square feet exclusive of any basement area provided,
however, any dwelling other than a one story structure shall have a total
minimum floor area of 800 square feet on the ground floor level.
a. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
stories of thirty-five (35') feet in height, whichever is the lesser.
§ 34-18.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-19.3
AO:444
§ 34-20. R-3 SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
§ 34-20.1. Primary Intended Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1301; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1301]
This Zone District is designed for single and two family residential use but
permits any use as permitted and regulated in the R-1 Residential Zone.
§ 34-20.2. Prohibited Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1302; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1302]
Any use other than those listed in subsection 34-20.1 is prohibited.
§ 34-20.3. Required Conditions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1303; Ord. 1/12/87,
§ 1303]
The following requirements must be complied with in the R-3 Residence
District:
b. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25')
feet.
c. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards and no side yard shall be less
than six (6') feet provided further that the aggregate width of the two
side yards combined must equal 30% of the lot width at the building
line.
d. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty-five (25') feet.
e. Minimum Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 5,000
square feet, with an average width of fifty (50') feet, measured within
one hundred (100') feet of the front property line.
f. Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor
area of 1,000 square feet exclusive of any basement area provided,
however, any dwelling other than a one story structure shall have a total
minimum floor area of 800 square feet on the ground floor level.
a. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
stories or thirty-five (35') feet in height, whichever is the lesser.
b. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25')
feet.
c. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard shall be less
than six (6') feet, provided, further that the aggregate width of the two
side yards combined must equal 30% of the lot width at the building
line.
d. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty-five (25') feet.
§ 34-19.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-20.3
AO:445
§ 34-21. R-4 GARDEN APARTMENT RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
§ 34-21.1. Primary Intended Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1401; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1401]
This Zone District is designed for single-family residential uses as well as
multiple family structures commonly referred to as garden apartments. This
Zone also permits any use as regulated in the R-1 Residence District.
§ 34-21.2. Prohibited Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1402; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1402]
Any use other than those listed in subsection 34-21.1 is prohibited.
§ 34-21.3. Required Conditions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1403; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1403]
The following conditions must be complied with for all garden apartment
buildings hereinafter constructed in the R-4 Zone:
e. Minimum Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 5,000
square feet, with an average width of fifty (50') feet measured within
one hundred (100') feet of the front property line.
f. Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor
area of 800 square feet per unit.
a. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of two stories.
b. Yards. Every garden apartment development shall be so designed so
that no structure containing a dwelling unit shall be closer than forty
(40') feet to any abutting street line or twenty-five (25') feet to any other
property line.
c. Open Space. There shall be a minimum distance of thirty (30') feet
between all structures containing dwelling units, provided, however, no
open court yard formed by either one building or a group of buildings
shall be less than sixty (60') feet.
d. Density. Every garden apartment development shall have at least 3,000
square feet of lot area per dwelling unit and shall have no more than 14
units per acre.
e. Rooms. No garden apartment unit as permitted shall contain more than
two bedrooms. However, no more than 20% of any such apartment unit
shall contain more than one bedroom. For the purpose of administering
this section, a bedroom shall be construed as any room other than
kitchen, living room or bath.
f. Superintendent. Each garden apartment project, whether contained in
one structure or more than one structure, shall have a building
superintendent residing in the project.
§ 34-20.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-21.3
AO:446
§ 34-22. through § 34-24. (RESERVED)
§ 34-25. O-R OFFICE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
§ 34-25.1. Primary Intended Use. [Ord. 1/13/87, § 14A-01]
The following uses are permitted in the O-R District:
§ 34-25.2. Prohibited Use. [Ord. 1/13/87, § 14A-02]
g. Basement Apartments. No dwelling unit shall be permitted in any
basement.
h. Minimum Lot Size. No garden apartment project, whether consisting of
one or more than one structure, shall be located on any lot having an
area of less than one acre and a minimum lot width of less than one
hundred twenty-five (125') feet.
i. Landscaping. All open spaces in any garden apartment project shall be
adequately landscaped and maintained in good condition after approval
by the Planning Board. All parking and service areas will be so screened
that adjacent residential areas are shielded from the parking or service
areas, and all ingress and egress driveways to and from the parking and
service areas shall only be located within the R-4 Zone District.
j. Lighting. Yard lighting shall be provided during the hours of darkness
to provide illumination for the premises and all interior sidewalks,
walkways and parking areas thereon. All wiring shall be laid
underground and all lighting fixtures shall be so arranged that the
direct source of light is not visible from any adjacent residential areas.
k. Minimum Floor Areas. Every garden apartment dwelling unit
containing only one bedroom shall have a minimum floor area of 700
square feet per unit. Two bedroom units shall have a minimum floor
area of 900 square feet per unit.
l. Parking Area. One and one-half (1 1/2) parking spaces per dwelling unit
will be provided.
a. Single-family residential use as permitted and regulated in the R-1
Residential District.
b. Single-family and two family residential use as permitted and regulated
in the R-3 Residential District and as permitted by this section.
c. Professional office use including medical, dental or legal offices, banks
and similar financial institutions, real estate offices, and other uses of
similar nature as defined by this chapter.
d. Home professional use as defined by this chapter.
a. Professional office and home professional office use are prohibited in
any building which contains more than one residential unit.
§ 34-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-25.2
AO:447
§ 34-25.3. Required Conditions. [Ord. 1/13/87, § 14A-03]
The following requirements shall be complied with in the O-R Office
Residential District:
b. Any use which is not expressly permitted in subsection 34-25.1 is
prohibited.
a. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
stories or thirty-five (35') feet in height, whichever is the lesser.
b. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25')
feet.
c. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard shall be less
than six (6') feet, provided, further that the aggregate width of the two
side yards combined shall equal 30% of the lot width at the building
line.
d. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty-five (25') feet.
e. Minimum Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 5,000
square feet, with an average width of fifty (50') feet measured within
one hundred (100') feet of the front property line.
f. Minimum Residential Floor Area. Each dwelling unit shall have a
minimum floor area of 800 square feet per unit.
g. Combined Uses. Combined residential and professional office or home
professional office uses shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
1. Professional office use and home professional use shall only be
permitted on the ground floor level of any building.
2. A separate exterior entrance shall be provided to the residential
unit of buildings having professional office use, except in the case
of home professional office use conducted by the resident of such
premises, in which case uses shall be physically separated by a
door or other type of partition to be approved by the Borough.
3. All open spaces on premises of professional office use or home
professional uses shall be adequately landscaped and maintained in
good condition after approval by the Borough. All parking service
areas shall be so screened that adjacent residential areas are
shielded from the parking or service areas.
4. Lighting shall be provided during the hours of darkness to provide
illumination for the premises and all interior sidewalks, walkways
and parking areas thereon during business hours of all professional
office and home professional uses. All wiring shall be laid
underground and all lighting fixtures shall be so arranged that the
§ 34-25.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-25.3
AO:448
§ 34-26. (RESERVED)
§ 34-27. B BUSINESS DISTRICT.
§ 34-27.1. Primary Intended Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1501; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1501]
This Zone District is limited to business uses of a strictly retail sales and
service type but also permits:
§ 34-27.2. Prohibited Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1502; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1502; Ord. No. 2008-09]
Any use other than those permitted by subsection 34-27.1 above is
prohibited and more particularly none of the following uses shall be
permitted: used car lots, unless an accessory use, junk yards, auction
establishments, adult book stores, auto body shops, warehouses, storage
buildings, trailer camps or tourist homes, roller skating rinks, residential
uses of any kind, rooming or boarding houses, and any industrial use. In the
event the Construction Official receives application for an intended use in
the B Business District and he believes that the intended use is not a strictly
retail sales and service nature or that it does not comply with all of the
provisions of subsection 34-27.1 above, he shall refer the application to the
Board of Adjustment for a decision after a hearing, as to whether or not the
intended use violates the spirit and intent of this section. The Construction
Official shall act pursuant to the decision of the Board of Adjustment.
§ 34-27.3. Required Conditions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1503; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1503]
The following requirements must be complied with in the B Business
District:
direct source of light is not visible from any adjacent residential
area.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section
34-13 of this chapter.
a. Business, professional and administrative offices.
b. Accessory uses customarily incident to the above.
c. Public garages as regulated in Section 34-7.
a. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of two stories or twentyeight
(28') feet in height, which-ever is the lesser.
b. Front Yard. No front yard is required.
c. Side Yard. Business buildings may be built without side yards, except
that where a side yard in the B Business District adjoins the side yard of
§ 34-25.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-27.3
AO:449
§ 34-28. INDUSTRIAL ZONE AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
§ 34-28.1. Primary Intended Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1601; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1601]
§ 34-28.2. Conditional Uses Permitted. [Ord. 1/13/87, § 1601.1]
Single-family attached development and customarily incidental accessory
uses are permitted as conditional uses as regulated by this chapter.
§ 34-28.3. Prohibited Use. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1602; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1602]
No land or building shall be used or occupied for a use which will in
any manner create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable, fire explosive, radioactive or other hazard; noise or vibration;
smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness,
movement of air; electrical or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid
waste in any manner or amount unless it conforms with the performance
standards of subsection 34-28.5 or any use which shall be detrimental to
the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the Borough. In addition, the
following uses are specifically prohibited:
a Residence Zone District, there shall be a minimum side yard of ten
(10') feet. If a side yard is provided, it shall not be less than ten (10')
feet.
d. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least ten (10') feet. Where
property abuts any Residence Zone District, there shall be a rear yard
of twenty-five (25') feet.
a. This zone is designed for offices of business or professional, executive
or administrative purposes, scientific or research laboratories and
selected industrial and manufacturing uses. The intensity of operations
shall not exceed the limitations imposed by the performance standards
hereinafter set forth in this section. Before the issuance of a building or
occupancy permit, the Planning Board shall review and approve a site
development plan of the proposed use. The Planning Board shall
ascertain that all the following requirements are complied with. All uses
permitted shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building except for loading and unloading operations and on-site
parking of delivery vehicles.
b. The LI, Light Industrial District is designed for industrial uses which do
not involve the storage, use, manufacturing, or fabrication of dangerous
sub-stances or involve objectionable noise production, effluents and
generally do not create a major hazard to the general public or
employees thereof. Permitted uses in the LI Zone District include
business office, warehousing of nonhazardous materials, fabrication
processes and other industrial uses as determined by the Borough
Planning Board which are not of a nuisance-generating character.
§ 34-27.3 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-28.3
AO:450
§ 34-28.4. Required Conditions. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1603; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 1603]
a. Residential construction or conversion except as conditionally
permitted in subsection 34-28.2 of this chapter.
b. Commercial incineration.
c. Junk yards.
d. Rubbish, garbage or trash dumps except by the Borough or its agent.
a. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of thirty-five (35') feet.
b. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25')
feet. Parking areas as required shall not be permitted in the front yard.
No parking area shall be nearer than five (5') feet to any other property
line nor ten (10') feet to any building. Corner lots in this Zone shall meet
1/2 the front yard setback requirements on the side street.
c. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards and no side yard shall be less
than twenty-five (25') feet. Parking as required may be permitted in the
side yard provided no parking area is closer than ten (10') feet to any
building nor ten (10') feet to any side property line.
d. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least fifty (50') feet. The rear
yard may be used for off-street parking provided no parking area shall
be nearer than ten (10') feet to any building nor ten (10') feet to any
property line.
e. Landscaping. Those portions of all front, rear, and side yards that are
not used for off-street parking shall be attractively planted with trees,
shrubs, plants and grass lawns, as required by the Planning Board to
insure that proper conditions will exist for drainage and absorption of
surface waters and in order to preclude and prevent traffic hazards.
f. Zone District Boundary Line Restrictions. No structure shall be
constructed within this Zone District which shall be nearer than fifty
(50') feet from any residential zone district boundary. Within the fifty
(50') foot wide buffer area hereby created, a solid and continuous
landscape screen shall be planted and maintained consisting of massed
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of such species and size as
will produce, within two growing seasons, a screen at least six (6') feet
in height, and such density as will obscure, throughout the full course of
the year, 75% of the glare of automobile headlights emitted from the
premises.
The landscape screen described above shall be located adjacent to the
Residential Zone District boundary line.
In the event that any of the plantings in accordance with the above
requirements do not live, they shall be replaced within one year.
§ 34-28.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-28.4
AO:451
§ 34-28.5. Performance Standards. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1604; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1604]
Before the issuance of any Building or Occupancy Permit for any use in the
Industrial District, all of the following regulations must be complied with:
g. Minimum Lot Size. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 12,500
square feet with a minimum lot width of one hundred (100') feet.
a. Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities shall be carried on only in
structures which conform to the standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters or the Borough Building Code or Fire Ordinance,
whichever is more restrictive. All operations shall be carried on and all
explosive raw materials, fuels, liquids, and finished products shall be
stored in accordance with the standards of the Board of Fire
Underwriters.
b. Radioactivity. Any industrial activity which emits dangerous
radioactivity outside any permitted structure at any point is prohibited.
c. Smoke, Dust, Fly Ash and Other Air Pollutants. All industrial activities
shall be carried on in accordance with the regulations set forth in the
New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code as published by the New Jersey
State Department of Health.
d. Liquid or Solid Wastes. No industrial operator shall discharge industrial
wastes of any kind into any reservoir, pond or lake. The discharge of
untreated industrial wastes into a stream shall be prohibited. All
methods of sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be
approved by the Borough and New Jersey State Health Departments.
Effluent from a treatment plant shall at all times comply with the
standards set forth by the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority and
the New Jersey State Water Policy Commission as the same shall apply.
e. Vibration. There shall be no vibration beyond the immediate site on
which the use is conducted.
f. Noise. There shall be no noise emanating from the operation or use
measured from any point on the property line of the lot on which the
industrial operation is located which shall exceed the values given in
the following table in any octave band of frequency. The sound pressure
level shall be measured with sound level meters and/or analyzers
conforming to "United States of America Standard Specification for
General-Purpose Sound Level Meters," S1.4-1961, or latest revision,
"United States of America Standard Specification for Octave, Half-
Octave, and Third-Octave Band Filter Sets," S1.11-1966 or latest
revision, published by United States of America Standard Institute,
New York, N.Y.
§ 34-28.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-28.5
AO:452
§ 34-29. CIVIC DESIGN REGULATIONS.
§ 34-29.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2005-03]
There is a compelling public purpose in regulating the visual character
of public spaces insofar as perceptual science has amply demonstrated
the linkage of visual character to public safety, public health, economic
vitality and property value. Public regulation is necessary to encourage
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Property Category in dBA
Receiving Property Category
Sound Source Residential Commercial Industrial
Property
Category
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m. All Times All Times
Any location within
a multi-dwellingunit
building
55 50 65 75
Residential 55 50 65 75
Commercial or
public spaces or
rights-of-way
65 50 65 75
Industrial 65 50 65 75
The following are exempt from the sound level limits of the above table:
1. Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers, and agricultural
equipment when operated with a muffler between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. on weekends and legal holidays, provided they produce less
than 85 dBA at or within any real property line of a residential
property.
2. Sound from church bells and church chimes when part of a
religious observance or service.
3. Noise from construction activity provided all motorized equipment
used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, except
as provided in this subsection.
4. Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers, and snow plows when
operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
5. Noise from stationary emergency signaling devices that conforms
with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29.
6. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor
vehicle provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation
within 15 minutes after it has been activated.
§ 34-28.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-29.1
AO:453
and promote unified, highly legible common public spaces undepreciated
by detractive visual elements — a condition aimed at fostering the good
feelings of aesthetics essential to a vibrant and desirable community while
avoiding the visual overload that undermines property values, degrades
public health, and spawns public hazards.
§ 34-29.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-03]
The civic design regulations are intended to protect and enhance
community character and promote a desirable visual environment through
good civic design and arrangements and creative development techniques.
§ 34-29.3. Civic Design Performance Standards. [Ord. No. 2005-03]
The streetscape between the building line and the street shall be a semipublic
amenity, a passive open space of a unified decorative character. No
visible structural or landscape feature is to be visually disruptive of that
character either in that it is:
a. The system of regulations encompassed by this section uses municipal
powers expressly granted for site plan review and approval and to
protect all aspects of community character.
b. These powers are used in a way that advances a specific statutory
purpose of New Jersey's Municipal Land Use Law, namely "to promote a
desirable visual environment through creative development techniques
and good civic design and arrangements" (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2.i.).
c. That regulatory system encompasses the following:
1. General performance standards to prevent the degradation of
visual character anywhere in the Borough;
2. Objective criteria to be used in judging the consistency of
character;
3. Explicit requirements for character consistency in site plan
reviews;
4. Overlay zoning district for the Borough Center and the Historic
Dublin Neighborhood aimed at protecting the unique character of
these areas; and
5. A Community Character Advisory Committee appointed by the
Mayor to collaborate with and assist the Planning Board, Zoning
Officer and property owners in determining consistency of visual
character.
a. Functionally incompatible with the passive character of the space or
that utilitarian activities and non-decorative features are visible from
the street;
§ 34-29.1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-29.3
AO:454
§ 34-29.4. Character Consistency Assessments. [Ord. No. 2005-03]
The character of a streetscape shall be determined by assessment of the
neighborhood context and its valued traits. Visible objects shall be judged
in terms of their fit within the visual context of the neighborhood and their
contribution to legibility of the streetscape as a whole. Context is to be
judged in terms of:
b. Out of character with the physical traits of color, material, form, scale,
formality or other design aspects of the streetscape; or
c. Disorderly in its competition for attention departing form a hierarchy of
safety first followed by celebration, display of goods and services,
promotional message, informational messages with background
elements subdued. The appropriate degree of salience of informational
features shall be gauged by the following hierarchal order of
importance.
1. Safety devices and hazard warnings;
2. Celebratory information;
3. Displays of goods, symbols or icons;
4. Promotional, identification, sales or marketing;
5. Informational, regulatory, promotional or addressing; and
6. Noninformational features designed to create a harmonious
background gauged in terms of similarity, congruence, and
agreement of visual traits including but not limited to:
(a) Form treatment including shape, scale, proportion, rhythm,
and balance.
(b) Surface treatment including color palette, texture, sheen and
pattern.
a. The type of space (This may include public, semi-public, or private
spaces. Semi-public spaces surround streets, street intersections or
other plaza types and usually extend from the building set-back line to
the street line);
b. The functions of the space (Functions in semi-public areas may include
vehicular or pedestrian travel, passive seating, active play, vehicular
parking or decorative features);
c. The stratification of the space (Visual boundaries may be multi-level,
comprised of building facades, tree lines, or distant horizons. Partial or
full enclosures may occur at various levels including the pedestrian
streetscape level, roofscape level, an intermediate fascia level and a
horizon/overhead enclosure. There may also be horizontal levels such
as pedestrian level surface or vehicular level surface);
§ 34-29.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-29.4
AO:455
§ 34-29.5. BC-CDO District. [Ord. No. 2005-03]
The Borough Center Civic Design Overlay district shall be coterminous with
the B, 1 and L-I districts situated within the bounds of the redevelopment
d. Informational aspects within the space (Functional focal points such as
major and minor portals, landmarks, activity areas, and way-finding,
cultural or informational features which require contrasting rather than
harmonizing treatment to provide salience and reinforce cultural
significance);
e. Needed buffering of interfering activity (The disparate needs of
utilitarian areas, private areas, dangerous activity areas and disruptive
activity areas which should be buffered, screened or removed);
f. The uniqueness and diversity of the space (along with the sequential
nature of adjoining spaces and the possible need for interesting or
exciting transitions).
g. The range of traits is several key areas as follows:
1. Cultural character includes visual information that reinforces a
sense of space such as function, geography and ethnicity. The
presence of various advertising, and regulatory, celebratory, or
behavioral messages is to be considered in terms of the economy
through icons, logos, and minimization of content and ordering of
importance.
2. Dimensional character relates to the openness of a space on a
continuum of size from intimate to grand. Considerations should
include scale, proportion and dimensioning of both the horizontal
space and of the vertical enclosure elements at the pedestrian
streetscape level and higher levels.
3. Compositional Character is largely defined by the degree of
formality/informality of a space. Considerations should include
symmetry and balance for both plan and elevation. Contributing
aspects include form treatment to including shape, proportion,
rhythm, and balance surface treatment including color palette,
texture, sheen, and pattern and transparent opening treatment
such as glass windows, interior/exterior closures, exposed interior
features, transparency and obstructions.
4. Spatial character relates to physical orientation and way-finding
cues within the space including movement cues of repetitive or
linear features such as tree lines, hedgegrows or railings.
5. Temporal character establishes an orientation in time such as
period cues for historic coherency such as style, materials and
technology, seasonal cues such as plants with variations or holiday
decorations, or business hour cues such as illumination levels,
gates, or window closures.
§ 34-29.4 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-29.5
AO:456
district. The following requirements must be complied with in the BC-CDO
district:
a. Benchmark Sites. The following buildings and sites have been
designated to serve as the contextual basis for visual unity:
1. 110 Canal Road (former GAF research building) with changes
recommended in the 2002 Borough Center Design Guidelines.
2. (Reserved)
b. Streetscape. A hard-surfaced furnished pedestrian area shall be
maintained between the curbline and building line. Buildings shall be
aligned directly on the street line with a finished floor at grade and
eave/cornice line height of 11.5 to 12.5 feet.
c. Roofscape. Limited to vertical parapets aligned at a height of between
15 and 35 feet.
d. Windows and Other Fascia Openings. Limited to formal styles with
strong, repetitive, linear, rectangular forms with strong symmetry
proportioned 1:1-1:3 vertical to horizontal on all floors.
e. Fascia Openings. 40-80% of street level fascia; 25-70% of upper level
fascia; 0% of roofscape.
f. Finishes. Color range shall be limited to "Colonial Revival" vernacular
commercial palettes with brick ranging from brick red to cream, stone
from cool to warm gray, other fascia materials to be limited to adjacent
color schemes; trim to be lighter hues and accent colors to be of
complementary or adjacent color schemes. Surface textures shall be
fine without significant relief or pattern. Color hue and saturation for
upper fascia and roofscape shall be limited to moderate intensity
ranges.
g. Signs and Displays. Visual clutter shall be minimized through the use of
sizable logos coupled with limited use of lettered signs.
1. Windows shall be unobstructed except for first floor display
windows limited to the following one logo not to exceed 36 inches
in diameter, painted letters not to exceed 12 inches in vertical
dimension for the initial line with any subsequent lines each
reduced to 50% of the preceding line height.
2. Additional interior signage visible through first floor display
windows shall be mounted in a frame not to exceed six square feet
in area and no closer than three feet to the window surface.
3. Displays and signage shall be of workman-like quality.
4. Exterior signs shall be displayed in permanent façade mounted
panels not exceeding 24 inches in vertical dimension. Panels shall
§ 34-29.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-29.5
AO:457
§ 34-29.6. HD-CDO District. [Ord. No. 2005-03]
The Historic Dublin Civic Design Overlay district shall be coterminous
with the R-2 district between Washington Street and Johnson Street. The
following requirements must be complied with the HD-CDO district:
be offset from window/door frames and upper floor fascia by a
distance equal to 50% of the panel's narrowest dimension.
h. Awnings. Shall be treated as a street level appurtenance.
i. Landscaping. Fences, walls and hedges shall be decorative and limited
to a height of 3 feet.
j. Pavement. Shall be limited to traveled paths and ways.
a. Benchmark Sites. The following buildings and sites have been
designated to serve as the contextual basis for visual unity:
1. 50 Franklin Street
2. 73 Franklin Street
3. 77 Franklin Street
4. 68 Canal Street
b. Street Setback. A uniformly landscaped quasi-public "green" 100 feet in
width shall be maintained between building lines. Open porches may
project not more than 10 feet and garage doors must be recessed not
less than 20 feet. An unobtrusive pedestrian way shall be maintained
between the curbline and street line and the street line may be
delineated by a linear feature no more than three feet in height.
Buildings shall have a finished floor at 2 to 3 feet above grade and an
eave/cornice line height of 11.5 to 12.5 feet.
c. Roofscape. Limited to pitched roofs with vertical project not exceeding
35 feet and a slope between 6:12 and 12:12.
d. Windows and Other Fascia Openings. Limited to formal styles with
strong repetitive, linear, rectangular forms with strong symmetry
proportioned 1:1-1:3 vertical to horizontal on all floors.
e. Fascia Openings: 25-70% of street level facsia; 25-70% of upper level
fascia; 0-30% of roofscape.
f. Finishes. Color range shall be limited to "Colonial Revival" vernacular
residential palettes with brick ranging from brick red to cream, stone
from cool to warm grey, other fascia materials to be limited to white,
green, cream and earth tones, trim to be of lighter hues and accent
colors to be of complementary or adjacent color schemes. Surface
textures shall be fine without significant relief or pattern. Color hue and
saturation for upper fascia and roofscape shall be limited to moderate
intensity ranges.
§ 34-29.5 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-29.6
AO:458
§ 34-30. through § 34-34. (RESERVED)
§ 34-35. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.19
§ 34-36. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 34-36.1. Enforcement. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1801; Ord. 1/13/87, § 1801]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Construction Official who shall in
no case, except under a written order of the Board of Adjustment or the
Borough Council, issue a permit for the erection or structural alteration
of any building nor grant any Zoning Permit or Occupancy Permit for any
land or building where the proposed erection, structural alteration, or use
thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. It shall
be the further duty of the Construction Official to investigate any violation
or alleged violation of this chapter coming to his attention, whether by
complaint or third persons or from his own personal knowledge or
observation. When any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of any provision of this chapter, it shall be the duty
of the Construction Official to proceed with the enforcement of this chapter
and the penalties provided for hereunder. He may also pursue such other
statutory method or methods as may be open to him.
The Construction Official shall file a monthly report on his activities,
including the complaints and cases processed by him and his disposition
thereof, with the member of council designated by the Borough Council.
§ 34-36.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1802; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1802]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
contractor or other person or persons interested as lessees, tenants or
otherwise in any building, land or premises where such violation has been
committed or shall exist, and who shall refuse to abate the violation within
five days after written notice so to do has been served upon him by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon him, shall
for each and every violation be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
1, Section 1-5, at the discretion of the Court of Judicial Officer before
whom a conviction may be had. Each and every day that such violation
g. Signs and Displays. Displays and signage to be of workman-like quality.
h. Awnings. Treated as a street level or upper fascia appurtenance.
i. Landscaping. Fences, walls and hedges shall be decorative and limited
to a height of 3 feet.
j. Pavement. Shall be limited to traveled paths and ways.
19.Editor's Note: See Section 30-2 of Chapter 30, Land Use Procedures.
§ 34-29.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-36.2
AO:459
shall continue after the abatement notice shall have been served shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter and not as a
continuing offense.
§ 34-37. through § 34-49. (RESERVED)
§ 34-50. VALIDITY, REPEALER, EFFECTIVE DATE.
§ 34-50.1. Severability and Validity. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 1901; Ord. 1/13/
87, § 1901]
In case any section, part or provision of this chapter shall be held
unconstitutional or invalid by any Court, such holding shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any other part thereof other than the
part so held unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 34-50.2. Repealer. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 2001; Ord. 1/13/87, § 2001]
Any and all ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with or inconsistent with
any of the terms of this chapter are hereby repealed to such extent as they
are so in conflict or inconsistent; provided, however, that the adoption of
this chapter shall not prevent or bar the continuance or institution of any
proceedings for offenses heretofore committed in violation of any existing
ordinances of the Borough.
§ 34-50.3. When Effective. [Ord. 3/12/74, § 2101; Ord. 1/13/87,
§ 2101]
This chapter shall take effect immediately after passage and publication in
the manner provided by law.
Appendix
Appendix A
REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
[Editor's Note: Complete copies of the following ordinances are on
file in the Borough offices.]
Ordinance No. 2005-01: Adopted a Refined Redevelopment Plan for the
Industrial District Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2010-05: Adopted the Redevelopment Plan for 107-109
Elizabeth Street.
Ordinance No. 2011-08: Adopted the 2011 Redevelopment Plan for the
Commercial Tract of the Canal Crossing Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2012-07: Adopted amendments to the 2011 Redevelopment
Plan for the Commercial Tract of the Canal Crossing Redevelopment Area.
§ 34-36.2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § 34-50.3
AO:460
Ordinance No. 2019-005: Adopted the Redevelopment Plan for Block 56,
Lots 1.01, 3, 4, and 8.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION FOR 1993 CODE.
This Ordinance Disposition List for the 1993 Code provides a listing of
the ordinances used in the preparation of the 1993 Code. See Appendix
B for a listing of the ordinances used in the preparation of subsequent
supplements.
Key to Disposition of Ordinances
S Indicates a special ordinance which shall not be included in the
codification, such as appropriations or salary.
P Indicates an ordinance that has been included in the codification.
O Indicates an obsolete ordinance.
R Indicates an ordinance which has been repealed.
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
4-6-1960 Amend Zoning - Sign
Regulation
P Zoning
4-6-1960 Amend Parking P Traffic
5-4-1960 Apartment Housing P Zoning
6-16-1960 Street Improvements S
7-13-1960 Street Improvements S
8-3-1960 Amend Land Subdivision P Land Subdivision
10-5-1960 Apartment Housing P Zoning
12-29-1960 Restrict Zones P Zoning
12-29-1960 Restrict Zones P Zoning
2-1-1961 Salary Ordinance S
4-5-1961 Taxation O
4-5-1961 Snow/Ice Removal P Police
Regulations
4-5-1961 Tax Assessment O
5-3-1961 Amend Snow Removal P Police
Regulations
§ 34-50.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:461
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
7-5-1961 Sewerage Disposal P Sewers and
Water
8-2-1961 Restrict Zones P Zoning
10-4-1961 Comprehensive Parking R Traffic
1-3-1962 Building Inspection and
Construction
P Zoning
1-3-1962 Further Amend Regulate
Buildings
P Building and
Housing
2-7-1962 Salary Ordinance S
3-7-1962 Amend Subdivision P Land Subdivision
4-10-1962 Regulate Alcohol Sales P Alcoholic
Beverage Control
6-12-1962 Amend Dog Control P Animal Control
6-29-1962 Street Improvements S
7-18-1962 Street Improvements S
7-18-1962 Appropriations S
9-11-1962 Bond Ordinance S
9-11-1962 Comprehensive Parking P Traffic
10-22-1962 Appropriations S
10-22-1962 Appropriations S
10-22-1962 Appropriations S
10-22-1962 Appropriations S
12-13-1962 Recreation Committee R Administration
12-11-1962 Amend Open Air Parking P General
Licensing
2-28-1963 Election Districts P Administration
5-14-1963 Purchase Truck S
9-10-1963 Vacate Lands S
11-12-1963 Training Patrolmen P Administration
2-27-1964 Salary Ordinance S
5-12-1964 Change Street Name S
5-26-1964 Regulate Alcohol Sale P Alcoholic
Beverage Control
5-26-1964 Appropriations S
5-26-1964 Appropriations S
§ DL-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-1
AO:462
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
5-26-1964 Appropriations S
5-26-1964 Bond Ordinance S
10-13-1964 Launderettes P General
Licensing
10-13-1964 Amend Establish Fire
Department
P Administration
11-10-1964 Vacate Lands S
11-10-1964 License Launderette P General
Licensing
12-21-1964 Games of Chance -
Sundays
P Police
Regulations
12-21-1964 License Vending
Machines
P General
Licensing
3-9-1965 Salary Ordinance S
4-13-1965 Amend License
Launderette
P General
Licensing
4-13-1965 Prohibit Storing Certain
Vehicles
P Police
Regulations
4-13-1965 License Vending
Machines
P General
Licensing
7-13-1965 Sale of Lands S
11-9-1965 Vacate Lands S
11-9-1965 Amend Launderettes P General
Licensing
12-14-1965 Games of Chance -
Sundays
P Police
Regulations
12-28-1965 Amend Comprehensive
Parking
P Traffic
3-8-1966 Salary Ordinance S
7-26-1966 Bond Ordinance S
7-26-1966 Bond Ordinance S
7-26-1966 Appropriations S
7-26-1966 Bond Ordinance S
7-26-1966 Appropriations S
8-9-1966 Appropriations S
11-7-1966 Appropriations S
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:463
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
2-28-1967 Appropriations S
4-11-1967 Bond Ordinance S
5-23-1967 Emergency Budget S
5-23-1967 Amend Zoning P Zoning
5-23-1967 Adopt N.J. Building Code P Building and
Housing
9-26-1967 Salary S
3-12-1968 Salary Ordinance S
12-27-1968 Appropriations S
12-27-1968 Amend Zoning P Zoning
3-11-1969 Salary Ordinance S
7-8-1969 License Taxi Drivers P General
Licensing
8-12-1969 Appropriations S
8-12-1969 Appropriations S
8-12-1969 Bond Ordinance S
8-12-1969 Bond Ordinance S
9-9-1969 Appropriations S
9-9-1969 Appropriations S
2-10-1970 Appropriations S
2-23-1970 Bond Ordinance S
2-23-1970 Salary Ordinance S
3-9-1971 Salary Ordinance S
7-13-1971 Amend Police
Department
P Administration
7-13-1971 Amend Comprehensive
Parking
P Traffic
7-26-1971 Appropriations S
8-10-1971 Appropriations S
8-10-1971 Appropriations S
9-14-1971 Amend Zoning P Zoning
11-9-1971 Appropriations S
11-9-1971 Appropriations S
3-14-1972 Salary Ordinance S
§ DL-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-1
AO:464
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
7-25-1972 Appropriations S
7-25-1972 Bond Ordinance S
3-13-1973 Salary Ordinance S
4-10-1973 Amend Establish Fire
Department
P Administration
7-10-1973 Conservation
Commission
P Administration
7-10-1973 Shade Tree Commission P Administration
5-14-1974 Amend Alcohol Sale P General
Licensing
5-14-1974 Salary Ordinance S
7-29-1974 Appropriations S
7-29-1974 Appropriations S
12-10-1974 Loitering/Alcohol P Police
Regulations
3-11-1975 Amend Comprehensive
Parking
P Traffic
5-13-1975 Salary Ordinance S
6-30-1975 Street Improvements S
8-12-1975 Recreation Committee P Administration
11-11-1975 Vacate Land S
12-9-1975 Agreement Sewer with
Middlesex County
S
12-30-1975 Sewerage Treatment P Sewers and
Water
3-22-1976 Salary Ordinance S
6-8-1976 Bond Ordinance S
7-13-1976 Bond Ordinance S
8-10-1976 Contract with
Freeholders
S
9-14-1976 Amend Zoning P Zoning
11-27-1976 Amend Zoning P Zoning
11-27-1976 Appropriations S
12-14-1976 Planning and Adjustment
Boards Established
P Land Use
Procedures
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:465
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
12-14-1976 Site Plan and Subdivision
Procedures
P Land Subdivision
12-14-1976 Amend Zoning P Zoning
2-8-1977 Amend Planning and
Adjustment Boards
P Land Use
Procedures
2-8-1977 Amend Site Plan and
Subdivision
P Land Subdivision
2-8-1977 C.A.T.V. Cross City Cable P C.A.T.V.
2-8-1977 Uniform Construction
Code
P Building and
Housing
3-8-1977 Fire Prevention P Fire Prevention
Amend C.A.T.V. P C.A.T.V.
4-22-1977 Salary Ordinance S
6-14-1977 Payment of Claims P Administration
7-12-1977 Appropriations S
7-12-1977 Bond Ordinance S
9-13-1977 Salary Ordinance S
9-13-1977 Amend Uniform
Construction Code
P Building and
Housing
10-11-1977 Bond Ordinance S
12-13-1977 Amend Dog Licensing P Animal Control
4-11-1978 Amend Comprehensive
Parking
P Traffic
5-9-1978 Salary Ordinance S
6-13-1978 Street Improvements S
6-29-1978 Amend Zoning P Zoning
7-11-1978 Bond Ordinance S
11-14-1978 Amend Zoning P Zoning
2-79 5-8-1979 Salary Ordinance S
3-79 7-10-1979 Bond Ordinance S
6-79 9-11-1979 Street - Regulate
Excavations
P Streets,
Sidewalks and
Sanitation
9-27-1979 Amend Bond Ordinance S
7-79 11-13-1979 Amend Disorderly
Conduct
P Police
Regulations
§ DL-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-1
AO:466
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
8-79 10-23-1979 Amend Bond Ordinance S
9-79 11-13-1979 Sale of Truck S
10-79 12-11-1979 Amend Dog Registration P Animal Control
11-79 12-11-1979 Sewer Charges P Sewers and
Water
12-79 12-26-1979 Tax Assessor P Administration
1-80 3-11-1980 Tax Exemption Ord. P Administration
2-80 3-18-1980 Appropriations Reevaluation
S
2-80(A)4-8-1980 Amend Comprehensive
Parking
P Traffic
3-80 4-8-1980 Transfer Funds S
4-80 5-13-1980 Tax Collector Established P Administration
5-80 6-10-1980 Bond Ordinance S
6-80 6-10-1980 Bond Ordinance S
7-80 6-10-1980 Salary Ordinance S
8-80 7-8-1980 Bond Ordinance S
9-80 11-11-1980 Certificate of Legal Use P Building and
Housing
10-80 12-9-1980 Cooperative Agreement S
1-81 3-10-1981 Amend Licensing Dogs P Animal Control
2-81 4-14-1981 Regulate Sewer
Construction
P Sewers and
Water
4-81 5-12-1981 Amend Comprehensive
Parking
P Traffic
5-81 5-12-1981 Salary Ordinance S
1-82 4-13-1982 Salary Ordinance S
1-82 8-10-1982 Salary Ordinance S
2-82 5-11-1982 Regulate Fire Detectors P Fire Prevention
7-13-1982 Regulate Police
Department
P Administration
3-82 10-12-1982 Amend Regulate Police
Department
P Administration
4-82 7-23-1982 Emergency
Appropriations
S
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:467
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
5-82 9-14-1982 Flood Prevention
Ordinance
P Flood Hazard
5-82A 11-9-1982 Amend Flood Prevention P Flood Hazard
6-82 8-10-1982 Subdivision Standards P Land Subdivision
7-82 9-14-1982 Change Street Name S
8-82 10-12-1982 Sale of Lot S
8-82 11-9-1982 Sale of Lot S
1-83 Index Rate, Salary S
1-83A Amend Index Rate S
1-83A Amend Index Rate S
2-83 5-10-1983 Amend Regulate Police
Department
P Administration
3-83 Amend Sewer Charges P Sewer and Water
4-83 Salary Ordinance S
5-83 8-9-1983 BOCA Codes P Fire Prevention
6-83 10-11-1983 Bond Ordinance-Streets S
7-83 Bond Ordinance-
Equipment
S
1-84 Amend Comprehensive
Parking
P Traffic
2-84 Amend Dog Registration P Animal Control
3-84 5-8-1984 Appropriations S
4-84 5-8-1984 Annual Salaries S
5-84 Interlocal Services S
6-84 Bond Ordinance S
7-84 Amend Restricted Zones P Zoning
8-84 Appropriations S
9-84 Purchase of Equipment S
1-85 3-12-1985 Extend Budget Cap S
2-85 3-12-1985 Weight Restrictions for
Streets
P Traffic
3-85 Salary Ordinance S
4-85 Purchase of Equipment S
5-85 6-17-1985 Bond Ordinance S
§ DL-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-1
AO:468
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
6-85 Uniform Fire Code
Adopted
P Fire Prevention
1-86 Budget Cap Ordinance S
2-86 Salary Ordinance S
3-86 Bond Ordinance S
4-86 Equipment Purchase S
5-86 Equipment Purchase S
6-86 Recycling Regulations P Solid Waste
Management
1-87 Traffic Signal at
Intersection
P Traffic
1-13-1987 Zoning Ordinance;
Supersedes Ord. 3/12/74
P Zoning
2-87 Bond Ordinance S
3-87 Amend Parking
Regulations
P Traffic
4-87 Budget Cap Ordinance S
5-87 Salary Ordinance S
6-87 Amend Recycling
Regulations
P Solid Waste
Management
7-87 Purchase of Air
Conditioner
S
8-87 Bond Ordinance S
9-87 Capital Improvements S
10-87 Bond Ordinance S
11-87 Existing Structures Code P Property
Maintenance
12-87 Bond Ordinance S
1-88 Bond Ordinance S
2-88 Budget Cap Ordinance S
3-88 Establish Court Clerk
Position
P Administration
4-88 Amend Fire Department P Administration
5-88 Salary Ordinance S
6-88 Litter In Public Places P Police
Regulations
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:469
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
7-88 License Amusement
Games
P General
Licensing
8-88 Road Construction S
1-89 Establish Chief Financial
Officer
P Administration
2-89 Purchase of Equipment S
3-89 No. not used
4-89 No. not used
5-89 Salary Ordinance S
6-89 Amend Police
Department
P Administration
7-89 Collection of Solid Waste P Solid Waste
Management
8-89 Purchase of Fire
Equipment
S
9-89 Purchase of Equipment S
10-89 Bond Ordinance S
11-89 12-28-1989 Amend Flood Prevention
Ordinance
P Flood Prevention
12-89 1-9-1990 Amend Parking
Regulations
P Traffic
1-90 3-13-1990 Amend Police
Department
P Administration
2-90 Amend Salary Ordinance S
3-90 Purchase of Equipment S
4-90 Not Adopted
1-91 Purchase of Equipment S
2-91 Licensing of Cats P Animal Control
3-91 3-12-1991 Amend Recycling P Solid Waste
Management
4-91 Purchase of Equipment S
5-91 Salary Ordinance S
6-91 Towing Ordinance P Police
Regulations
7-91 Title 39 Regs. App. to
Finchley Garden Apts.
P Traffic Regs. for
Private and Semi-
Private Property
§ DL-1 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-1
AO:470
Ord.
No.
Date of
Adoption Short Title Dispo. Chapter
8-91 Title 39 Regs. for South
Bound Brook Plaza
P Traffic Regs. for
Private and Semi-
Private Property
9-91 Title 39 Regs. for Rite
Aid Pharmacy Parking
Lot
P Traffic Regs. for
Private and Semi-
Private Property
10-91 Amend "Peace and Good
Order"
P Police
Regulations
11-91 8-13-1991 Reevaluation of Property S
12-91 Purchase of Fire
Equipment
S
13-91 Bond Ordinance S
14-91 12-10-1991 Amend Solid Waste
Ordinance
P Solid Waste
Management
15-91 12-10-1991 Salary Ordinance S
16-91 Amend Traffic P Traffic
1-92 2-11-1992 Cable Television
Franchise Agreement
P C.A.T.V.
2-92 Amend Traffic Regs.:
South Bound Brook Plaza
P Traffic Regs. for
Private and Semi-
Private Property
3-92 Amend Traffic Regs: Rite
Aid Parking Lot
P Traffic Regs. for
Private and Semi-
Private Property
4-92 Amend Traffic Regs:
Finchley Garden Apts.
P Traffic Regs. for
Private and Semi-
Private Property
5-92 1992 Amend Towing
Ordinance
P Police
Regulations
6-92 1992 Amend Traffic P Traffic
7-92
8-92
1-93 Amend Traffic P Traffic
2-93 Curfew P Police
Regulations
3-93 Index Rate Change S
4-93 6-7-1993 Fees for Alcoholic
Beverage
P Alcoholic
Beverage Control
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-2
AO:471
§ DL-2. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION FOR SUPPLEMENTATION.
This Ordinance Disposition List for Supplementation provides a list of the
ordinances used in the preparation of Code Supplements. The word Special
after the ordinance description indicates material that is special in nature
and has not been included in the Code.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
5-93 Salary Ordinance (Special)
6-93 Not adopted
7-93 9-14-1993 Amends Existing Structures Code
(Special)
8-93 11-9-1993 Amends Intermunicipal Police
Assistance Agreement (§ 2-51)
9-93 Capital purchases (Special)
10-93 Bond Ordinance (Special)
1-94 3-8-1994 Capital (Special)
2-94 Withdrawn
3-94 5-10-1994 Bond Ordinance (Special)
4-94 5-10-1994 Capital (Special)
5-94 6-14-1994 CAP Ordinance (Special)
6-94 7-12-1994 Bond Ordinance (Special)
7-94 8-1-1994 Bond Ordinance (Special)
8-94 Salary Ordinance (Special)
9-94 9-13-1994 Bell Atlantic (Special)
10-94 Capital (Special)
11-94 Bond Ordinance (Special)
12-94 12-14-1994 Towing (Not codified)
1-95 2-16-1995 Community Development (Special)
2-95 CAP Ordinance (Special)
3-95 Salary Ordinance (Special)
4-95 Bond Ordinance (Special)
5-95 Bond Ordinance (Special)
6-95 Bond Ordinance (Special)
7-95 10-10-1995 Add Drug-Free Zone (§ 3-10)
8-95 10-10-1995 Amend dog license fees (§ 5-1.3)
9-95 10-10-1995 Amend cat license fees (§ 5-2.10)
§ DL-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-2
AO:472
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
10-95 10-10-1995 Co-ops (Special)
11-95 10-10-1995 Capital purchases (Special)
12-95 12-12-1995 Community Development (Special)
1-96 2-13-1996 Create a single jurisdiction Planning
Board; abolish Zoning Board of
Adjustment (§§ 30-1.1, 30-1.1A,
30-2.1—30-2.4)
2-96 Bond Ordinance (Special)
3-96 4-9-1996 Adopting Ordinance
4-96 4-9-1996 Amends alcoholic beverage control
fees (§ 6-3.5)
5-96 Bond Ordinance (Special)
6-96 Salary Ordinance (Special)
7-96 9-10-1996 Emergency Cooperation (Special)
8-96 Capital Ordinance (Special)
1-97 4-8-1997 Amends land development fees
(§ 31-14)
2-97 2-11-1997 Amends State Uniform Construction
Code fees (§ 20-1.2)
3-97 Bond Ordinance (Special)
4-97 4-8-1997 Amends parking permits (§ 7-7.9)
5-97 Capital Ordinance (Special)
6-97 6-3-1997 Adds Historical Commission (§ 2-32)
7-97 Capital Ordinance (Special)
8-97 7-8-1997 Amends Solid Waste Management
(§ 15-1)
9-97 8-12-1997 Amends Ch. 16, Housing and Property
Maintenance Code (Ch. 16)
10-97 8-12-1997 Adds display of obscene material
(§ 3-11)
11-97 Salary Ordinance (Special)
12-97 Capital Ordinance (Special)
13-97 Capital Ordinance (Special)
14-97 Capital Ordinance (Special)
15-97 11-11-1997 Adds Employment of Off-Duty Police
Officers (§ 2-22A)
§ DL-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-2
AO:473
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
16-97 12-9-1997 Adds Public Defender (§ 2-10)
17-97 12-9-1997 Amends solid waste - quantity of
containers (§ 15-1.5)
1-98 2-10-1998 Amends one-way streets (§ 7-9)
2-98 Salary Ordinance (Special)
3-98 Amends license fees for launderettes,
laundries and car washes (§ 4-3.4)
4-98 4-14-1998 Vacation of alleys (Special)
5-98 Capital Ordinance (Special)
6-98 Capital Ordinance (Special)
7-98 Bond Ordinance (Special)
8-98 6-9-1998 Redevelopment Ordinance (Special)
9-98 Capital Ordinance (Special)
10-98 7-14-1998 Amends turns prohibited (§ 7-13)
11-98 Salary Ordinance (Special)
12-98 Capital Ordinance (Special)
13-98 Capital Ordinance (Special)
14-98 Bond Ordinance (Special)
15-98 Not Adopted
16-98 11-10-1998 Amends temporary signs (§ 29-1)
17-98 Salary Ordinance (Special)
18-98 11-10-1998 Amends solid waste management bulk
items (§ 15-1.13)
1-99 Withdrawn
2-99 Index Rate Ordinance (Special)
3-99 4-13-1999 Adds licensing of body piercing and
tattoo businesses (Ch. 22)
4-99 5-11-1999 Adds fire damage tax lien (§ 2-45)
5-99 Capital Ordinance (Special)
6-99 8-10-1999 Amends parking prohibited during
certain hours on certain streets
(§ 7-7.8)
7-99 Not adopted
8-99 Capital Ordinance (Special)
9-99 Not used
§ DL-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-2
AO:474
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
10-99 10-12-1999 Amends Fire Department (§ 2-23)
11-99 10-12-1999 Amends automatic amusement games
(§§ 4-1.4, 4-1.6, 4-1.7A, 4-1.8)
12-99 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2000-01 4-11-2000 Fees for copies, Ch. 2 3
2000-02 4-11-2000 Construction Code fees, 20-1.2 3
2000-03 6-13-2000 Park regulations, Ch. 17 3
2000-04 6-13-2000 (Not received) 3
2000-05 6-13-2000 Vacation of portion of street, Special 3
2000-06 9-12-2000 Salary, Special 3
2000-07 10-10-2000 Historic preservation, Chs. 2, 27 3
2000-08 11-7-2000 Capital improvement, Special 3
2000-09 11-20-2000 Capital Improvement, Special 3
2000-10 12-19-2000 Certificate of Occupancy, 20-3 3
2000-11 2-13-2001 Licensing of rental property, Ch. 20 3
2001-01 — (Not received) 3
2001-02 8-14-2001 Junk dealers, 4-2 3
2001-03 10-3-2001 Stopping or standing prohibited
certain hours, certain streets, 7-7.4;
time limit parking, 7-7.5; parking
permits, 7-7.9; parking of trucks over
13 tons, 7-8.1; truck routes, 7-8.3;
parking of trucks- exception, 7-8.5;
one-way streets, 7-9
3
2001-04 8-14-2001 Drug- free zones within 500 feet of
parks, Ch. 3
3
2001-05 8-14-2001 Towing fee schedule, 3-7.16 3
2001-06 9-13-2001 Salary, Special 3
2001-07 11-8-2001 Condemnation- eminent domain,
Special
3
2001-08 11-8-2001 Bond, Special 3
2001-09 10-9-2001 Junk dealers, 4-2 3
2001-10 11-8-2001 Capital improvements, Special 3
2002-01 3-12-2002 Drug-free school zones, 3-10 3
2002-02 5-14-2002 CAP, Special 3
2002-03 5-14-2002 Capital improvements, Special 3
§ DL-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-2
AO:475
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
2002-04 10-8-2002 Construction Code fees, 20-1.2 3
2002-05 9-10-2002 Historic preservation, Ch. 27 3
2002-06 10-22-2002 Amends Maximum general penalty,
1-5.1
3
2002-07 — (Not received) 3
2002-08 10-22-2002 Salary, Special 3
2002-09 — Not adopted 3
2002-10 — Not adopted 3
2003-01 2-11-2003 Public improvements, Special 3
2003-02 4-8-2003 CAP, Special 3
2003-03 7-29-2003 Bond, Special 3
2003-04 11-11-2003 Salary, Special 3
2003-05 10-14-2003 Fees- Video tape copy, Ch. 2 3
2003-06 10-14-2003 Parking permits, 7-7.9 3
2004-01 1-13-2004 Fees- Construction Code, 20-1.2 3
2004-02 1-13-2004 Masseurs/ masseuses and massage
establishments, 4-8
3
2004-03 4-13-2004 Acquisition of property, Special 3
2004-04 1-26-2004 Affordable housing- Fair share
obligation, Ch. 26
3
2004-05 CAP, Special 3
2004-06 Parking time limited, 8-5 3
2004-07 8-10-2004 Reconstruction of street, Special 3
2004-08 10-5-2004 Capital improvements, Special 3
2005-01 1-25-2005 Redevelopment Plan for Industrial
District Redevelopment Area, Code
Appendix C
3
2005-02 3-8-2005 Capital improvements, Special 3
2005-03 3-8-2005 Civic regulations, 30-1.10, 31-13.5,
34-3.1, 34-29
3
2005-04 3-1-2005 CAP, Special 3
2005-05 3-8-2005 Capital, Special 3
2005-06 3-22-2005 Acquisition of property, Special 3
2005-07 6-14-2005 Salary, Special 3
§ DL-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-2
AO:476
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
2005-08 6-14-2005 Agreement for tax exemption and
payment in lieu of taxes for Industrial
District Redevelopment Area, Special
3
2005-09 8-9-2005 Parks and playgrounds- regulations,
Ch. 17
3
2005-10 8-9-2005 Vacation of easements, Special 3
2005-11 8-9-2005 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-7.7 3
2005-12 — (Not received) 3
2005-13 12-13-2005 Non- solicitation list, 4-7.13 3
2005-14 9-6-2005 Acquisition of property, Special 3
2005-15 — (Not received) 3
2005-16 11-8-2005 Reconstruction of street, Special 3
2005-17 12-13-2005 Capital improvements, Special 3
2005-18 — (Not received) 3
2005-19 12-13-2005 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-7.7;
parking prohibited certain hours,
7-7.8; trucks over designated weight,
7-8.4; stop intersections, 7-11; turn
prohibitions, 7-13; lane use
reservations, 7-18; towing of vehicles,
7-3; penalties, 7-4; Parking in
municipal lots, 7-21; Speed limits,
7-22
3
2006-01 2-14-2006 Repeal parking permits required on
municipal roadways, 7-7.9
3
2006-02 4-11-2006 Superintendent of Public Works, 2-11 3
2006-03 CAP, Special 3
2006-04 5-9-2006 First Aid Squad equipment, Special 3
2006-05 — (Not received) 3
2006-06 10-12-2006 Salaries, Special 3
2006-07 10-10-2006 Improvements to street, Special 3
2006-08 Purchase of equipment, Special 3
2006-09 Purchase of equipment, Special 3
2006-10 8-15-2006 Deletes Appeals from Planning Board,
30-4.2; deletes appeals from Zoning
Board of Adjustment, 30-4.3
3
2007-01 6-14-2007 Construction Code fees, 20-1.2 3
§ DL-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-2
AO:477
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
2007-02 Budget- CAP Bank, Special 3
2007-03 6-14-2007 Creates Stormwater Control Ch. 25 3
2007-04 6-14-2007 Litter control Ch 3; pet waste, wildlife
feeding Ch 5, containerized yard
waste, yard waste collection Ch 15;
illicit connections, improper disposal
of waste Ch 25
3
2007-05 7-10-2007 Capital improvements, Special 3
2007-06 7-10-2007 (Not received) 3
2007-07 — (Not received) 3
2007-08 8-14-2007 Appropriation, Special 3
2007-09 10-2009-2007Flood hazard prevention (Not
received)
3
2007-10 11-13-2007 Salary, Special 3
2007-11 11-13-2007 Animal control- fees, renewals, 5-1.3 3
2008-01 2-12-2008 Salaries 3
2008-02 4-8-2008 Capital- Repair and purchase of
equipment, Special
3
2008-03 6-10-2008 CAP Bank, Special 3
2008-04 9-2-2008 Parking time limited, 7-7.5 3
2008-05 9-2-2008 Repair of equipment, Special 3
2008-06 Salaries, Special 3
2008-07 11-11-2008 Bond, Special 3
2008-08 12-9-2008 Parking time limited, 7-7.5 3
2008-09 12-9-2008 Outdoor eating and drinking areas,
34-8; amends 34-27.2; Site plan
approval and review, 34-12.1
3
2008-10 8-4-2008 Drug- free school zones, Ch. 3 3
2009-01 3-10-2009 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-7.7 3
2009-02 4-14-2009 Cable television (Not received) 3
2009-03 4-14-2009 Salaries, Special 3
2009-04 4-14-2009 CAP, Special 3
2009-05 4-14-2009 Capital, Special 3
2009-06 8-11-2009 Private storm drain inlet retrofitting,
Ch. 20
3
§ DL-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-2
AO:478
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
2009-06A Traffic regulations- Robert Morris
Parking Lot, 7-21
3
2009-07 8-11-2009 Refuse containers/ dumpsters, Ch. 16 3
2009-08 8-11-2009 Lease of property, Special 3
2009-09 — (Not received) 3
2009-10 12-8-2009 Establish position of Administrator,
2-11
3
2010-01 3-9-2010 Bond, Special 3
2010-02 7-13-2010 Storage of motor vehicles, 3-2 3
2010-03 7-13-2010 CAP Bank, Special 3
2010-04 7-13-2010 Bond, Special 3
2010-05 7-13-2010 Adopt Redevelopment Plan for
107-109 Elizabeth Street, Code
Appendix C
3
2010-06 7-13-2010 Bond, Special 3
2010-07 11-9-2010 Bond, Special 3
2010-08 12-14-2010 Agreement for tax exemption and
payment in lieu of taxes-
Redevelopment Plan for 107-109
Elizabeth Street, Special
3
2010-09 12-14-2010 Keeping of animals and fowl for
domestic use, 5-3
3
2011-01 6-21-2011 CAP Bank, Special 3
2011-02 7-14-2011 Sewer user charges, Ch. 10 3
2011-03 8-9-2011 Improvements, Special 3
2011-04 7-12-2011 Purchase of equipment, Special 3
2011-05 12-28-2011 Consumption of alcoholic beverages
by underage persons on private
property, Ch. 3
3
2011-06 12-28-2011 Salary, special 3
2011-07 12-13-2011 Create Raritan and Millstone Rivers
Flood Control Commission, Ch. 2
3
2011-08 12-28-2011 Adopt 2011 Canal Crossing
Redevelopment Plan for Block 57.01,
Lot 1, 45 Main Street, Code Appendix
C
3
2012-01 3-13-2012 Amend fee schedule, Ch. 2 3
§ DL-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-2
AO:479
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description and Disposition Supp. No.
2012-02 3-13-2012 Purchase of equipment, Special 3
2012-03 3-13-2012 Bond, Special 3
2012-04 3-13-2012 CAP, Special 3
2012-05 5-24-2012 Purchase and repair of equipment,
Special
3
2012-06 9-24-2012 Sewer user charges, Ch. 10 3
2012-07 10-3-2012 Amend Canal Crossing
Redevelopment Plan for Block 57.02,
Lot 1, 45 Main Street, Code Appendix
C
3
2012-08 9-11-2012 Bond, Special 3
2012-09 9-24-2012 Amend sewer user charges, Ch. 10 3
2012-10 12-27-2012 Establish Commuter Parking Lot, Ch.
8
3
2012-11 12-27-2012 Alcoholic beverages- hours of sale,
6-4
3
2012-12 12-27-2012 Removal of weeds, growth and debris,
16-90
3
2013-01 6-11-2013 Bond, Special 3
2013-02 10-8-2013 Animal control- fees, renewals, 5-1.3 3
2013-03 5-7-2013 Salaries, Special 3
2013-04 10-8-2013 Purchase of equipment, Special 3
2013-05 11-12-2013 Bond, Special 3
2013-06 11-12-2013 Bond, Special 3
2014-01 4-8-2014 CAP, Special 3
2014-02 4-8-2014 Salary, Special 3
2014-03 6-25-2014 Purchase of equipment, Special 3
2014-04 7-15-2014 Bond, Special 3
2014-05 10-14-2014 Establish program for tax abatements
for areas in need of redevelopment,
Ch. 2
3
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject DispositionSupp. No.
2015-001 4-14-2015 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 5
2015-002 4-14-2015 Capital Improvement NCM 5
§ DL-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-2
AO:480
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject DispositionSupp. No.
2015-003
2015-004 8-11-2015 Capital Improvement NCM 5
2016-001 4-12-2016 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 5
2016-002 5-10-2016 Salaries NCM 5
2016-003 6-14-2016 Precious Metals, Gems
and Secondhand
Goods, Dealersof
Ch. 11 5
2017-001 3-14-2017 Salaries NCM 5
2017-002 5-9-2017 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 5
2017-003 5-9-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 5
2017-004 6-13-2017 Taxation: Abatement of
Real Property Taxes in
Areas in Need of
Rehabilitation or
Redevelopment
Ch. 14,
Art. I
5
2017-005 7-11-2017 Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 5 5
2017-006 7-11-2017 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 5
2017-007 10-10-2017 Capital Improvement NCM 5
2017-008 11-13-2017 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 5
2018-001 4-10-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 5
2018-002 3-13-2018 Building and Housing
Amendment
Ch. 20 5
2018-003 3-13-2018 Salaries NCM 5
2018-004 4-10-2018 Budget NCM 5
2018-005 Not
Introduced
2018-006 10-9-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 5
2018-007 10-9-2018 Sale of Property NCM 5
2019-001 6-11-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 5
2019-002 8-13-2019 Salaries NCM 5
2019-003 8-13-2019 Appropriation NCM 5
2019-004 Not
Adopted
§ DL-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-2
AO:481
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject DispositionSupp. No.
2019-005 11-12-2019 Redevelopment
Districts Amendment
A 5
§ DL-2 SOUTH BOUND BROOK CODE § DL-2
AO:482