The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Trenton of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City of
Trenton, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
315, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as the "Code of the City of Trenton," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1967 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Trenton
by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Trenton" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Trenton, pursuant to law, shall this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Trenton to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 TRENTON CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 10-17-2003.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes: Throughout the Code the following
nomenclature changes have been made:
(1) Department of Housing and Development to Department of
Housing and Economic Development.
(2) Department of Health, Welfare and Recreation to Department of
Health and Human Services.
(3) Police Chief or Chief of Police to Police Director.
(4) Poundkeeper to Animal Control Officer.
(5) New Jersey Department of Health to New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services.
(6) Magistrate to Judge.
C. Throughout the Code, statutory references have been updated or
revised to the current citation. Consolidated (N.J.S.A.) references have
been added to unconsolidated (P.L.) where appropriate.
D. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file and available for inspection in the Clerk's office.
§ 1-13 TRENTON CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Definitions; Construction
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as §§ 1-2 and 1-3 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 1-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of the Code of the City of Trenton, and in the interpretation
and application of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted,
except as the context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
CITY — The City of Trenton in the County of Mercer and State of New
Jersey.
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The governing body of the City constituted
and elected pursuant to law.
CLERK or CITY CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed pursuant to
law.
DEPARTMENT — An organization unit of the City government established
or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the City government assigned to such
organization unit by the City Council.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of the Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-16. Construction.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require, the
following shall apply:
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day and if the last day be a
Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
§ 1-16 TRENTON CODE § 1-16
1:8
ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as §§ 3-19 of the Revised General Ordinances as
amended through Ord. No. 90-16]
§ 1-17. Maximum penalty.
For violation of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
City where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section or sections
violated, the maximum penalty shall, upon conviction for such violation, be
one or more of the following:
§ 1-18. Separate violation.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of any
provision of this chapter or any ordinance of the City exists shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 1-19. Repeat offenders.
Any person who is convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision
and who was fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by the
court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed
by the court upon a person for a repeat offense shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of this chapter,
but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation
of any provision of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the officer
signing the complaint to determine before the trial whether the person is
subject to the additional fine as a repeat offender. The defendant shall be
provided with a reasonable opportunity to dispute any allegation that (s)he
is subject to punishment as a repeat offender.
§ 1-20. Default in payment of fine.
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this chapter in
default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, may, in the discretion of
the court by which (s)he was convicted, be imprisoned in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 90 days or be required to perform community service
for a period not exceeding 90 days.
A. A fine not exceeding $2,000. [Amended 6-20-2002 by Ord. No.
02-54; 8-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-60]
B. Imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days.
C. A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:9
§ 1-21. Appropriateness of maximum penalty.
The maximum penalty stated in this general penalty section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser
penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate
for a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 1-21 TRENTON CODE § 1-21
1:10
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Hall — See Ch. 53.
Official Flag — See Ch. 105.
Rules of Procedure — See Ch. A316.
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:11

ARTICLE I
City Council and City Clerk
§ 2-1. City Council.
§ 2-2. City Clerk.
A. Organization. The Council shall consist of seven members, three of
whom shall be elected at large and four of whom shall be elected by
wards, one for each of the four wards in the City which have been
established for that purpose. Members of Council shall be elected for a
term of four years at a regular municipal election, the term to
commence on the first day of July next following their election pursuant
to the Charter.
B. Vacancies.
(1) Pursuant to the Charter, vacancies in any elective office occurring
prior to the ninth Friday before the general election day of any year
shall be filled by election for the unexpired term at the next general
election except as hereinafter otherwise provided. Such election to
fill a vacancy shall be upon direct nomination by petition in the
manner provided by law for the filling of vacancies in municipal
offices where candidates are nominated by direct petition for a
general election. Council shall fill such vacancies temporarily by
appointment to serve until the qualification of a person so elected.
(2) When any such vacancy occurs on or after the ninth Friday before
general election day, it shall be filled by election for the unexpired
term at the general election to be held in the following year, but if it
occurs on or after such Friday in the third year of the term of such
office, the Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment to serve for
the remainder of the term.
C. Powers of Council. The legislative power of the City shall be exercised
by the Council except as otherwise provided by general law. Pursuant to
the Charter the Council may, in its discretion, require any city office to
prepare and submit statements regarding his/her official duties and the
performance thereof, and the Council may otherwise investigate the
conduct of any department, office or agency of the City government.
D. Compensation. The compensation of each member of City Council shall
be $20,000 per annum; provided, however, that the President of City
Council shall be paid an additional $1,500 per annum. [Amended
9-4-2003 by Ord. No. 03-102; 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
E. Any elected member of City Council shall be required to attend a
minimum of 2.0 hours of state-approved educational credits per
calendar year that such officials are in office. [Added 5-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-28]
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:13
A. Appointment. The Council shall appoint a City Clerk for the term
prescribed by law. Prior to his/her appointment, (s)he shall have been
qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of his/her
office. The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and have such other
functions, powers and duties as are provided by this chapter.
B. Compensation. The salary range for the City Clerk shall be as set by
ordinance.
C. Clerk of City Council and committees. The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of
the Council and as secretary of any special legislative committees of the
Council appointed pursuant to the Charter. The Clerk shall attend all
meetings of the Council and of any such committee when required by
the Chairperson thereof, and shall keep the minutes of the proceedings
of the Council and of such committees. The minutes of each meeting of
the Council shall be signed by the officer presiding at the meeting and
by the Clerk.
D. Ordinances and resolutions.
(1) The Clerk shall record all ordinances and all resolutions of a
permanent character in books to be provided for that purpose.
After each ordinance (s)he shall also record and certify the proof of
publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance and
resolution so recorded shall be signed by the Council president and
the Clerk, who shall attest that it was duly adopted upon a date
stated and, when so signed, the recorded copy shall be deemed to
be a public record of the ordinance or resolution. Any omission by
the Clerk or the Council President to record, sign or certify as
herein required shall not impair or affect the validity of any
ordinance which has been duly adopted.
(2) At the close of each year the Clerk, with the advice and assistance
of the City Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances
and resolutions, or true copies thereof, which then remain in force
and effect. The Clerk shall also properly index the record books,
compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions.
E. Custodian of records. The Clerk shall have custody of, and shall safely
keep, all records, books and documents of the City, except those
committed by Charter or ordinance to any other office. The Clerk shall,
upon request and upon the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by
resolution of the Council for the use of the City, furnish a certified copy
of any such paper in his/her custody, under the Corporate Seal of the
City.
F. Corporate Seal. The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the City to
be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or
resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document
on record in his/her office, or to certify any act or paper which, from the
records in his/her office, shall appear to have been a public act of the
City or a public document. The Clerk shall not affix the Seal or cause or
§ 2-2 TRENTON CODE § 2-2
1:14
permit it to be affixed to any other instrument or writing or other paper
unless required by law or ordinance.
G. Insurance, surety bonds and contracts. The Clerk, subject to the
supervision of the City Council, shall:
(1) Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, except his/
her own bond which shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer;
of all insurance policies upon or with respect to risks insured for
the benefit of the City or to protect it against any claim, demand or
liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor,
services, supplies, equipment and materials to which the City may
be a party.
(2) Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the City as obligee, or any other form of security given
by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on
account of work done or to be done in or for the City.
(3) Have custody of all leases of property owned by the City.
(4) Report to the City Council annually, at such time as the Council may
require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each
surety bond and contract of insurance; the nature and terms of
outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective
expiration dates.
H. Administrative rules and regulations; filing and publication. No rule or
general regulation made by any department, officer, agency or
authority of the City, except as relates to the organization or internal
management of the City government or a part thereof, shall take effect
until it is filed with the City Clerk. The Clerk shall maintain a current
compilation of all rules and regulations which shall be available for
public inspection in his/her office during business hours.
I. Other laws and ordinances. In addition to such other functions, powers
and duties as may be prescribed by the Charter and ordinances, subject
to the supervision and direction of the City Council, the Clerk shall:
(1) Perform all functions required of City Clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance.
(2) Administer the provisions of city ordinances with reference to the
licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
(3) Issue certificates as to approval of land subdivisions by the
Planning Board or Council, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(4) Keep the minutes of the local public agency.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:15
§ 2-3. Assistant City Clerk; other personnel.
There shall be an Assistant City Clerk who shall perform the duties of the
City Clerk in the absence or upon direction of the Clerk, and there shall
be such other personnel in the office of the City Clerk as authorized by
ordinance.
(5) Collect fees, as set forth in this Code.
(6) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and
duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to
him/her by City Council.
§ 2-2 TRENTON CODE § 2-3
1:16
ARTICLE II
Mayor; Chief of Staff; Business Administrator
§ 2-4. Mayor.
A. Election; term; compensation. The Mayor shall be elected by the voters
of the City at a regular municipal election and shall serve for a term of
four years beginning on the first day of July next following his/her
election. The salary range for the Mayor shall be as set by ordinance.
B. General powers and duties of Mayor. The Mayor shall be the chief
executive and administrative officer of the City. The Mayor shall:
(1) Enforce the Charter and ordinances of the City.
(2) Supervise all of the departments of City government.
(3) Require each department to make an annual and such other reports
of its work as (s)he may deem desirable.
(4) Appoint all officers and employees for whose election or
appointment no other provision is made by Charter or ordinance.
(5) From time to time make such recommendations for action by the
Council as (s)he may deem to be in the public interest.
(6) Report annually at the beginning of the year to the Council and the
public on the work of the previous year and condition and
requirements of City government for the current year.
C. Appointment powers of Mayor.
(1) The Mayor may appoint a Deputy Mayor in charge of staff, who
shall be called the "Chief of Staff," and whose powers, duties and
annual compensation shall be prescribed, in writing, by the Mayor.
The Chief of Staff shall serve and be removable at the pleasure of
the Mayor and shall serve in the unclassified service of the civil
service of the City.
(2) The Mayor shall appoint the Director of each department with the
advice and consent of Council. Each department head shall serve
during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him/her and until
the appointment and qualification of his/her successor.
(3) The Mayor may, in his/her discretion, remove any department head
after notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a
department head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of his/her
intention with the Council, and such removal shall become effective
on the 20th day after the filing of the notice unless the Council
shall, prior thereto, have adopted a resolution by a two-thirds vote
of the whole number of the Council disapproving the removal.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:17
§ 2-5. Business Administrator.
(4) The Mayor shall have such further appointing power with advice
and consent of the Council, or otherwise as provided by general
law.
(5) Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the Charter or
this chapter to be filled by the Mayor with advice and consent of
Council, and there is no holdover incumbent, the Mayor may
temporarily fill such vacancy (in the absence of any contrary
provision in the Charter or ordinances) by appointing an active
officer, including designation of himself/herself as Acting Business
Administrator in event of a vacancy in that office.
(6) Such appointee shall have all of the functions, powers and duties of
the office until it shall be filled permanently. Such appointment
shall terminate no later than 90 days after the date of the
appointment unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one
or more extensions of such period.
D. Veto power. Ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to
the Mayor, and (s)he shall, within 10 days after receiving any ordinance,
either approve the ordinance by affixing his/her signature thereto or
return it to the Council by delivering it to the City Clerk together with a
statement setting forth his/her objections thereto or to any item or part
thereof. No ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect
without the Mayor's approval unless the Mayor fails to return an
ordinance to the Council within 10 days after it has been presented to
him/her, or unless Council upon reconsideration thereof on or after the
third day following its return by the Mayor shall by a vote of 2/3 of the
members resolve to override the Mayor's veto.
E. Acting Mayor. As provided by the Charter (Section 3-12, N.J.S.A.
40:69A-42), the Mayor shall designate the Chief of Staff, the Business
Administrator, any other department head or the City Clerk to act as
Mayor whenever the Mayor shall be prevented, by absence from the
City, disability or other cause, from attending to the duties of the office.
During such time, the person so designated by the Mayor shall possess
all the rights, powers and duties of Mayor. Whenever the Mayor shall
have been unable to attend to the duties of the office for a period of 60
consecutive days for any of the above-stated reasons, an acting Mayor
shall be appointed by the Council who shall succeed to all the rights,
powers and duties of the Mayor or the then Acting Mayor.
F. Vacancy. A vacancy in the office of Mayor shall be filled by election for
the remainder of the unexpired term at the next regular municipal
election occurring not less than 60 days after the occurrence of the
vacancy. Council shall fill vacancies temporarily by appointment to
serve until the qualification of a person so elected.
§ 2-4 TRENTON CODE § 2-5
1:18
A. A Business Administrator shall be appointed as provided by the Charter.
The Business Administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of his/
her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference
to his/her actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice in
respect to duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his/
her appointment (s)he need not be a resident of Trenton or of this state,
but during his/her tenure of office (s)he may reside outside the City only
with the approval of the City Council.
B. Under the direction of the Mayor, the Business Administrator shall:
(1) Assist the Mayor in the preparation of the City budget.
(2) Negotiate contracts and maintain proper labor relations with all
employee collective bargaining groups.
(3) Serve as Director of the Department of Administration.
(4) Prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the City government not inconsistent with the
Charter and this chapter.
(5) The Business Administrator shall approve and authorize payments,
on behalf of the City, of claims which, upon review of the City
Attorney, represent legitimate and provable causes of action
against the City in such amount as represents a just, equitable and
fair settlement and to authorize payment of such amounts from the
trust fund account administered by the agency designated by the
City to administer the self-insurance program, provided that
nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the
Business Administrator to make settlement of any claim in excess
of $3,000 without the prior approval by resolution of the City
Council.
(6) Perform such other duties as this chapter may require, as assigned
by the Mayor or as Council may otherwise prescribe.
C. The salary range for the Business Administrator shall be as set by
ordinance.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:19

ARTICLE III
Administrative Organization
§ 2-6. Departments. [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6;
10-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-452]
§ 2-7. Boards, bodies and commissions.
In addition to the departments provided for above, there shall be the
following boards, bodies or commissions which are created or continued by
this chapter:
A. The administrative functions, powers and duties of the City are
allocated and assigned among and within departments established or
constituted by this chapter as follows:
(1) City Clerk.
(2) Department of Administration and Finance.
(3) Department of Law.
(4) Department of Housing and Economic Development.
(5) Department of Inspections.
(6) Department of Public Works.
(7) Department of Health and Human Services.
(8) Fire Department.
(9) Police Department.
(10) Department of Water and Sewer.
B. The director of each department established by this chapter must be
duly qualified, by education, training, experience or certification within
the department field, to fulfill the duties and obligations of the position
of "director" of said department, as established under this Code.
A. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Planning Board.
C. Municipal Court.
D. Parking Authority.
2. Editor's Note: The revisions to certain department and division names enacted by this
ordinance [specifically, “Department of Administration” to “Department of Administration
and Finance”; “Department of Finance” to “Division of Finance” (and “Director” to
“Division Head”); “Division of Water and Sewer” to “Department of Water and Sewer” (and
“Division Head” to “Director”); and “Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture” to “Division of Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture” (and “Director” to
“Division Head”)] will be incorporated throughout the Code during the course of regular
supplementation.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7
1:21
§ 2-8. Department Directors.
E. Housing Authority.
F. Library.
G. Public Employees' Awards Committee.
H. Citizens' Advisory Committee on Parks and Recreation.
I. Public Parking System Utility.
J. Landmarks Commission for Historic Preservation.
K. Trenton Parking Utility.
L. Board of Review (Purchasing).
M. Open Space Advisory Board.
N. Board of Education.
O. Human Relations Commission.
P. Board of Construction Appeals. [Added 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
Q. Employment Commission. [Added 9-4-2014 by Ord. No. 14-42]
A. Powers and duties. Under the supervision of the Mayor, each
department head shall:
(1) Appoint subordinate officers and employees within their respective
departments and, with the approval of the Mayor, remove such
officers and employees subject to the provisions of the Revised
Statutes, Title 11, Civil Service.
(2) Direct and supervise the work of the department and its employees
through the divisions established by this chapter.
(3) Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify such assignments as
need appears.
(4) Delegate to division heads such of his/her powers as (s)he may
deem necessary for efficient administration.
(5) Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council in such form as
shall be approved by the Business Administrator on the work of the
department during the preceding year.
B. Compensation.
(1) The salary range for the directors of departments shall be as set by
ordinance.
§ 2-7 TRENTON CODE § 2-8
1:22
§ 2-9. Removal.
(2) A director may serve as a division head, and a division head may
serve as a bureau head without additional compensation.
Department heads shall devote full time as required for the proper
and efficient discharge of the duties of their respective offices.
C. Filling vacancies. Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of head of any
division by resignation, removal, disability or otherwise, the director of
the department may fill such vacancy temporarily by appointing an
acting head of such division who shall have and perform all the
functions, powers and duties of such division until the office shall be
filled permanently.
A. Pursuant to the Charter, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37 and 40:69A-43:
(1) The Mayor, in his/her discretion, may remove any department head
after notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a
department head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of his/her
intention with the Council, and such removal shall become effective
on the 20th day after the filing of the notice, unless prior thereto
the Council shall have adopted a resolution by a two-thirds vote of
the whole number of the Council disapproving the removal.
(2) The Council may, for cause, remove any municipal officer other
than the Mayor or a member of Council.
(3) The Council shall consider notices under Subsection A(1) above
and motions under Subsection A(2) above only after notice and an
opportunity to be heard are given to the affected officer. The Clerk
shall forthwith cause a copy of the notice or motion, as the case
may be, together with a statement of the charges involved and
notice of the time and place fixed for hearing to be served
personally, or by registered mail, upon the officer affected. The
hearing shall be held not less than 10 days nor more than 15 days
after the date of such service. The hearing shall be open to the
public.
B. Pursuant to the Charter, Council may veto a removal under Subsection
A(1) above, by a two-thirds vote of the Council and may adopt or defeat
a motion under Subsection A(2) above, by a majority vote of the
Council.
§ 2-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Department of Administration and Finance
§ 2-10. Department established; Director. [Amended 10-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-45]
There shall be a Department of Administration and Finance, the Director
of which shall be the Business Administrator, who shall serve without
additional compensation.
§ 2-11. Functions.
The Business Administrator, with the approval of the Mayor, shall establish
divisions and offices within the Department for the effective administration
of the functions assigned to the Department, which are itemized below:
A. Operate an efficient, centralized purchasing operation in compliance
with all applicable state law.
B. Prescribe and install uniform forms and procedures for budget
preparation by all departments, and assist in the review and analysis of
budget requests and in the preparation of the budget document.
C. Administer the City's personnel program, including job classification,
pay plan, recruitment, training and other personnel policies, and
maintain a complete system of personnel records of municipal officers
and employees.
D. Study, prepare and install methods and systems for administration of
the various departments.
E. Operate a centralized Information Technology Division on behalf of the
various departments and coordinate systems of office automation.
[Amended 5-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-45]
F. Administer the City's affirmative action program.
G. Administer an effective program for safety, insurance and loss control
for all City departments, including self-insurance programs in all areas
deemed appropriate.
H. Administer a grants management program for the City, including, but
not limited to, the administration of the Community Development Block
Grant Program.
I. Manage telecommunications services on behalf of all City departments.
J. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Mayor or
prescribed by City Council.
K. Operate the Trenton Parking Utility as established in § 2-72, appoint
Parking Enforcement Officers, conduct parking enforcement duties
authorized in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.7 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.2 et seq., and
§ 2-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11
1:25
§ 2-12. Assistant Business Administrator.
The Business Administrator, with the approval of the Mayor, may designate
a member of his/her staff to be Assistant Business Administrator, who shall
act for or in place of the Business Administrator in his/her absence, and
have such other functions, powers and duties as may be assigned by the
Business Administrator.
perform all functions necessary to maintain and repair parking meters,
and collect monies therefrom. The conduct of parking enforcement
duties with the Trenton Parking Utility shall not be construed to
diminish, supersede or supplant the authority and responsibility of
the Police Department as set forth in § 2-58 of this chapter. [Added
3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-08]
§ 2-11 TRENTON CODE § 2-12
1:26
ARTICLE V
Division of Finance
§ 2-13. Establishment; Division Head; Divisions. [Amended 2-5-2004
by Ord. No. 04-6; 2-19-2004 by Ord. No. 04-14; 10-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-45]
§ 2-14. Chief Financial Officer.
There is hereby created by the City Council the position of Chief Financial
Officer of the City, which position shall carry no additional compensation
and shall be filled, ex officio, by the City Comptroller. The Chief Financial
Officer shall have all the authority and responsibility provided by state laws.
§ 2-15. Division of Accounts and Control.
Within the Division of Finance there shall be a Division of Accounts and
Control, the head of which shall be the City Comptroller. Under the
supervision and direction of the Division Head of Finance, the Division shall:
A. There shall be a Division of Finance within the Department of
Administration, the head of which shall be the Division Head of the
Division of Finance. The Division Head shall, prior to his/her
appointment, be qualified by training or experience in governmental
finance and fiscal management. The Division of Finance, under the
direction and supervision of the Division Head, shall be organized into
four divisions, namely, Accounts and Controls, Assessment, Treasury
and Tax.
B. Powers and duties of Division Head of Finance. Through the
Department of Administration, the Division Head of the Finance
Division shall be responsible for the accounting, preauditing and
control of all City revenues and expenditures; for the custody, receipt
and disbursement of City funds; for the safety and investment of the
City's investments; for the management of the City's debt; for the
development of financial policies for recommendation to the Mayor and
for the safeguarding of the City's financial interests.
A. Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts, including
forms, standards and procedures for all departments of the City
government. Any uniform system of accounts shall include appropriate
provision for such records and reports as may be prescribed or
approved by the Business Administrator for the determination of the
cost of performance of each functional program or activity, measured in
such work units as may be appropriate thereto, and for such data,
records and reports as may be prescribed or approved by the Business
Administrator for the preparation and execution of a budget for the
expenditure of public funds for capital purposes to give effect to
general improvement programs.
§ 2-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-15
1:27
§ 2-16. Division of Assessments.
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Assessments,
the head of which shall be the Chief Assessor. The Chief Assessor shall
be appointed by the Director to serve for the term provided by law, and
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Prior to his/her
appointment, the Chief Assessor shall be qualified by at least five years'
training or experience, or a combination thereof, in the valuation and
assessment of real and personal property. The Division of Assessments
shall be limited to the Chief Assessor and six other persons engaged in
assessment functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director
of Finance, the Division shall:
B. Maintain and operate the City's central bookkeeping and accounting
records according to sound accounting principles and in accordance
with the requirements of the Director of the State Division of Local
Government.
C. Audit all receipts and disbursements of the City government and of
each of its departments, preaudit all bills, claims and demands against
the City, including payrolls, and require each department head to
certify that materials, supplies or equipment have been received and
accepted as specified and that services have been duly rendered.
D. Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded, and maintain such books and records as may be required for
the proper exercise of such budgetary control, including an
encumbrance system of budget operation.
E. Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on
behalf of any department for conformity with state law, the Charter and
ordinances of the City and authorize only such expenditures and
commitments as conform with all the requirements of this chapter.
F. Install, operate and maintain all pension records for personnel of all
departments. [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
G. Devise, install and supervise a perpetual inventory of unissued stores of
the City and install an accounting system whereby the status of such
inventories will be maintained current. Supervise a physical inventory
periodically. Supervise the making of inventory lists of furniture and
equipment by every officer, department or other agency having
possession of city owned properly. Devise a system of inventory records
to account for all furniture and equipment and supervise a periodic
counting of such furniture and equipment. [Amended 2-5-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-6]
H. Submit a monthly report of encumbrances, expenditures and
unencumbered balances to the City Council and Business
Administrator.
§ 2-15 TRENTON CODE § 2-16
1:28
§ 2-17. Division of Treasury.3
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Treasury, the
head of which shall be designated as the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be
appointed by the Director to serve for the term prescribed by law, and any
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Under the direction and
supervision of the Director of Finance, the Division shall:
A. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a Municipal Assessor.
B. Make assessments for benefits for local improvements and, for that
purpose, have and exercise the powers and duties of a Board of
Assessment for local improvements as provided by law.
C. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted and establish and maintain such files,
records and procedures as may be required for the valuation and
assessment of personal property pursuant to law.
D. Maintain a current Tax Map of the City as a public record and cause to
be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character of the real
property assessed, employing for that purpose the facilities of other
departments as provided by this chapter.
A. Receive funds entrusted to or under the control of any department, and
deposit all funds received by it in depositories authorized by the Council
by resolution.
B. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City or in its
possession in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise provided by law,
and keep such funds and City moneys not required for current
operations safely invested or deposited in interest-bearing accounts, as
may be approved by the Comptroller.
C. Make disbursements of City funds upon warrant of the Comptroller by
an individual warrant check for each bill, claim, wage and salary
payment.
D. Keep a full account of all cash receipts and disbursements by the
Division according to the system of accounts approved by the Director
of Finance.
E. Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the City and the receipt
and delivery of City bonds and notes for transfer, registration or
exchange.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 2-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18
1:29
§ 2-18. Division of Tax.4
Within the Department of Finance shall be a Division of Tax, the head of
which shall be designated as the Collector of Taxes. The Collector of Taxes
shall be appointed by the Director to serve for the term prescribed by law,
and any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Under the
direction and supervision of the Director of Finance, the Division shall:
§ 2-19. Division of Water Billing.5
Within the Department of Finance shall be a Division of Water Billing. Under
the direction and supervision of the Director of Finance, the Division shall
bill, receive and collect water and sewer accounts as determined from water
meter readings or flat rate, pursuant to Chapter 309, Water and Sewer, of
this Code.
§ 2-20. Bad checks.6
The City receives numerous checks dishonored for insufficient funds or
other reasons that would cause the check to be invalid or valueless
constituting a burden on the personnel in the respective offices who must
correspond and recover funds as a result. Therefore it is in the best interest
of the City to assess the issuers of such instruments a charge sufficient
to reimburse the costs incurred and to discourage such practices. The
City Council shall impose a service charge of $20 upon the account of,
or surcharged to the fee or charge otherwise chargeable to, any person
or entity who issues to the City, or for whom it is issued, a negotiable
instrument which, upon presentment in due course, is subsequently
A. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for the Tax Collector including, but without limitation
thereto, the preparation and mailing of tax bills, enforcement of tax
collections by tax sales and otherwise, and the maintenance of tax
accounting records in such manner as may be prescribed or approved
pursuant to the Charter and this chapter.
B. Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes, and charge and receive penalties and interest pursuant
to law.
C. Make, or cause to be made, and certify searches for tax and other liens
on real property as may be authorized by law, and charge and collect for
the use of the City, the fee required pursuant to law for any such search.
The Tax Collector may appoint or designate one of the Division
employees as official tax searcher to perform these functions within the
Division.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 2-18 TRENTON CODE § 2-20
1:30
dishonored by the bank or other institution upon which it was drawn or at
which it was made payable.
§ 2-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20
1:31

ARTICLE VI
Department of Law
§ 2-21. City Attorney. [Amended 9-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-58]
§ 2-22. Professional Assistants. [Amended 9-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-58]
The City Attorney shall appoint Assistant City Attorneys and legal
assistants, each to serve during the term of office of the City Attorney
appointing him. Prior to their appointment each of them shall have been
admitted to the practice of law in the State of New Jersey, and a member
of the bar in good standing, for at least three years, except that the
requirement for three years' admission to practice law in the State of
New Jersey may be waived by the City Attorney with the approval of the
Mayor for the position of legal assistant. The number of assistant City
Attorneys shall be seven in number. The Department shall also hire a total of
three legal secretaries, four paralegals and a Management Specialist. The
attorneys hired for the position of Assistant City Attorney need not comply
with § 2-95 of the City Code regarding residency, although residence of the
City of Trenton shall receive preferential treatment in the hiring process.
The City Council is empowered by this section to increase the number of
attorneys and legal assistants in the Department of Law by resolution.
§ 2-23. Powers and duties.
The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Mayor, the Council and
all departments except as may be otherwise provided by the Charter. (S)He
shall prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by and against the City
and every department thereof. In furtherance of these general powers, and
without limitation thereto, (s)he shall:
A. There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the City
Attorney. (S)He shall be appointed pursuant to the Charter and receive
such compensation as shall be provided by ordinance. Prior to his/her
appointment, (s)he shall have been duly admitted to the practice of law
in this state, and a member in good standing, for at least five years,
except that this requirement may be waived by the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council.
B. Whenever (s)he deems the interests of the City so require, the City
Attorney may, with the approval of the Mayor and Council and within
the limits of available appropriations, appoint special counsel to assist
him/her in the preparation, trial or argument of such legal matters or
proceedings as (s)he may determine. If the City Attorney should be
disqualified with respect to any matter, the Mayor shall appoint special
counsel, with the approval of the City Council, to represent the City for
and with respect to such matter.
A. Advise the Council as to the form and sufficiency of all ordinances and
resolutions prior to their passage.
§ 2-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-23
1:33
§ 2-24. Assistant City Attorneys. [Amended 9-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-58]
Assistant City Attorneys shall perform such duties as the City Attorney may
direct or prescribe and, during the absence or disability of the City Attorney,
shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties of the City Attorney.
In the event of the death or resignation of the City Attorney or of the
occurrence of a vacancy in the office for any other reason, the Assistant City
Attorney shall act as City Attorney until the office is duly filled pursuant to
the Charter.
§ 2-25. Special counsel.
Whenever (s)he deems the interests of the City so require the City Attorney
may, with the approval of the Mayor and Council and within the limits of
available appropriations, appoint special counsel to assist him/her in the
preparation, trial or argument of such legal matters or proceedings as (s)he
may determine. If the City Attorney should be disqualified with respect to
any matter, the Mayor shall appoint special counsel, with the approval of
the City Council, to represent the City for and with respect to such matter.
B. Review and approve all contract deeds, documents and instruments
prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the City.
C. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the City as (s)he may in his/her discretion determine to be
necessary or desirable, or as directed by the Mayor or Council.
D. Subject to the approval of the Council, have power to enter into
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the City
is involved.
E. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him/
her by the Mayor, the Council, the Business Administrator or the head
of any department with respect to their official powers and duties.
F. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the City's interest and report thereon from time to time as the
Mayor or Council may require.
G. Conduct, when requested by the magistrate of the Municipal Court of
Trenton, prosecution for crimes and offenses cognizable by the
Municipal Court, except such crimes and offenses as it may be the duty
of the county prosecutor to prosecute, including violations of
ordinances of the City, complaints of any department under state law
and violations of rules or resolutions duly promulgated by any
department.
H. Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may be
provided by charter or ordinance.
§ 2-23 TRENTON CODE § 2-26
1:34
§ 2-26. Records and papers.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating
to the administration of the Department of Law shall be and remain the
property of the City. Upon the termination of this service with the City,
the City Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his/her successor all such
property, together with a written consent to substitution of his/her
successor in all legal actions and proceedings then pending to which the
City is a party. The Assistant City Attorney and legal assistants shall have a
like duty and obligation upon the termination of their services with the City.
§ 2-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26
1:35

ARTICLE VII
Department of Housing and Economic Development
§ 2-27. Establishment; Director.
There shall be a Department of Housing and Economic Development, the
head of which shall be the Director.
§ 2-28. Powers and duties.
The Department shall:
§ 2-29. Redevelopment functions. [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord. No.
04-6]
The Department shall supervise and coordinate all redevelopment functions
of the City and to that end shall:
A. Advise and assist the Mayor and the Council in regard to the physical
planning and public improvement aspects of all matters related to the
development of the City.
B. Provide staff assistance to the Planning Board in all matters under its
jurisdiction.
C. Conduct continuous studies and collect statistical and other data to
serve as the basis for planning recommendations.
D. Study the operation and effect of land use controls and their
administration within the City and report thereon to the Mayor and
Council.
E. Develop and administer programs and activities for the rehabilitation of
housing and the conservation of neighborhoods.
F. Promote the City's economic development through the retention and
expansion of existing businesses and the attraction of new businesses;
and be responsible for coordinating the design and construction of Cityfunded
facilities and recreational sites.
A. Administer and direct urban conservation, rehabilitation and renewal
activities of the City.
B. Exercise the powers of the City as set forth in the Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.) for purposes of any
federal urban renewal or redevelopment program, provided that no
project shall be undertaken, except upon the approval of the Council,
and nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any
expenditure, except pursuant to an appropriation made by the Council.
C. Conduct studies, collect statistical and other data and make
recommendations with regard to redevelopment areas and plans.
§ 2-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:37
§ 2-30. Planning Board review.
Whenever any project or course of action is related to or may affect the
Master Plan, the Department shall submit the matter to the Planning Board
for review and recommendation. Such recommendations shall be annexed
to and accompany any proposal transmitted to the Council with respect to
any such project or course of action.
§ 2-31. (Reserved)7
§ 2-32. Bureau of Property Management. [Amended 2-5-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-6]
There shall be a Bureau of Property Management within the Division. The
Bureau shall:
§ 2-33. Division of Economic Development. [Amended 2-5-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-6]
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Economic Development
under the direction and supervision of the Director. Subject to the Charter
and code, the Division shall:
D. Appoint or contract with technical and professional advisors and
assistants as may be required and approved for any federally or stateaided
planning, renewal, development or redevelopment project,
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the making
of any contract without the approval of Council.
E. Constitute and appoint advisory committees, neighborhood councils
and other forms of citizen participation in urban rehabilitation and
redevelopment.
A. Manage and dispose of properties acquired by the City through tax
foreclosure.
B. Manage tax delinquent and other properties subject to the receivership
provisions of state law.
C. Administer relocation assistance to individuals, households and
businesses displaced as a result of governmental action.
D. Maintain, board and secure City-owned vacant structures not needed
for public purposes.
E. Maintain and manage tenant-occupied City-owned structures.
A. Prepare an overall economic development plan (OEDP) for the City.
7. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-7.7, Bureau of Property Maintenance, which immediately
followed § 2-31, was repealed 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6. Former § 2-31, Division of Real
Estate, was repealed 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-08.
§ 2-29 TRENTON CODE § 2-33
1:38
§ 2-34. Division of Planning.
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Planning. Under the
direction and supervision of the Director and subject to the Charter and
Code, the Division shall:
B. Encourage the retention of existing businesses and assist such
businesses in securing financing for renovation and expansion.
C. Encourage the establishment of new industry and businesses in the City
and secure federal and/or state funds to make this possible.
D. Coordinate the City's economic development efforts with those of other
governmental bodies and agencies.
E. Arrange and coordinate City services necessary for economic
development projects.
F. Prepare data and statistics regarding the City's economy and make
analyses and develop recommendations for economic development
policies and activities.
G. Establish liaison with the Trenton Downtown Association and various
commercial associations, including business associations in
neighborhood shopping areas.
H. Plan and coordinate public improvements in commercial areas and the
disposition of land owned by the City, Parking Utility or Redevelopment
Agency, if applicable in such areas.
I. Establish liaison with the Economic Development Corporation for
Trenton (EDCT) and other entities involved in economic development in
the City.
A. Review all requests of property owners and developers for
consideration by the Planning and Zoning Boards and make
recommendations to such Boards.
B. Prepare redevelopment plans for proposed redevelopment areas
pursuant to state statute.
C. Prepare and periodically revise a Comprehensive Master Plan for the
City and prepare such plans, studies, analyses, surveys and reports
which may, from time to time, be necessary to implement the Master
Plan or guide governmental policy to coordinate and promote the
overall development of the City.
D. Review proposed landmark and historic district designations and make
recommendations to the appropriate City body or bodies which review
and approve such designations.
E. Assess the environmental impact of proposed facilities, programs and
activities.
§ 2-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-34
1:39
§ 2-35. Division of Housing Production. [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-6]
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Housing Production.
Under the direction and supervision of the Director and subject to the
Charter and Code, the Division shall:
F. Review rehabilitation and construction plans which are required to be
considered by the City Landmarks Commission for Historic
Preservation and make recommendations to the Commission as to the
conformity of the proposed work with the architectural standards
adopted by the Commission.
G. Establish liaison with the Capital City Development Corporation and
other groups involved in the planning and development of areas within
the City.
H. Undertake such traffic and transportation plans, analyses and reports
which may be necessary to implement the comprehensive master
planning program or to guide governmental policy for the assurance of
orderly and coordinated traffic and transportation planning and
development of the City, including coordinating the City's traffic and
transportation planning efforts with appropriate county, regional and
state agencies.
I. Advise the Director on matters dealing with public transportation,
including bus, railroad, taxi and other modes, as they affect the
planning and development of the City.
J. Undertake plans and studies of parking needs and conditions, and
coordinate the construction of additional public and private parking
facilities, including those to be operated by the Trenton Parking Utility.
A. Through programs for new construction and rehabilitation, encourage
the creation of housing in the City, including market-rate housing and
housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
B. Provide technical assistance and support to developers of housing,
including nonprofit and community-based development corporations.
C. Coordinate efforts to obtain financing for housing development from
public and private sources.
D. Encourage the maintenance and improvement of the existing housing
stock through programs of property improvement, rental rehabilitation
and urban homesteading, as appropriate.
E. Provide technical services to further the improvement and expansion of
facilities for nonprofit organizations providing services to the City's
lower-income households and neighborhoods.
F. Provide services with respect to the construction and restoration of
public facilities owned and operated by the city.
§ 2-34 TRENTON CODE § 2-35
1:40
§ 2-35.1. Housing and Economic Development Section 3 Plan.
[Added 5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-36]
G. Provide construction-monitoring services with respect to housing and
related projects being carried out by private developers and nonprofit
corporations.
H. In conjunction with the Division of Planning, prepare plans and conduct
studies to further the City's ability to provide affordable housing to its
residents.
I. Build partnerships with private and public sector agencies and
organizations, and encourage innovative programs and approaches, to
the end of improving the housing conditions of the City's residents. 8
A. Statement of purpose.
(1) City of Trenton (COT) is committed to helping the residents of its
communities achieve their individual goal of self-sufficiency by
providing opportunities for training and employment.
(2) Section 3 of the Federal Housing Act of 1968 requires that
economic opportunities generated by certain U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) financial assistance shall,
to the greatest extent feasible, be given to low-income persons,
particularly those who are recipients of government assistance for
housing, and to businesses that provide economic opportunities for
these persons. Regulations governing the implementation of
Section 3 are contained in 24 CFR Part 135.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COVERED ACTIVITY — Any activity that is funded by Section 3 covered
assistance, including public housing assistance.
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES GENERATED BY SECTION 3
COVERED ASSISTANCE — All employment opportunities generated by
the expenditure of Section 3 covered public assistance with respect to
Section 3 covered housing and community development assistance; this
term means all employment opportunities arising in connection with
Section 3 covered projects, including management and administrative
jobs.
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE JOBS — Include architectural,
engineering or related professional services required to prepare plans,
drawings, specifications, or work write-ups; and jobs directly related to
administrative support of these activities, e.g., construction manager,
relocation specialist, payroll clerk, etc.
8. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-7.13, Division of Construction Services, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.1
1:41
NEW HIRE — An individual employed on average for at least 30 hours
of service per week, or 130 hours of service per month for permanent,
temporary, or seasonal employment opportunities.
RECIPIENT — Any entity which receives Section 3 covered assistance,
directly from HUD or from another recipient, and includes, but is not
limited to, any state unit of local government, public housing authority,
or other public body, public or private nonprofit organization, private
agency or institution, mortgagor, developer, limited dividend sponsor,
builder, property manager, community housing development
organization, resident management corporation, resident council, or
cooperative association. The "recipient" also includes any successor,
assignee or transferee of any such entity, but does not include any
ultimate beneficiary under the HUD program to which Section 3
applies, and does not include contractors.
RESIDENT-OWNED BUSINESS (ROB) — A business concern owned or
controlled by public housing residents that is at least 51% owned by one
or more public housing resident(s); and whose management and daily
business operations are controlled by one or more such individuals.
SECTION 3 — Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of
1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. § 1701u).
SECTION 3 BUSINESS —
SECTION 3 COVERED ASSISTANCE —
(1) The business is 51% or more owned by a Section 3 resident; or
The business' full-time, permanent workforce consists of 30% or
more of Section 3 residents, or persons who were Section 3
residents within three years of first employment; or
(2)
A business that subcontracts in excess of 25% or more of the total
amount of the contract (including modifications), to a business that
is 1% or more owned by a Section 3 resident; or
(3)
The business' full-time, permanent workforce consists of 30% or
more of Section 3 residents as identified in Subdivision (1) or (2)
above.
(4)
Public housing development assistance provided pursuant to
Section 5 of the 1937 Act;
(1)
Public housing operating assistance provided pursuant to Section 9
of the 1937 Act;
(2)
Public housing modernization assistance provided pursuant to
Section 14 of the 1937 Act;
(3)
Assistance provided under any HUD housing or community
development program that is expended for work arising in
connection with housing rehabilitation, construction, or other
(4)
§ 2-35.1 TRENTON CODE § 2-35.1
1:42
SECTION 3 COVERED CONTRACTS — A contract or subcontract
(including a professional service contract) awarded by a recipient or
contractor for work generated by the expenditure of Section 3 covered
assistance, or for work arising in connection with a Section 3 covered
project. Section 3 covered contracts do not include contracts awarded
under HUD's procurement program, which are governed by the Federal
Acquisition Regulation (FAR). Section 3 covered contracts also do not
include contracts for the purchase of supplies and materials. However,
whenever a contract for materials includes the installation of the
materials, the contract constitutes a Section 3 covered contract.
SECTION 3 COVERED PROJECT — The construction, reconstruction,
conversion or rehabilitation of housing (including reduction and
abatement of lead-based paint hazards), other public construction
which includes buildings or improvements (regardless of ownership)
assisted with housing or community development assistance.
SECTION 3 RESIDENT — A public housing resident; or an individual
who resides in the City of Trenton and who meets the following criteria:
public construction project (which includes other buildings or
improvements, regardless of ownership).
LOW-INCOME PERSONS — Families (or single persons) whose
incomes do not exceed 80% of the median income for the area.
(1)
VERY-LOW-INCOME PERSONS — Families (or single persons)
whose incomes do not exceed 50% of the median income for the
area.
(2)
C. Departmental responsibilities. The following departments have roles
and responsibility in reporting Section 3 activities as described by the
COT Section 3 Policy:
(1) Administration.
(a) Obtain annual projections of hiring requirements from all
departments. These projections will be based on expansion
plans, turnover history, and budget availability.
(b) Provide Personnel Director all current openings eligible for
recruitment from current COT housing tenants.
(c) Maintain an annual list of positions filled, indicating which new
hires meet the definition of Section 3 eligible residents.
(2) Purchasing Agent.
(a) Review every invitation for bid, request for proposal or request
for qualifications to ensure that it includes the required
Section 3 language.
(b) Collect documentation prior to the notice to proceed of the
current employment status of the contractor including
§ 2-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.1
1:43
subcontractors of employees who will be working on the
project.
(3) Section 3 Officer.
(a) In coordination with the Qualified Purchasing Agent (QPA) and
Business Administrator, provide oversight of the procurement
process assuring compliance with Section 3 requirements as
outlined in the Section 3 Policy - Economic Opportunities.
(b) In coordination with the Qualified Purchasing Agent (QPA) and
Business Administrator, certify Section 3 business status:
[1] Based on ownership and workforce or workforce only (as
applicable) meeting the required status at the time the bid
or proposal is submitted to COT.
[2] Completed the "Certification for Section 3 Preference
Form" requirement.
[3] Demonstrated, to COT satisfaction, that the contractor is
responsible and has the ability to complete the work under
the terms and conditions of the proposed contract. In
evaluating firms under this provision, COT will examine:
[a] The work history and prior performance of the
business in previous COT projects.
[b] The requirements of the contract versus the skills
evidenced by the business through its owners,
officers, principals, and any key staff.
[c] Technical and logistical capacity to complete the work
considering contracts already awarded the business
by COT.
[d] Bonding capacity and ability to obtain required
insurance.
[e] Evidence of past sanctions imposed by COT.
[f] Evidence that the business, its principals, associates,
partners, subcontractors or others have acted or
colluded in order to circumvent the compliance
process by structuring contractual or other
relationships or engaging in practices designed to
comply with Section 3 only to obtain the preference
without regard to the work or requirements of the job.
[4] In coordination with Qualified Purchasing Agent (QPA) and
Business Administrator, require each contractor to comply
with COT Section 3 compliance procedures and provide
them with the applicable forms (i.e., baseline employment
§ 2-35.1 TRENTON CODE § 2-35.1
1:44
report, new hire Section 3 information form, and
applicable subcontractor forms).
[5] Maintain a current list of certified Section 3 businesses
and their capabilities with updates from other
departments.
[6] Maintain a record of contractors in Section 3 compliance
with updates from other departments.
[7] In coordination with the Business Administrator, prepare
the HUD 60002 - Section 3 Summary Report and submit to
the Mayor for approval prior to submission to HUD.
[8] Verify and document the following:
[a] Eligibility of Section 3 eligible residents and tenants.
[b] Contractors (including subcontractors) will be
required to document that employees hired meet the
residency and income requirements. Documents that
may be used include a valid ID with a City of Trenton
address, income tax forms, W2 forms, utility bills, etc.
[c] Any inquiries made by a contractor/subcontractor to
hire COT residents or tenants.
[9] Report to Business Administration on a monthly basis any
contact received by a contractor or subcontractor by
documenting the date of the request, the name of the
contractor, the type of job opening, and if there was a
qualified resident available.
[10] Provide the Business Administration department on a
monthly basis with an updated Section 3 list.
[11] Track and report all Section 3 activities with the
contractor and subcontractor for each project.
[12] Have contractors complete any necessary forms and lists.
[13] Maintain documents on each contractor's good-faith
efforts and compliance with Section 3 reporting
requirements.
[14] Document any inquiries made by a contractor/
subcontractor to hire COT residents and voucher tenants.
[15] Receive and maintain a copy of certified payroll records
submitted by the contractor on a monthly basis.
[16] Notify Business Administration and Purchasing
Department of any conflict of interest pertaining to the
selection of a Section 3 contractor or subcontractor.
§ 2-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.1
1:45
(4) Housing and Economic Development.
(a) Conduct outreach and recruitment efforts for COT residents
and tenants.
(b) Promote awareness of Section 3 opportunities in other
outreach activities.
(c) Provide ongoing information along with community partners in
the projected hiring.
(d) Review and approve HUD 60002 Section 3 Summary Report
and the performance evaluation report prepared by staff on an
annual basis prior to submission to HUD.
D. Contractor/subcontractor responsibilities.
(1) Employment compliance for contractors.
(a) Prior to the notice to proceed, the contractor (including
subcontractors) must document their workforce for the
project. The general contractor and its subcontractors must
provide to the COT documentation on their good-faith efforts to
comply with the workforce participation goals of any awarded
contract. This would include, but not be limited to, weekly
certified payroll reports. All information will be provided via an
electronic Web-based compliance tracking software unless an
alternative method is previously agreed upon by the COT and
the contractor/subcontractor. The alternative method would be
the "baseline employment report for Section 3 form" or their
own documentation if the following information appears on the
contractor's or subcontractor's form:
[1] Name of project.
[2] Name of the company reporting.
[3] Name of contractor.
[4] Job titles.
[5] Number of positions needed for a specific job title.
[6] Total expected hours throughout the project.
[7] Total persons on the payroll that meet the Section 3
definition and their title.
[8] Number of positions to be filled during the life of the
project.
[9] Number of positions anticipated to be filled with Section 3
residents.
§ 2-35.1 TRENTON CODE § 2-35.1
1:46
(b) Contractors, including subcontractors, will be required to
submit the "new hire Section 3 information form (contractor's
version)" with its certified payrolls. The contractor must
comply with the Section 3 requirement throughout the life of
the contract. COT will periodically audit this information.
(c) Contractors are ultimately responsible for Section 3
compliance for their specific project. It is their responsibility to
ensure that the subcontractors are complying with Section 3.
(2) Continued Section 3 status and documentation.
(a) After the award of a contract, if a business must hire to
maintain the Section 3 workforce percentage, new hiring
efforts must be made in accordance with COT preferences.
(b) If a business claims Section 3 status by virtue of workforce
composition, documentation of the 30% workforce
requirement must be submitted to COT as part of the response
to the bid, quote, or proposal. Further, the firm must maintain
the Section 3 workforce percentage throughout the life of the
contract. Workforce composition is subject to audit.
(c) Subcontractors identified by any contractor claiming Section 3
status must be a Section 3 business by ownership and/or
workforce as defined in this procedure.
(d) Subcontractors used by prime contractors cannot claim
Section 3 status by further subcontracting.
(3) Other Section 3 business opportunities.
(a) Section 3 joint ventures. COT may permit a contract with an
association of firms, at least one of which meets the COT
definition of a Section 3 business.
(b) Joint ventures or subcontractors or subconsultants are subject
to the following documentation requirements:
[1] The subcontractor/subconsultant forms must be in writing
and must be submitted as part of the response to any bid
or proposal solicited by COT.
[2] The joint-venture agreement and/or subcontractor/
subconsultant forms must reference a completed and fully
executed joint venture certification.
[3] COT requires that the Section 3 joint-venture partner is a
bona fide Section 3 business; therefore, the joint venture
shall provide documentation that shows that the Section 3
partner meets the ownership and workforce, or workforce
requirements.
§ 2-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.1
1:47
[4] Section 3 requires that the joint-venture partner be
responsible for a clearly defined portion of the work.
Proposals or bids must specify the work portions and
compensation to be received by the Section 3 joint-venture
firm.
[5] Section 3 firms in the joint venture must be qualified to
perform the scope of work and have the capacity to
complete the work assigned under the joint-venture
agreement.
(4) Compliance and documentation of "to the greatest extent feasible/
good-faith effort."
(a) "To the greatest extent feasible" refers to the efforts taken by
the contractor to comply with Section 3 requirements. The
contractor must supply written documentation to COT of goodfaith
efforts on a monthly basis to meet the Section 3
requirement.
(b) Examples of good-faith efforts include, but are not limited to,
the following:
[1] Entering into hiring agreements with organizations
representing Section 3 residents.
[2] Establishing training programs, which are consistent with
the requirements of the Department of Labor, for public
housing residents and other Section 3 residents.
[3] Advertising the training and employment positions by
distributing flyers (which identify the positions to be filled,
the qualifications required, and where to obtain additional
information about the application process) to every
occupied dwelling unit in the housing development and in
common areas.
[4] Consulting with state and local agencies administering
training programs funded through the Workforce
Investment Act, probation and parole agencies,
unemployment compensation programs, community
organizations, and other officials or organizations to assist
with recruiting Section 3 residents.
[5] Advertising the jobs to be filled through the local media,
such as community television networks, newspapers of
general circulation, and radio advertising.
(c) This policy shall remain in effect for all covered activities so
long as this policy remains consistent with federal regulations
or until changed by the City of Trenton.
§ 2-35.1 TRENTON CODE § 2-35.1
1:48
(d) All contractors undertaking Section 3 covered projects and
Section 3 covered activities on behalf of the City of Trenton
Housing are expected to meet the requirement of Section 3.
Any contractor (whether or not they meet the definition of a
Section 3 business), in order to demonstrate compliance with
the requirement of Section 3 to the "greatest extent feasible,"
must meet the numerical goals set forth for providing training,
employment and contracting opportunities to Section 3
residents and Section 3 business concerns.
(e) It is COT's goal to achieve Section 3 goals through the
following means when awarding contracts:
[1] Hiring. At least 30% of all new hires must be Section 3
employees and work, on average, at least 30 hours of
service per week, or 130 hours of service per month. This
includes COT and low-income Mercer County area
residents. The prime contractor is required to outline all of
the employees who are needed to complete the scope of
work. This will determine how many Section 3 employees
are needed for the contract. The 30% of all new hires
covers new hires for the prime contractor and the
subcontractors. Contractors will be required to utilize an
established hiring system, which allows Section 3
individuals to apply for open positions on COT contracts.
[2] Contracts. Contractors may demonstrate Section 3
compliance by providing a certified statement committing
to subcontract to Section 3 business concerns:
[a] At least 10% of the total dollar amount of all Section 3
covered contracts for building trades work for
maintenance, repair, modernization, or development
of public housing, or for building trades work arising
in connection with housing rehabilitation, housing
construction, and other public construction.
[b] At least 3% of the total dollar amount of all other
Section 3 covered contracts.
[c] COT's preference is to contract directly with Section 3
business or contract with vendors that subcontract to
a Section 3 business. In either case, COT's preference
is further defined as prioritizing business concerns
that employ COT residents from the property where
the work is being performed. Note that supply and
delivery contracts may be excepted from these
Section 3 policy requirements.
(f) COT does not certify subcontracted Section 3 business
concerns and it is the responsibility of the prime contractor to
§ 2-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.1
1:49
verify the information presented by the self-certified,
subcontracted Section 3 businesses.
(g) If, for any reason, a business is unable to subcontract the full
percentage requirement to a Section 3 business concern, COT
requires the vendor to propose other economic opportunities
that would benefit the residents and future businesses.
Examples include, but are not limited to, teaming agreements,
mentorship programs or internship programs.
(5) Selection preferences to meet goals. COT preference is to ensure
that as many COT residents as possible are employed full time, for
at least 30 hours of service per week, or 130 hours of service per
month. In an effort to further that goal, COT has created the
following preferences:
(a) Hiring contractors are to apply a system of priority hiring
among eligible Section 3 residents pursuant to the following:
[1] Priority 1: Hire residents from the development where the
work is to be performed.
[2] Priority 2: Hire residents from another COT HUD
subsidized property.
[3] Priority 3: Hire non-COT residents countywide who meet
the definition of Section 3 resident.
[4] Priority 4: Hire non-COT residents statewide who meet the
definition of Section 3 resident.
(b) Minimum wage requirements. Contractors must pay the
specified minimum wage or prevailing wage to those
employees who are considered to be providing work to the COT
under the contract. The specified minimum wage or prevailing
wage will apply primarily to contracts for services to the COT,
though some employees (or contractors) on supply contracts
may be covered.
(c) Contracts preference shall be awarded to Section 3 business
concern according to the following system:
[1] Small purchases. For Section 3 covered contracts
aggregating no more than $100,000, COT shall follow
small purchase procedures as outlined in its procurement
policy.
[a] Where the Section 3 covered contract is to be awarded
based upon the lowest price, the contract shall be
awarded to the qualified Section 3 business concern
with the lowest responsive bidder, if it is reasonable
and no more than 10% higher than the quotation of
the lowest responsive quotation from any qualified
§ 2-35.1 TRENTON CODE § 2-35.1
1:50
source. If no responsive quotation by a qualified
Section 3 business concern is within 10% of the lowest
responsive quotation from any qualified source, the
award shall be made to the source with the lowest
responsive bid.
[b] Where the Section 3 covered contract is to be awarded
based on factors other than price, a request for
quotations shall be issued by developing the
particulars of the RFP, including a rating system for
the assignment of points to evaluate the merits of each
quotation. The solicitation shall identify all factors to
be considered, including price or cost. The rating
system shall provide for a range of 15% to 25% of the
total number of available rating points to be set aside
for the provision of preference for Section 3 business
concerns. The purchase order shall be awarded to the
responsible firm whose quotation is the most
advantageous, considering price and all other factors
specified in the rating systems.
[2] Competitive bids.
[a] Bids shall be solicited from all businesses (Section 3
business concerns and non-Section 3 business
concerns). An award shall be made to the qualified
Section 3 business concern with the highest priority
ranking and with the lowest responsive bid if that bid
is within the maximum total contract price established
in the COT budget for the specific project for which
bids are being taken; and is not more than "X" higher
than the total bid price of the lowest responsive bid
from any responsible bidder. "X" is determined as
follows:
X = Lesser of: When the lowest
responsive bid is:
Less than $100,000 10% of that bid or $9,000
At least $100,000, but
less than $200,000
9% of that bid or $16,000
At least $200,000, but
less than $300,000
8% of that bid or $21,000
At least $300,000, but
less than $400,000
7% of that bid or $24,000
At least $400,000, but
less than $500,000
6% of that bid or $25,000
At least $500,000, but
less than $1 million
5% of that bid or $40,000
§ 2-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.1
1:51
At least $1 million, but
less than $2 million
4% of that bid or $60,000
At least $2 million, but
less than $4 million
3% of that bid or $80,000
At least $4 million, but
less than $7 million
2% of that bid or
$105,000
$7 million or more 1 1/2% of the lowest
responsive bid, with no
dollar limit
[b] If no responsive bid by a Section 3 business concern
meets the requirements of Subsection D(5)(c)[2][a] of
this section, the contract shall be awarded to a
responsible bidder with the lowest bid.
[c] A bidder, to be considered responsible, must
demonstrate compliance with the "greatest extent
feasible" requirement of Section 3.
[3] Competitive proposals [RFP]. When utilizing the
competitive proposal process in compliance with its
procurement policy, from 15% to 25% of the total number
of available points shall be awarded for compliance
Section 3 on Section 3 covered contracts. Proposals from
firms not demonstrating compliance with the "greatest
extent feasible" requirement of Section 3 shall not be
considered responsible.
E. Section 3 Compliance Officer.
(1) The position of "Section 3 Compliance Officer" is hereby
established within the Division of Economic Development under the
direction and supervision of the Director of the Department of
Housing and Economic Development, who, in coordination with the
Qualified Purchasing Agent (QPA) and Business Administrator (BA),
provide oversight of the procurement process assuring compliance
with all federal, state and the COT Section 3 requirements.
(2) The salary range for the Section 3 officer shall be established by
ordinance and the salary set by resolution of the governing body.
§ 2-35.1 TRENTON CODE § 2-35.1
1:52
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Inspections
§ 2-36. Establishment; Director.
There shall be a Department of Inspections, the head of which shall be the
Director.
§ 2-37. Powers and duties.
The Department shall administer and enforce:
§ 2-38. Organization; personnel.
A. The prevailing construction code and all related laws, regulations and
ordinances.
B. The City ordinances relating to minimum standards governing the
condition and maintenance of dwellings and any other Housing Code9
as to all interior and exterior conditions, including grounds and
walkways, public or private.
C. The City Zoning Ordinance10 and all related land use regulations and
conditions as established by ordinance or by decision of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, by the Planning Board or other appropriate
agency.
D. The Electrical Code.
E. The Plumbing Code.
F. The Fire Code.
G. All ordinances and codes pertaining to the repair or construction of
streets and sidewalks.
H. All laws, ordinances and codes concerning weights and measures.
A. For the purpose of carrying out the foregoing, there shall be, within the
Department of Inspections, such offices and bureaus and personnel as
shall be deemed appropriate by the Director of the Department, subject
to the approval of the Mayor and within the limits of annual
appropriations, to enforce such laws, codes and regulations in each of
the code and subcode specialties.
B. The Director of the Department of Inspections shall have the
responsibility to organize and administer the Department and all of the
personnel assigned to it in such a manner as to promote and maintain
efficiency by coordinating the activities or personnel within the
Department through an effective table of organization and to insure
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Housing Standards.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-38
1:53
that the work of the Department of Inspections is properly coordinated
with the work of all of the other departments, to the end that the public
is provided with a modern and convenient form of service.
§ 2-38 TRENTON CODE § 2-38
1:54
ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Works
§ 2-39. Establishment; Director.
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director of Public Works. The Chief Engineer may be appointed to serve as
Director without additional compensation. The Department shall:
§ 2-40. Division of Engineering and Operations.
§ 2-41. Bureau of Engineering and Operations.
Within the Division of Engineering and Operations there shall be a Bureau
of Engineering and Operations. Under the direction and supervision of the
Municipal Engineer, the Bureau shall:
A. Be responsible for all matters relating to the construction,
management, maintenance and operation of the physical properties of
the City other than office supplies, furniture and equipment, and such
recreation maintenance functions as are assigned to the Division of
Parks and Recreation of the Department of Human Services.
B. Direct and supervise the preparation of plans and specifications and the
letting and performance of contracts for all City public works or
improvements.
C. Provide all engineering and mechanical services required by any
department, office or agency of the City government, except as
otherwise directed by the Mayor or Business Administrator.
A. Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of
Engineering and Operations, the head of which shall be the Municipal
Engineer.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall supervise the Bureau of Engineering and
Operations, the Bureau of Streets and the Bureau of Traffic and
Transportation.
A. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the City, either on force
account or by public contract.
B. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the City.
C. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other city
departments as needed.
D. Supervise the performance of contracts for public works and certify the
amounts due and payable thereunder; coordinate with the Department
of Inspections for the proper supervision of the performance of
§ 2-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-41
1:55
§ 2-42. (Reserved)11
§ 2-43. (Reserved)12
§ 2-44. Bureau of Streets.
Within the Division of Engineering and Operations there shall be a Bureau
of Streets. Under the direction and supervision of the Municipal Engineer,
the Bureau shall:
§ 2-45. Division of Solid Waste Management.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Solid
Waste Management. Under the direction and supervision of the Director,
the Division shall provide, operate and maintain facilities for the collection
and disposal of solid waste and recyclable refuse at such times and in such
manner as may be authorized by ordinance.
§ 2-46. Division of Public Property.
contracts for public works and the issuance of permits as well as the
supervision and inspection of work performed on any city street or
sidewalk.
A. Maintain and repair all City streets, bridges, culverts and drains within
the City.
B. Construct and reconstruct streets, roads, bridges, culverts and drains;
treat road surfaces and resurface streets and roads according to such
standards and schedules as directed or approved by the Chief Engineer.
C. Maintain all city streets in a clean and safe condition, free of
obstructions and hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.
D. Receive applications for and issue street opening permits.
A. Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a division of
public property, the head of which shall be the superintendent. Under
the direction and supervision of the director, the division shall:
(1) Operate, maintain and repair city-owned buildings and properties
and provide custodial and janitorial services thereof, including
office quarters, waterfront property and all other real estate.
(2) Trim, plant and care for trees in the public way.
11.Editor's Note: Former § 2-42, Division of Water and Sewer, as amended 2-19-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-14, was superseded 10-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-45. See now Article XIIIA,
Department of Water and Sewer.
12.Editor's Note: Former § 2-43, Division of Sewers, was repealed 2-19-2004 by Ord. No.
04-14.
§ 2-41 TRENTON CODE § 2-46
1:56
§ 2-47. Division of Automotive Maintenance.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of
Automotive Maintenance. Under the supervision and direction of the
Director, the Division shall:
§ 2-48. Bureau of Traffic and Transportation.
Within the Division of Engineering and Operations there shall be a Bureau
of Traffic and Transportation. Under the direction and supervision of the
Municipal Engineer, and subject to the Charter and Code, the Bureau shall:
(3) Maintain all playing fields, public parks, greens and playgrounds,
including any necessary specialized maintenance repairs.
B. The Mayor and the City Business Administrator are hereby directed to
coordinate and assist in whatever is necessary to accomplish the
transfer of the Bureau of Recreation and Maintenance from the
Department of Health, Welfare and Recreation into the Department of
Public Works. The payroll plan of the City of Trenton and any other
related pay or benefit ordinances are hereby amended in order to
reflect the general purposes provided for within this section.
A. Control the care, use and disposition of motor vehicles owned by the
City, other than fire engines, and for this purpose the Division shall:
(1) Operate or supervise the operation of a garage or garages for the
storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of city-owned motor
vehicles.
(2) Supervise any work done by contract for the storage, repair,
servicing and maintenance of city-owned motor vehicles or
equipment.
(3) Control the maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the City by
maintaining individual vehicle records of mileage, costs of
operation and maintenance, and replacement schedules.
B. Establish standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all
city-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of the
Department.
A. Undertake studies of traffic conditions, including but not limited to
street traffic congestion, identify areas in need of improvement, advise
the Division of Planning on needs and problems identified and
recommend to the Director specific actions for street improvements,
regulations and other means to improve the flow of traffic and the
utilization of the City's streets.
B. Construct, install, repair and maintain traffic control signals, excluding
the police and fire signal and radio systems.
§ 2-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-48
1:57
C. Install, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and markers and
check for streetlight outages.
D. Administer programs for the regulation of on-street parking, including
handicapped parking spaces as provided by state law, and resident
parking districts as provided by City ordinance.
§ 2-48 TRENTON CODE § 2-48
1:58
ARTICLE X
Department of Health and Human Services
§ 2-49. Establishment; Director; Divisions. [Amended 10-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-45]
There shall be a Department of Health and Human Services, the head of
which shall be the Director. The Department shall include the Division of
Health, Division of Community Relations and Social Services, Division of
Economic Opportunity and the Division of Recreation, Natural Resources
and Culture.
§ 2-50. Division of Health.
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Health, the head of
which shall be the Health Officer. The person appointed shall be the holder
of a Health Officer's license issued by the State Department of Health
and Senior Services of New Jersey and shall have had thorough education
and training in public health theory and practice. Within the Division of
Health there shall be a Bureau of Vital Statistics, a Bureau of Environmental
Health, a Bureau of Children's Health Services and a Bureau of Animal
Control. Under the supervision of the Director, the Division, through its
aforementioned bureaus, shall:
§ 2-51. Division of Social Services.
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Social Services, the
head of which shall be the Director. The Division shall plan, develop and
administer policies and programs to maintain and improve the delivery of
human services to residents within the City. In particular, the Division shall:
A. Have all of the functions, powers and duties of a local board of health
under Title 26 of the Revised Statutes, except that as required by the
Charter, the Council shall have and exercise all local legislative powers
under that statute.
B. Plan and administer a comprehensive public health program, including,
without limitation thereto, environmental sanitation, communicable
disease control, child and adult health and health education, laboratory
services and such other services as may be authorized by the Charter or
ordinance.
C. Administer and enforce local health ordinances and the licensing of
dogs pursuant to law.
D. Maintain and administer vital statistics, including births, deaths and
marriages in accordance with state law, and receive applications for
and issue marriage licenses pursuant to law.
A. Assess the impact of human services programs operated by the
Department, and develop and implement recommendations as
necessary.
§ 2-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-51
1:59
§ 2-52. Division of Economic Opportunity.
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Economic Opportunity,
the head of which shall be the Director. Within the Division of Economic
Opportunity there shall be a Bureau of Municipal Welfare, the head of which
shall also be the Division Director. The Division of Economic Opportunity
under the supervision of the Director shall:
B. Plan, develop, administer and coordinate the operation of socialization
programs and social services for children, families and adults. Within
the Division there will be an Office on Youth Services and an Office on
Aging Services.
C. Prepare demographic data and statistical analyses in order to prioritize
and deliver human services.
D. Enter into and perform cooperative agreements and contract with other
public agencies and voluntary charitable organizations to effectuate
other functions under this section. Coordinate human service delivery
systems in conjunction with other public and private agencies and
organizations.
A. Plan, and where feasible, administer a comprehensive economic
opportunity program for individuals, including emergency food and
shelter, public assistance, compensatory education, employment
training, job readiness and job placement with the goal of assisting
individuals in attaining self-sufficiency.
B. Maintain and administer a municipal welfare program headed by the
Local Assistance Board pursuant to law.
C. Administer laws and ordinances relating to relief for the needy,
including the furnishing of all forms of public assistance and emergency
assistance to needy persons who are eligible for assistance provided by
law through county, state and private agencies.
D. Provide and arrange for the shelter and custodial care to dependent
and homeless men and women.
E. Provide and arrange for employment readiness, employment training
and employment placement opportunities to persons requiring
assistance in gaining self-sufficiency.
F. Cooperate with other public agencies, institutions and with voluntary
institutions in the certification of medically indigent patients for care
and treatment.
G. Provide related social services such as counseling investigation,
addiction screening, indigent burials, employment development and
other public welfare activities.
§ 2-51 TRENTON CODE § 2-52
1:60
H. Enter into and perform cooperative agreements and contracts with
voluntary charitable organizations and services to effectuate other
functions under this section.
§ 2-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-52
1:61

ARTICLE XI
Division of Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture
§ 2-53. Establishment; Division Head. [Amended 10-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-45]
§ 2-54. Division of Culture.
There shall be a Division of Culture, headed by the Director whose title shall
be Administrator, Cultural and Heritage Affairs. The Division shall:
§ 2-55. Cultural Resources Council.
A. There shall be a Division of Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture,
the head of which shall be the Division Head. The Division Head, with
the approval of the Mayor, shall establish divisions and offices within
the Division for the effective administration of the functions assigned to
the Division.
B. Duties. The Division shall oversee, develop and maintain the City's
natural resources, parks, trees and open spaces; coordinate the
development and operation of cultural activities, programs and
facilities; and develop and operate recreational activities and programs.
A. Administer and operate the following cultural institutions, including:
Ellarslie, the Trent House, the Mill Hill Playhouse, the Eagle Tavern, the
Douglass House and the Artworks Building.
B. Coordinate activities of the above institutions and ensure coordination
among the City, state and private cultural and heritage institutions in
the greater Trenton area.
C. Sponsor and administer cultural and heritage programs and activities
in cooperation with other public and private agencies and
organizations.
D. Coordinate with private and public cultural institutions and funding
agencies and advocate for the City's continuing cultural growth.
E. Under the direction of the Administrator, Cultural and Heritage Affairs,
oversee management of the Mill Hill Playhouse.
F. Under the direction of the Administrator, Cultural and Heritage Affairs,
oversee management of the City Museum at Ellarslie.
G. Under the direction of the Administrator, cultural and Heritage Affairs,
oversee management of the Trent House.
A. Findings. The Mayor and City Council find and declare that:
(1) This City is uniquely rich in that its history and culture have been
crucial to the creation of our country and state.
§ 2-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-55
1:63
(2) The enormous historical and cultural wealth that exists in this City
can be used as a tool for growth and redevelopment of the City and
for the benefit of its citizens.
(3) To ensure the continuing important role that private agencies,
commissions and individuals have played in keeping our cultural
institutions alive, it is necessary and appropriate for the City to
utilize these former organizations and individuals in establishing a
cultural resources Council (CRC).
B. Purpose. In an effort to promote and support the City as a major
cultural and historical center, we have recognized the need and
established a Division of Culture within the Division of Recreation,
Natural Resources and Culture.
C. Duties of Cultural Resource Council. To ensure the goal of fostering
civic pride and promoting the cultural and historical resources
available in the City, the Cultural Resource Council shall:
(1) Serve as the primary advisory Council to the Mayor on all matters
pertaining to cultural and historic resources and opportunities,
including matters related to policy, promotion and management.
(2) Assist the Mayor in developing a short- and long-term strategy to
make the City a vibrant cultural center, building upon existing
resources and institutions.
(3) Generate ideas and assist in identifying public and private
resources to promote cultural and historic institutions and
programs.
(4) Facilitate a regular system of communication among cultural and
heritage institutions in the greater Trenton area through regular
meetings and occasional conferences and workshops.
(5) Encourage the use of our cultural facilities in order to increase
usage and maximize rental income whenever possible.
(6) Encourage and facilitate the work of the many private and public
arts and heritage organizations in and around Trenton.
(7) Encourage agencies such as the Capital City Redevelopment
Corporation, the Trenton Downtown Association, the
Chambersburg Restaurant Association, the Mercer County
Chamber of Commerce and similar organizations to promote
cultural and heritage facilities and activities.
(8) Develop good working relationships with the Mercer County
Cultural and Heritage Commission, the New Jersey Council on the
Arts and the New Jersey Historical Commission.
D. Council membership, appointments, procedures.
§ 2-55 TRENTON CODE § 2-55
1:64
(1) The Cultural Resource Council shall consist of 35 members,
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City
Council.
(2) The membership shall be divided into three classes:
(a) Organization members. One member, usually the Director, or
his/her designee, of the following departments and
organizations:
[1] Mayor.
[2] Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture.
[3] Housing and Economic Development.
[4] Division of Culture.
[5] Trenton Convention and Visitors Bureau.
[6] Free Public Library of Trenton.
[7] Board of Education, Performing and Fine Arts Coordinator.
[8] Trent House.
[9] Trenton City Museum.
[10] Mill Hill Playhouse.
[11] Douglass House.
[12] Department of State.
[13] Office of Legislative Services.
[14]War Memorial.
[15] New Jersey State Museum.
[16] Old Barracks.
[17] Historic Preservation Specialist.
(b) Citizen members. Any member of the following organizations
shall also be eligible for appointment as a citizen member:
[1] Trent House Association.
[2] Trenton Museum Society.
[3] Friends of the Douglass House.
[4] Friends of the Free Public Library.
[5] Trenton Historical Society.
§ 2-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-55
1:65
[6] Trenton Artists Workshop Association (TAWA).
[7] Artworks.
[8] Minority Arts Assembly.
[9] Contemporary Club.
[10] Performing Arts Coalition of Trenton.
[11] Performing Art Representative.
(c) There shall also be six citizens at large with an interest in
Trenton's development as a cultural center.
(d) Member of City Council. There shall be a member of City
Council, appointed by the Council President.
E. Residency. At least half of the members of the Cultural Resources
Council shall be residents of the City.
F. Officers. The Mayor, or his/her designee, shall serve as Chairperson of
the Cultural Resources Council. The Director of Recreation, natural
resources and culture shall serve as Vice Chair of the Council.
G. Length of term. All citizen appointments, whether from organizations or
at-large, shall be for one-year terms. A member of City Council shall be
appointed by the Council President each year as its designee to the
Cultural Resources Council. Members of the Council who are either
directors or their designees or from the Secretary of State's office shall
have terms which coexist with their terms of office.
§ 2-55 TRENTON CODE § 2-55
1:66
ARTICLE XII
Police Department
§ 2-56. Establishment of Department and Police Director; number
and types of positions; Police Director stipend; Chief of
Administrative Services. [Amended 4-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-47;
9-4-2003 by Ord. No. 03-103; 9-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-75]
A. There shall be a Police Department, the head of which shall be the
Police Director. Prior to his/her appointment, the Director shall have
had at least five years' experience in a responsible capacity in public
administration and policing. Whenever there is any reference in any law
or ordinance to the Chief of Police or to the Police Chief, such reference
shall be deemed to mean the Police Director. [Amended 11-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-56]
B. Number and types of positions.
(1) Within the Department of Police, in addition to the Police Director
and the Chief of Administrative Services, there shall be the
following ranks and number of positions per rank: (1) Captains: six
to nine; (2) Lieutenants: 18 to 23; (3) Sergeants: 48 to 56; and (4)
police officers: 280 to 340. The Department may also include such
civilian employees as may, from time to time, be approved by the
Director. [Amended 9-7-2006 by Ord. No. 06-66; 12-6-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-69]
(2) The Department may also include such civilian employees as may,
from time to time, be approved by the Director.
C. The Police Director is eligible to receive an annual stipend not to exceed
$25,000 at the discretion of the Mayor. The stipend may be paid to the
Police Director to compensate him/her for responsibilities related to
public safety requirements of the City.
D. Chief of Administrative Services.
(1) The salary range for the Chief of Administrative Services shall be as
set by ordinance.
(2) The Chief of Administrative Services is eligible to receive an annual
stipend not to exceed $12,500 at the discretion of the Mayor. The
stipend may be paid to the Chief of Administrative Services to
compensate his/her responsibilities related to public safety
requirements of the City.
E. Special law enforcement officers. [Added 12-20-2018 by Ord. No.
18-72]
(1) The City of Trenton authorizes the use of special law enforcement
officers to assist the regular Police Department in the performance
of its duties and responsibilities subject to the eligibility criteria
§ 2-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-56
1:67
and limitations set forth in the Special Law Enforcement Officers
Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq. No special law enforcement
officers shall be appointed to any term exceeding one year.
(a) No special law enforcement officer, by virtue of his/her
appointment as such, shall be or become a regular member of
the Police Department.
(b) Special law enforcement officers are considered part-time
employees and can be terminated for cause after adequate
hearing, unless the appointment is for four months or less, in
which event the appointment may be revoked without cause or
hearing (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14).
(c) Every special law enforcement officer, while on duty, shall
abide by all the rules and regulations of the Police Department
and those policies, general order, or standard operating
procedures established by the Police Director.
(2) Qualifications. No person shall be appointed as a special law
enforcement officer unless the person:
(a) Is a resident of the State of New Jersey during his/her term of
appointment. The residency requirement for City of Trenton
employees set forth in § 2-95 shall not apply to Class III
officers; however, there shall be a hiring preference in the
following order: City of Trenton residents, residents of Mercer
County and residents of the State of New Jersey;
(b) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
(c) Is of sound body and of good health;
(d) Is of good moral character;
(e) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
that which would make him/her unfit to serve as a special
police officer; and
(f) In accordance with the enabling legislation allowing for Class
III officers, all applicants for the title must meet the following:
[1] Precertification requirements.
[a] Must be a retired police officer who has previously
served as a duly qualified, fully trained, full-time
officer in any municipality or county of this state, or as
a member of the New Jersey State Police;
[b] Must be retired from that agency in good standing (it
is necessary to have a letter of good standing issued
§ 2-56 TRENTON CODE § 2-56
1:68
§ 2-57. Authority of Police Director.
Subject to the supervision of the Mayor, the Police Director shall be directly
responsible for the efficient and routine day-to-day operations of the Police
Department. The Police Director shall have the authority to:
§ 2-58. Responsibilities of Police Department.
Under the direction and supervision of the Police Director, the Department
shall:
by the agency from which officer retired, listing the
date and type of retirement);
[c] Must be less than 65 years of age for appointment;
[d] Must pass a psychological exam;
[e] Must pass a medical exam and have a doctor complete
the medical certification form;
[f] Must pass a drug test pursuant to the Attorney
General's Law Enforcement Drug Testing Policy; and
[g] Must have an updated background investigation.
[2] Any and all other requirements promulgated by the New
Jersey Attorney General or by statute.
(3) Duties; classification of special law enforcement officers. There
shall be the following class of special police officers pursuant to
law:
(a) Class III. SLEO Class III (SLEO III) are authorized to exercise
full powers and duties equivalent to those of a permanent,
regularly appointed full-time police officer.
A. Organize the Department subject to the table of organization set forth
in § 2-56B above. [Amended 9-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-75]
B. Adopt and promulgate such policies as are necessary and appropriate
for the divisions with the Department.
C. Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
divisions under his/her supervision and for the discipline of their
members.
D. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
E. Adopt and promulgate standard operating procedures for the efficient
operation of the Department.
§ 2-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58
1:69
§ 2-58.1. Division of Communications. [Added 6-21-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-48]
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Communications, the
head of which shall be the Director, who shall serve under the direction
and supervision of the Police Director. The Division shall plan and operate a
comprehensive police, fire and medical emergency communications system
in the City of Trenton.
§ 2-58.2. Employment of off-duty police officers. [Added 6-17-2010
by Ord. No. 10-36; amended 5-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06]
A. Preserve the public peace, prevent crime and detect and arrest
offenders against the penal laws and ordinances effective within the
City.
B. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control
and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the
use of the streets by vehicles and persons generally.
C. Remove all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other public
places; inspect and observe all places of public amusement or
assemblage and all places of business requiring any state or municipal
license or permit and report thereon to the appropriate department.
D. Conduct a training program to maintain and improve efficiency of law
enforcement officers, including members of the Division, and operate a
Police Training Academy as approved by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission for the purpose of providing a police training course in
compliance with the Police Training Act, N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
A. General.
(1) Employment of off-duty Trenton police officers for police-related
activities shall only be permitted as set forth herein. For the
purposes of this section, a Trenton police officer shall be deemed to
be in the actual performance of his duties if the Trenton police
officer is in uniform, or is exhibiting evidence of his authority, is
performing public safety functions on behalf of and as assigned by
the Police Director and is receiving compensation.
(2) Regulations to be followed by police officers.
(a) Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
police-related employment only during off-duty hours and only
at such time as will not interfere with the efficient performance
of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the City of
Trenton. The Police Director shall be responsible for the
assignment of all off-duty police-related activities and the
billing of all compensation due to the City. The Police Director
shall develop regulations to insure that all officers are assigned
off-duty employment in a nondiscriminatory manner on a
§ 2-58 TRENTON CODE § 2-58.2
1:70
rotating basis among the officers who have expressed interest
in off-duty assignment.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer from
performing private security functions or activities for a private
employer in compliance with the Security Officer Registration
Act (N.J.S.A. 45:19A-1 et seq.).
(3) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police officers shall
first obtain the approval of the Police Director which approval shall
be granted if, in the opinion of the Police Director, such
employment would not be inconsistent with the efficient
functioning and good reputation of the Police Department, and
would not reasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the officer
or officers who are to perform the work. The Police Director shall
memorialize any agreement made with an entity wishing to employ
police officers so employed to insure compliance with this section.
B. Requests for services.
(1) All requests to the City for services of off-duty police officers shall
be forwarded to the Police Director for posting at least 10 days
before such services are required. The Police Director may relax
this time restriction in the event of an emergency. Any police
officers, when so employed, shall be treated as an employee of the
City; provided, however, that wages earned for outside employment
shall not be applied toward the pension benefits of police officers so
employed, nor shall hours worked for outside employment be
considered in any way as compensable overtime.
(2) Police officers shall not be able to institute legal proceedings
against the City of Trenton for lost wages or disability retirement
benefits in the event they are injured while working off-duty
employment.
C. Insurance requirements.
(1) No party or employer shall employ any off-duty City police officer in
order to perform the services of security guard, traffic control
officer or plain-clothes surveillance officer without having first filed
with the City's Municipal Clerk a certificate of comprehensive
general liability insurance in the amount of not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limits for any one occurrence with
respect to injuries and damages suffered or caused by City police
officers while in the employ of the party or employer. Said
certificate shall list the City, the City's Police Department and
municipal officials, representatives and employees as additional
parties insured.
(2) No certificate of insurance required by this section shall be deemed
filed with the Municipal Clerk unless the City's Municipal Attorney
has first approved it.
§ 2-58.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58.2
1:71
(3) Any and all policies of insurance evidenced by any certificate filed
hereunder shall be maintained by the party or employer in full
force and effect at all limes while any City police officer is employed
by such party or employer. Upon the change or renewal of any such
policy of insurance, the party or employer shall forthwith file with
the Municipal Clerk a new and current certificate of insurance in
compliance with the foregoing provisions.
(4) In the event of an emergency, which results in the person or entity
being precluded from complying with the requirements of this
subsection, the Police Director shall have the authority to waive
said insurance prerequisite prior to approving the use of off-duty
officers for certain police-related employment.
(5) In addition to the aforesaid requirements, the party or employer
shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, the City's Police
Department and the municipality's officials, representatives and
employees, from and against any claim, liability, damage or
expense that may arise out of or relate to the actions of:
(a) Any City police officers employed by the party or employer,
including any claims concerning the alleged negligence of the
City's police officers; and
(b) The party or employer, its employees, officers and
representatives.
D. Escrow accounts.
(1) Except as provided hereinbelow, any party or employer requesting
the services of an off-duty City police officer shall estimate the
number of hours such law enforcement services are required,
which estimate shall be approved in writing by the Police Director
and shall establish an escrow account with the Chief Financial
Officer of the City by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the
rates of compensation and administrative fees set forth in
Subsection F hereinbelow for the total estimated hours of service.
(2) If the amount required to be deposited with the City pursuant to
Subsection D(1) hereinabove exceeds $20,000, an escrow deposit
of $20,000 shall be required. Said $20,000 deposit shall be
maintained until such time as the amount required to be deposited
for all remaining services on any given project shall be less than
$20,000, and then such lesser amount shall be required to be
maintained.
(3) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty City police
officers, the Police Director shall verify that the balance in the
escrow account of the party or employer requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of
hours specified in the request for services and that the insurance
requirements under Subsection C have been met. The Police
§ 2-58.2 TRENTON CODE § 2-58.2
1:72
Director shall not post a request for services from any party or
employer unless all fees and compensation required in the manner
described above have been deposited with the City's Chief
Financial Officer. No officer shall provide any such services for
more hours than are specified in the request for services.
(4) In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty police officers shall cease, and
requests for further or future services shall not be performed or
posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
(5) The party or person requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that the sufficient funds remain in the escrow account
in order to avoid any interruption of services.
(6) Schools and government agencies shall be exempt from the
requirements of the posting of an escrow deposit.
(7) In the event of an emergency, which results in the person or entity
being precluded from timely complying with the requirements of
this subsection, the Police Director shall have the authority to
waive the escrow account prerequisite and approve the use of offduty
officers for certain police-related employment. This waiver
shall be limited to the escrow account/prepayment aspect of this
subsection. The person or entity requesting the law enforcement
services shall remain fully responsible for paying for same. In the
event the person or entity requesting the off-duty police services
fails to submit payment within 30 days of the approval of the use of
the off-duty police officers, the City shall not be responsible for
paying the subject officers for their off-duty services. The police
officers will be limited in their remedies to pursuing payment from
the person or entity that requested, and received, the services.
E. Rates of compensation; administrative fees; payment for services.
Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty City
police officers shall take effect on January 1, 2011, and shall be as
follows:
(1) For all security and nonconstruction traffic control assignments,
the rate shall be as follows:
(a) Rate categories and descriptions.
[1] Low-risk security: $30 per hour.
[a] Security assignments that have a low probability of
police involvement (example: high visibility for church
events or small businesses).
[2] Moderate-risk security: $35 per hour.
§ 2-58.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58.2
1:73
[a] Security assignments that have an elevated risk of
potential police involvement example: larger
businesses with high public volume).
[3] High-risk security: $40 per hour.
[a] Security assignments that have a substantial risk of
police involvement (example: locations that have a
documented crime issue where officers are hired to
address these issues through police actions).
(b) Placement in a rate category shall also be determined by
overall police activity at the location.
(c) The Police Director or designee shall determine which security
rate applies for the person or entity wishing to employ off-duty
police officers.
(2) For all exterior security at licensed liquor establishments, the rate
shall be $55 per hour.
(3) For construction traffic control assignments contracted by the City
of Trenton with private companies, the rate shall be $57.20 per
hour.
(4) For non-City-contracted construction traffic control assignments,
the rate shall be $65 per hour.
(5) In addition to the hourly rate, an administrative fee of 14% shall be
applied to all hourly rates.
(6) In the event that a party or employer employs any off-duty City
police officer pursuant to this section, in addition to any
compensation to be paid to the City pursuant to the requirements
herein, there shall also be a fee of $10 per hour per vehicle for the
use of marked police vehicles.
(7) Periodic special events such as parades, festivals, etc., shall be
compensated under the regular overtime rates.
(8) Rates of compensation shall be reviewed on a yearly basis for any
contractual or other increases.
F. Penalty. Any person or entity who employs off-duty City police officers in
order to perform the above services without first having complied with
the requirements of this section shall be subject to the fines set forth in
the City's Code of Ordinances for each day that the party or entity
employs any City police officer, unless a waiver of said requirements
has been granted by the Police Director.
§ 2-58.2 TRENTON CODE § 2-58.2
1:74
ARTICLE XIII
Fire Department
§ 2-59. Establishment; Fire Director; stipend.
§ 2-60. Authority of Fire Director.
Subject to the supervision of the Mayor, the Fire Director shall be directly
responsible for the efficient and routine day-to-day operations of the Fire
Department. The Fire Director shall have the authority to:
§ 2-61. Responsibilities of Fire Department.
Under the direction and supervision of the Fire Director, the Fire
Department shall:
A. There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the Fire
Director. Prior to his/her appointment, the Fire Director shall have had
at least five years' experience in a responsible capacity in fire
administration.
B. The Fire Director is eligible to receive an annual stipend not to exceed
$25,000 at the discretion of the Mayor. The stipend may be paid to the
Fire Director to compensate him/her for responsibilities related to
public safety requirements of the City. [Added 9-4-2003 by Ord. No.
03-103]
A. Organize the Department according to such table of organization as
(s)he shall deem necessary and appropriate.
B. Adopt and promulgate such policies as are necessary and appropriate
for the divisions within the Department.
C. Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
divisions under his/her supervision and for the discipline of their
members.
D. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
E. Adopt and promulgate standard operating procedures for the efficient
operation of the Department.
A. Have exclusive jurisdiction over the control, fighting and extinguishing
of any conflagration which occurs within the City limits.
B. Provide the fire-fighting services and facilities for the protection of life
and property within the City and in accordance with such mutual aid
agreements as may be enforced.
C. Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report to
the County Prosecutor every case of suspicious arson.
§ 2-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-61
1:75
D. Maintain and administer fire prevention and fire safety inspection
service for the City, provided that the primary responsibility for
organizing and conducting fire inspection activities shall be lodged in
the Department of Inspections which such personnel as shall be
specially trained and assigned with reference to fire inspections.
E. Maintain and administer the Office of Emergency Management, which
shall include a Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management and
which shall be established, constituted and empowered pursuant to law.
All other departments of the City government shall cooperate with and
assist the Office of Emergency Management as may be required.
§ 2-61 TRENTON CODE § 2-61
1:76
ARTICLE XIIIA
Department of Water and Sewer
[Added 10-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-45]
§ 2-61.1. Establishment; Director; powers and duties.
A. There shall be a Department of Water and Sewer. Under the direction
and supervision of the Department Director or his/her designee, which
shall be known as the "Director of the Water and Sewer Department,"
the Director of which shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of City Council, this department shall:
(1) Operate, maintain and repair the Trenton Water Works and the
water supply treatment and distribution system of the City.
(2) Maintain, repair, test and set water meters; maintain service maps
and records; install and repair water mains, service connections,
valves and appurtenances.
(3) Maintain and service all fire hydrants in the City.
(4) Bill, receive, and collect water and sewer accounts as determined
from water meter reading or flat rate, pursuant to Chapter 309,
Water and Sewers.
(5) Operate, maintain and repair the City's sanitary and storm sewer
system, pumping stations, treatment plants and appurtenances.
B. Any employee of the Department of Water and Sewer who was formerly
an employee of any division to the Department of Public Works as of the
date of this section shall be entitled to all seniority and other benefits
accumulated while they were an employee of the Public Works
Department.
§ 2-61.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-61.1
1:77

ARTICLE XIV
Boards, Bodies and Commissions
§ 2-62. City Historian.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to increase the education,
appreciation and communication of the heritage of the City through the
establishment of the position of City of Trenton Historian, for the
recreation, education, inspiration and enrichment of the residents of
the City.
B. Authority. This section is authorized by "Local Historians Enabling Act,"
N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq.
C. Establishment of position. There is hereby established, as an officer of
the City, the position of City of Trenton Historian.
D. Appointment; term. The City Historian shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. The City Historian shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
E. Compensation; expenses. The City Historian shall serve without
compensation. The City Council may annually appropriate such funds
as may be necessary to reimburse the City Historian for expenses
incurred in the performance of the duties and responsibilities set forth
in this section.
F. Powers; responsibilities. The City Historian shall have the following
powers and responsibilities:
(1) To recommend an historical program, including, but not limited to,
collecting, preserving and making available materials relating the
history of the City.
(2) To store such materials in such a manner as to insure their
preservation, and to notify the State Archivist, New Jersey
Historical Commission, county local historian and City Council of
any materials which should be acquired for preservation.
(3) Upon leaving the position, to turn over all materials, records and
reports into the possession of the successor, if then appointed, or to
the City Council until a successor shall be appointed.
(4) To report to the Mayor and City Council as necessary concerning
the work performed and accomplished.
(5) To recommend the research, writing and publication of a history of
the City, and to recommend appropriate historical materials for
publication.
(6) To assist the Landmarks Commission for Historic Preservation, as
well as advise the Mayor and City Council, concerning the
acquisition, administration, use and disposition of any landmark or
§ 2-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-62
1:79
§ 2-63. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Adjustment, as more fully set
forth in section 19-13 of this revision.
§ 2-64. Planning Board.
A Planning Board is hereby established, as more fully set forth in Chapter
315, Zoning and Land Development, of this Code.
§ 2-65. Municipal Court.
historic site, including such places in the City included on the New
Jersey Register of Historic Places.
A. Creation; powers.
(1) There shall be a Municipal Court in the City pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented, to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City of
Trenton, Mercer County." The Municipal Court shall have a seal
bearing the impress of the name of the Court.
(2) The Municipal Court shall be held in the City Hall of the City of
Trenton or such other place as the City Council shall designate
from time to time, and shall exercise all of the functions, powers,
duties and jurisdiction conferred upon Municipal Courts by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended or supplemented,
or any other law.
B. Municipal Judges.
(1) Power and duties. There shall be three full-time judges of the
Municipal Court appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council, who shall serve for three-year terms
from the date of appointment and until a successor shall be
appointed and qualified. The Mayor may appoint two part-time
judges of the Municipal Court, with the advice and consent of the
City Council, who shall serve for a three-year term from the date of
appointment and until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
One of the full-time judges shall be designated at the time of
appointment, or at any time thereafter, as Chief Judge of the
Municipal Court, and shall be responsible during his/her term for
the establishment and enforcement of the rules, policies and
procedures relating to the operation of the Court, as well as the
general management of the Court and its personnel. Each
Municipal Court Judge shall have and possess the qualifications
and shall have, possess and exercise all of the functions, duties,
powers and jurisdiction conferred by law. The part-time judges
shall not be required to devote full time to judicial duties to the
exclusion of such other professional pursuits as are permitted by
§ 2-62 TRENTON CODE § 2-65
1:80
the Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey. [Amended
7-10-2008 by Ord. No. 08-38; 10-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-62]
(2) Compensation. The salary range for the Chief Judge and for
Municipal Judges shall be as set by ordinance.
C. Municipal Court Administrator. There shall be an Administrator of the
Municipal Court who shall be appointed in the manner provided by law
and who shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed
by law, the rules applicable to Municipal Courts and by the Municipal
Judge. The Administrator's duties shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures
relating to the operation of the Court.
(2) Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants; receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to Court matters.
(3) Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
(4) Attending Court, taking minutes of trials and entering them in the
docket; arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents;
preparing and issuing warrants and commitments.
(5) Taking and preparing bail bonds, making inquiry as to their
sufficiency and equity; receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
(6) Interviewing persons on informal Police Court matters to
determine if there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary,
issuing summonses requiring Court appearances in this regard;
maintaining and classifying records and files.
D. Violations Clerk. There shall be a violations Clerk of the Municipal
Court who, under the direction of the Municipal Court Administrator,
shall:
(1) Perform the necessary clerical work in relation to appearances,
waivers of trial, pleas of guilty and payment of fines and costs in
traffic violations.
(2) Keep proper records and entries of summonses, amounts of fines,
and their classification in such books or other records and
machines provided for this purpose, as well as the names and
addresses of the persons, the amount of the fines and dates of
payment.
(3) Periodically prepare reports concerning traffic violations and other
cases, and such other duties as the Municipal Court Clerk shall
from time to time prescribe, order and direct.
E. Chief Municipal Prosecutor and Chief Municipal Public Defender.
[Added 1-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
§ 2-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65
1:81
§ 2-66. Parking Authority.
(1) The title of Chief Municipal Prosecutor is hereby created subject to
applicable law.13
(2) The title of Chief Municipal Public Defender is hereby created
subject to applicable law.14
(3) The salary ranges for the Chief Municipal Prosecutor and the Chief
Municipal Public Defender shall be the salary range for division
directors in the City of Trenton.
A. Preamble. The greatly increased use by the public of motor vehicles of
all kinds has caused serious traffic congestion on the streets of the City;
and the parking of motor vehicles on the streets has contributed to this
congestion to such an extent as to interfere seriously with the primary
use of such streets for the movement of traffic; and such parking
prevents the free circulation of traffic in, through and from other
municipalities, impedes rapid and effective fighting of fires and the
disposition of police forces and endangers the health, safety and
welfare of the general public; and such parking threatens irreparable
loss in valuations of property in portions of the City which can no longer
be readily reached by vehicular traffic; and this parking crisis which
threatens the welfare of the community can be reduced by providing
sufficient off-street parking facilities properly located in the several
residential, commercial and industrial areas of the City; and adequate
provisions of properly located terminal space for automobiles is a public
responsibility; and the parking problem cannot be remedied by
regulatory processes and cannot be effectively dealt with by private
enterprise, and the establishment of a parking authority will promote
the public safety, convenience and welfare.
B. Creation. Pursuant to the provisions of the Parking Authority Law of the
State of New Jersey, Chapter 198 of the Laws of 1948 (N.J.S.A. 40:11A-1
et seq.), there shall be a body corporate and politic to be known as the
"Parking Authority of the City of Trenton," subject to all the rights,
powers and duties vested in and conferred upon it by the terms and
provisions of the aforesaid statute.
C. Appointment of Commissioners. The Parking Authority of the City of
Trenton shall consist of seven persons as Commissioners of the
Authority. Five persons shall be appointed by the governing body of the
City of Trenton, and two additional Commissioners shall be appointed
by the Mayor. The five Commissioners who are first appointed by the
governing body shall be designated to serve for terms of one, two,
three, four, and five years, respectively, from the date of their
appointment, but, thereafter, Commissioners shall be appointed as
aforesaid for a term of five years. The two Commissioners who are first
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:25-4.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-3.
§ 2-65 TRENTON CODE § 2-66
1:82
§ 2-67. Housing Authority.
appointed by the Mayor shall be designated to serve for terms of one
and two years, respectively, from the date of their appointment; but,
thereafter, Commissioners shall be appointed as aforesaid for a term of
five years. All vacancies, however, shall be filled for the unexpired term.
[Added 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-08]
D. Parking management. The City of Trenton may delegate the
management and operation of "on-street" and other parking meters and
related parking facilities owned by the City of Trenton, and the
enforcement of all of the applicable laws, ordinances and regulations as
to the parking of vehicles in the City of Trenton to the Parking Authority
of the City of Trenton subject to the terms and conditions set forth in an
agreement to be negotiated by the Mayor, and separately approved by
City Council resolution. [Added 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-08]
E. Eminent domain. No real property shall be acquired by the Parking
Authority of the City of Trenton without the consent of the City Council.
[Added 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-08]
A. Preamble.
(1) There exists in the City of Trenton unsanitary or unsafe dwelling
accommodations and persons of low income are forced to reside in
such unsanitary or unsafe accommodations; and in the City there is
a shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling accommodations available
at rents which persons of low income can afford and such persons
are forced to occupy overcrowded and congested dwelling
accommodations; and the aforesaid conditions cause an increase in
and spread of disease and crime and constitute a menace to the
health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the City and
impair economic values; and those conditions necessitate excessive
and disproportionate expenditures of public funds for crime
prevention and punishment, public health and safety, fire and
accident protection, and other public services and facilities.
(2) These areas in the City cannot be cleared, nor can the shortage of
safe and sanitary dwellings for persons of low income be relieved,
through the operation of private enterprise, and the construction of
housing projects for persons of low income, as defined in the Local
Housing Authorities Law, would therefore not be competitive with
private enterprise.
(3) The clearance, replanning and reconstruction of the area in which
unsanitary or unsafe housing conditions exist and the providing of
safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations by any public body for
persons of low income are public uses and purpose for which public
money may be spent and private property acquired and are
governmental functions.
§ 2-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-67
1:83
§ 2-68. Library.
§ 2-69. Public Employees Awards Committee.
(4) It is in the public interest that work on projects for such purposes
be commenced as soon as possible in order to relieve
unemployment.
B. Creation. Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Development and
Housing Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.), there shall be a body
corporate and politic to be known as the "Housing Authority of the City
of Trenton", subject to all the rights, powers and duties of the aforesaid
law.
A. Creation. There shall be a free library known as the "Trenton Free
Public Library," governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of seven
members. One member shall be the Mayor or the Superintendent of
Schools, and the Mayor shall appoint five additional trustees for terms
of five years each pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:54-9. At least
four of the five citizen members shall be residents of the City of
Trenton.
B. Powers of Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall hold in trust
and manage all property of the library. It may rent rooms or, when
proper, construct buildings for the use of the library; purchase books,
pamphlets, documents, papers and other reading matter; hire librarians
and other necessary personnel, and fix their compensation; make
proper rules and regulations for the government of the library; and
exercise all of the powers contained in N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq., that a
board of trustees of a free public library may exercise, including the
doing of all things necessary and proper for the establishment and
maintenance of the Trenton Free Public Library.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-3 1, there is hereby created within the City of
Trenton a Public Employees Awards Committee to consist of five
members appointed by the Mayor for terms provided therein.
B. The Committee shall establish appropriate rules and regulations for the
conduct and operation of the awards program, which is designed to
promote efficiency and economy in government functions, and to
reward individual employees for meritorious suggestions, copies of
same to be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
C. Cash awards shall be paid from funds appropriated therefor in the
Department of Administration. 15
D. The Committee shall report at least annually to the Mayor and City
Council concerning the awards program.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 2-67 TRENTON CODE § 2-70
1:84
§ 2-70. Citizens Advisory Committee on Parks and Recreation.
The Mayor shall appoint a Citizens Advisory Committee on Parks and
Recreation to advise and consult with the Superintendent. With the aid and
assistance of the Committee, the Superintendent shall plan and develop
recreational facilities; promote and direct an all-year program of cultural/
recreational activities for children, youth and adults; and provide for the
optimum coordination and development of public and private recreational
facilities and programs.
§ 2-71. Landmarks Commission for Historic Preservation.
A. General. The Mayor and City Council find and declare that:
(1) The spirit and direction of this City, state and nation are founded
upon and reflected in Trenton's historic past.
(2) The historical and cultural foundations of the City should be
preserved as a living part of our community life and development in
order to give a sense of orientation to the people of Trenton and
visitors.
(3) In the face of ever-increasing urban development, the present
governmental and nongovernmental historic preservation
programs and activities are inadequate to ensure future
generations a genuine opportunity to appreciate and enjoy the rich
heritage of this City.
(4) Although private agencies and individuals should continue to play a
vital role, it is nevertheless necessary and appropriate for the City
to begin a comprehensive preservation program by the creation of
a Landmarks Commission for Historic Preservation.
B. Duties of Commission. To ensure the goal of fostering civic pride in the
beautiful and noble accomplishments of the past, the Landmarks
Commission for Historic Preservation shall:
(1) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and
perpetuation and restoration of such improvements and districts
which represent or reflect elements of the City's cultural, social,
economic, political and architectural history.
(2) Safeguard the City's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage, as
embodied in such improvements and districts.
(3) Protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors
and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided.
(4) Promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for the
education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of this City and its
visitors.
(5) Strengthen, through its actions, the economy of the City.
§ 2-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-71
1:85
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall mean and
include:
ALTERATION — Any act defined as an alteration by the Building Code
of the City of Trenton as set forth in the standard building code of New
Jersey.16 An alteration or construction shall be deemed to be "major"
if it is the kind of work which is not normally done without the aid of
plans or specifications; an alteration or construction shall be deemed
to be "minor" if it is the kind of work which is normally done without
the aid of plans, specifications or skilled labor and which would not
substantially or radically change the external appearance of the site.
COMMISSION — The Landmarks Commission for Historic
Preservation.
DAY — Any day other than Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday; provided,
however, that for the purpose of Subsection H, the term "day" shall
mean every day in the week.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — The architectural style,
design, general arrangement and components of all the outer surfaces
of an improvement, as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed
by said exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, the kind and
texture of the building material, and the type and style of all windows,
doors, lights, signs, and other features appurtenant to such
improvements.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — Any area which:
IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object constituting a physical betterment of the real property, or any
part of such betterment.
IMPROVEMENT PARCEL — The unit of real property which:
Contains improvements which:
Have a special character or special historic or aesthetic
interest or value.
(a)
Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical
of one or more eras in the history of the City, state or nation.
(b)
Cause such area, by reason of such features, to constitute a
distinct section of the City.
(c)
(1)
Has been designated as an Historic District pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
(2)
Includes a physical betterment constituting an improvement and
the land embracing the site thereof.
(1)
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction.
§ 2-71 TRENTON CODE § 2-71
1:86
INTERIOR LANDMARK — An interior, or part thereof, any part of which
is 30 years old or older, and which is customarily open or accessible
to the public, or to which the public is customarily invited, and which
has a special historical or aesthetic interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, and which
has been designated as an interior landmark pursuant to the provisions
of this section.
LANDMARK — Any improvement, any part of which has a special
character or special historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, state or
nation and which has been designated as a landmark pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
LANDMARK SITE — An improvement parcel or part thereof on which
is situated a landmark and any abutting improvement parcel or part
thereof used as and constituting part of the premises on which the
landmark is situated, and has been designated a landmark site pursuant
to the provisions of this section.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS —
OWNER — Any person or persons having such right to, title to or
interest in any improvement so as to be legally entitled, upon obtaining
the required permits and approvals from the City agencies having
jurisdiction over building construction, to perform with respect to such
property any demolition, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration or other work as to which such person seeks the
authorization or approval of the Commission.
Is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying taxes,
provided that the term "improvement parcel" shall also include any
unimproved area of land which is treated as a single entity for such
tax purposes.
(2)
(1) Work done on any improvement.
Replacement of any part of an improvement for which a permit
issued by the central permit office is not required by law, where the
purpose and effect of such work or replacement is to correct any
deterioration or decay of or damage to such improvement or any
part thereof and to restore same, as nearly as may be practicable,
to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay
or damage.
(2)
D. Commission membership, appointments and procedures.
(1) Members; appointment. The Commission shall consist of nine
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council.
(2) Classes. The membership shall be divided into three classes:
§ 2-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-71
1:87
(a) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history.
(b) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history.
(c) Class C: regular members who are not designated as Class A or
Class B. Class C members shall be citizens of the City who shall
hold no other municipal office, position or employment, except
for membership on the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(3) Composition. At least one of the Commission members shall be
from Class A. At least one of the Commission members shall be
from Class B. No less than four of the regular members of the
Commission shall be from Classes A and B combined.
(4) Terms; designation of term and class. Appointees shall serve for a
period of four years, provided that of those first taking office, four
shall be appointed for two years and five shall be appointed for four
years. At the time of appointment, the term and class of each
appointee shall be designated.
(5) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by an appointee of the Mayor.
The appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(6) Organization; meetings; compensation; staff.
(a) The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson
and a Vice Chairperson.
(b) The Commission shall create rules and procedures for the
transaction of its business, subject to the following regulations:
[1] A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of
five of the Commission's members.
[2] The Commission shall keep minutes and records of all
meetings and proceedings, including voting records,
attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations and
decisions. All such material shall be public record.
[3] All meetings shall be open to the public, and notice of
meetings shall be posted 48 hours in advance, provided
that emergency meetings may be held without prior
notice.
(c) The Commission members shall serve without compensation,
but shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the
performance of official business.
(d) Within the limits of funds appropriated generally for the
performance of its work, the Commission may obtain the
§ 2-71 TRENTON CODE § 2-71
1:88
services of qualified persons to direct, advise and assist the
Commission, and may obtain the equipment, supplies and
other material necessary to its effective operation.
(7) Alternate members. Alternate members of the Commission may be
appointed in the following manner:
(a) Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. The alternates selected
shall be designated as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2.
(b) Alternate members shall meet the qualification of Class C
members.
(c) Alternate members shall be appointed for two-year terms.
E. Powers and duties.
(1) The Landmarks Commission shall have the responsibility to
perform in an advisory capacity the following duties:
(a) Prepare and maintain a survey of sites worthy of consideration
and protection within the City of Trenton.
(b) Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the
implications for preservation of historic sites of any other
Master Plan elements.
(c) Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in
the recommended capital improvement program.
(d) Advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on
applications for development pursuant to the provision of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(e) Provide written reports, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
on the application of the zoning provisions concerning historic
preservation.
(f) Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation.
(g) Report and recommend to the Zoning or Planning Board on
such matters as applications for certificates of appropriateness
as may be referred to the Commission in connection with a
building permit application site plan approval or other
procedure pending before such Board.
(h) Periodically publish lists and related information regarding
historic and architecturally significant landmarks. It shall have
the authority to propose modifications and additions to the list
based on study and recommendations, including special
hearings to be conducted in the discretion of the Commission.
§ 2-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-71
1:89
(i) Issue its advice and recommendations for preservation by way
of periodic or special reports to the Planning Board stating
reasons in support of its action with respect to each landmark,
landmark site and historic district designation.
(j) Review all applications for permits pertaining to historic sites
on property in historic districts pertaining to those aspects of
the proposed changes which were not determined by approval
of an application for development. The Commission shall
submit its report to the Director of Inspections. Such report
shall be submitted within 45 days of the referral of the
application to the Commission. If within the forty-five-day
period the Historic Preservation Commission recommends to
the administrative officer against the issuance of a permit or
recommends conditions to the permit to be issued, the
administrative officer shall deny issuance of the permit or
include the conditions in the permit, as the case may be.
Failure to report within the forty-five-day period shall be
deemed to constitute a report in favor of issuance of the permit
and without the recommendation of conditions to the permit.
(k) The Commission shall make recommendations to the Planning
Board for the designations of landmark sites and districts in
accordance with Subsection E(2) hereof.
(2) Designation of landmarks. Landmark sites and Historic Districts.
(a) The Commission shall make a comprehensive survey of the City
of Trenton for the purpose of identifying landmarks, landmark
sites and Historic Districts and interior landmarks which are
worthy of protection and preservation because of their
historical, cultural, social or architectural significance which is
hereinafter defined.
(b) Based on the survey and upon the recommendation of
concerned citizens, the Commission shall document the
importance and historical or architectural significance to the
City, state or nation of each landmark designation. Thereafter,
the Commission, by certified mail, shall:
[1] Notify each owner that his/her property has been
tentatively designated an historical or architectural
landmark.
[2] Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of
such tentative designation, and advise him/her of the
opportunities and rights to challenge or contest such
designation.
[3] Invite each owner to voluntarily consent to final
designation without the need of public hearing or other
procedures.
§ 2-71 TRENTON CODE § 2-71
1:90
(c) The Commission shall as soon as practicable make public a
complete list of the tentatively designated landmarks and
districts specifying the locations, boundaries and popular
names thereof. The tentative list shall thereafter be submitted
at a public hearing to the examination and criticism of the
public. Interested persons shall be entitled to present their
opinions, suggestions and objections at this public hearing.
(d) After full consideration of the evidence brought forth at the
special hearing, the Commission shall make its final decisions
on the designations and shall issue its final report to the public
stating reasons in support of its action with respect to each
landmark, landmark site, and historic district designation.
(e) The list shall be submitted thereafter to the Planning Board for
review and recommendation for approval to the City Council,
in accordance with Subsection 19-21.2.
(f) After a complete list of designations has been composed and
approved by City Council, the landmarks, landmark sites and
Historic Districts affected shall be plotted on an appropriate
map and kept as the permanent designation record of the
Commission.
(g) Updated copies of the designation list and official map shall be
made public and distributed to the Bureau of Building
Inspection, the Bureau of Housing Inspections and the Zoning
Inspector. Certificates of designation shall be issued to the
owner of each site included in the final list as amended, and
official notification of each property so designated shall be filed
with the City tax receiver for recording on the tax records of
the designated landmark property in the same manner as a tax
lien upon the property.
(h) Each designated landmark, landmark site and Historic District
may be marked by an appropriate plaque carrying a brief
description and account of the historical significance of the
property.
(3) Special projects. The Commission shall investigate and pursue any
special projects, including but not limited to restoration projects
and projects coordinated with groups having similar purposes,
provided that such special projects are directly related to the
purpose of this section. The Commission shall also act in an
advisory capacity to citizens of Trenton who are interested in the
historic preservation or restoration of their property.
F. Funding. The City Council shall annually appropriate funds, within
budget limitations, for operation of the Commission. The Commission
shall endeavor to avail itself of financial assistance from federal, state
or private sources.
§ 2-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-71
1:91
§ 2-72. Trenton Parking Utility.
§ 2-73. Board of Construction Appeals.17
G. Guidelines for restoration of City Hall.
(1) No person shall make or direct to be made any change in the
present existing design, structure, decor or other architectural or
aesthetic feature of City Hall except in faithful compliance with the
official guidelines entitled "City Hall Restoration Guidelines," a
copy of which is annexed hereto and 10 copies of which shall be
maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(2) Prior to commencement of any such work, the person responsible
for preparing specifications for or authorizing such work shall
obtain the review and comment of the Landmarks Commission.
H. Violations of any provision of this section shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Established. A public parking system utility is hereby established in and
for the City of Trenton, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:60-25.1(D).
B. Revenue and accounting. All future revenue and accounting on the
public parking system utility shall be on a dedicated utility basis in
conformity with N.J.S.A. 40A:4-33. All moneys derived from operation of
the public parking system utility and any other moneys applicable to its
support shall be segregated and kept in a separate fund which shall be
known as the "Public Parking System Utility Fund." All disbursements
for operation and maintenance for the public parking system utility
shall be taken from the Public Parking System Utility Fund.
C. Dedicated budget. The dedicated budget of the public parking system
utility shall include appropriations for operating expenses, capital
improvements, debt services for payment of any public parking system
utility bonds which may be issued, principal and interest and all other
deferred charges and statutory expenses as may be required.
A. Creation and composition. There is hereby established the City of
Trenton Construction Board of Appeals. The Board shall consist of five
members to be appointed by the Mayor. Each member of the Board
shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of
members of the Construction Board of Appeals and shall be appointed
for a term of four years; provided, however, that for the initial
appointment, two of the appointees shall have terms of four years, one
appointee shall have a term of one year, one shall have a term of two
years and one shall have a term of three years. It shall be the
responsibility of the Mayor to designate length of initial term for which
each of his/her nominees shall be considered.
17.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 42, Building Construction.
§ 2-71 TRENTON CODE § 2-73
1:92
§ 2-74. Board of Review.
B. Compensation and duties. The Construction Board of Appeals shall
serve without remuneration or salary and shall be responsible for
hearing appeals from decisions rendered by the appropriate code
enforcement official in the manner provided by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127. It
shall be the responsibility of the Board to establish its own procedural
rules and determine its own time and place for convening, in
accordance with the said state law and in accordance with the
regulations established by the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
C. Appeal procedure. When a code enforcement official such as the
Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector or any
similar construction enforcement official refuses to grant an application
or refuses to act upon an application for a construction permit or when
the enforcing agency makes any other decision pursuant or related to
the appropriate construction code or State Uniform Construction Code,
an owner or his/her authorized agent may appeal in writing to the
Board. The Board shall hear the appeal, render a decision thereon and
file its decision with a statement of the reasons therefor with the
enforcing officer from which the appeal has been taken not later than
10 business days following submission of the appeal, unless such period
of time has been extended with consent of the applicant. Such decision
may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the enforcing officer or
remand the matter to the enforcing officer for further action. A copy of
the decision shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail to the
party taking the appeal. Failure by the Board to hear the appeal, render
and file a decision thereon within the time limits prescribed in this
subsection shall be deemed a denial of the appeal for purposes of a
complaint, application or appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. A
record of all decisions made by the Board, properly indexed, shall be
kept by the enforcing officer and shall be subject to public inspection
during business hours.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established a Board of Review, which
Board shall have the authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-30 to review
decisions of the purchasing agent with respect to the qualification,
classification or reclassification of persons or business agencies
applying for the same pursuant to the state law.
B. Composition.
(1) The Board shall consist of one member of the City Council to be
designated by motion of the City Council and two citizens of the
City to be designated by motion of the City Council. The City Clerk
shall serve as secretary to the Board of Review and shall keep a
complete record of its proceedings and decisions. All members of
the Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 2-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-74
1:93
§ 2-75. Open Space Advisory Board.
(2) The Board shall select its presiding officer and shall make
reasonable rules for the conduct of its business and for the holding
of hearings.
C. Request for review. Any prospective bidder seeking to appeal the
decision of the Purchasing Agent with respect to his/her qualification,
classification or reclassification shall be required to submit a request
for review, in writing, to the City Clerk no later than 30 days following
receipt of the decision of the Purchasing Agent. The Board shall
convene a hearing on such request within 30 days of receipt and shall
make its decision known within 30 days of the hearing. The failure of
the Board to render a decision or to convene a hearing within the time
period prescribed shall constitute a denial of the appeal.
D. Appeals. In such cases where a prospective bidder desires to appeal the
decision of the Purchasing Agent with respect to a particular public
works or public contract previously advertised and desires to have a
review and decision by the Board prior to the time for submission of
bids on the contract, the request shall be filed not less than five days
prior to the final date for the submission of bids, and the Board shall
hold a hearing and act upon the request not less than two days prior to
the date fixed for the next opening of bids on such public works or
contract. The request for any such expedited review shall state with
specificity the need for an accelerated review stating the time and
subject matter of the impending bid. Such accelerated review shall also
be available to any person who receives notice of disqualification or
notice of potential rejection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-32 following
the opening of bids and prior to the award of contracts.
A. Creation; purpose; duties. There is hereby created an Open Space
Advisory Board whose purpose is to promote and facilitate the
development and improvement of open spaces within the City of
Trenton. The Open Space Advisory Board will consider such matters as
it deems necessary as well as those presented to it by the Mayor, City
Council or the various city department directors. The Open Space
Advisory Board shall have the following purposes and duties:
(1) To promote programs that involve city residents in the care of
existing street trees, parks and other open spaces in the City.
(2) To determine ways in which the various city agencies and citizens
can work together in the most efficient and productive manner.
(3) To encourage and facilitate the use of vacant city property for
gardens and passive recreation areas.
(4) To foster heightened citizen awareness and concern for the outdoor
environment.
§ 2-74 TRENTON CODE § 2-75
1:94
(5) To inventory street trees throughout the City and make
recommendations on areas most in need of new trees or tree
maintenance.
(6) To seek conventional and alternative sources of funding for open
space development.
(7) To make recommendations on capital budgets and program
operations.
(8) To advise the Department of Housing and Economic Development
on the terms and conditions of the sale of city-owned land of 10,000
square feet or more and buildings with eight or more units with
regard to open space requirements.
B. Membership; appointments.
(1) The Board shall consist of 13 members. The Board shall be
composed as follows:
(a) Eight of the members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council.
(b) One member shall be a member of the City Council chosen by
the City Council.
(c) Three members shall be Directors of the Departments of
Housing and Economic Development, Health and Human
Services and Public Works.
(d) The Mayor of Trenton.
(2) Appointment terms shall be as follows:
(a) Appointees shall serve for a period of two years, provided that
of those members first taking office, four shall be appointed for
one year and four shall be appointed for two years.
(b) Vacancies shall be filled by an appointee of the Mayor with the
exception of the City Council's appointee. The appointee shall
serve for the remainder of his/her predecessor's term.
(3) Alternate members, who shall be called to serve only as needed to
form a quorum but once called shall serve regardless of whether
actually needed to fill a quorum, may be appointed in the following
manner:
(a) Four alternate members may be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council.
(b) The City Council may appoint a member of the Council as an
alternate to the Board.
§ 2-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-75
1:95
§ 2-76. Board of Education. [Amended 2-18-2010 by Ord. No. 10-08]
There is hereby established in the City of Trenton a Board of Education. The
membership shall hereby be established to be nine members pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 18A:12-6 et seq.
§ 2-77. Human Relations Commission.
(c) Not more than two alternate members shall serve for regular
members for any one meeting. Alternate members shall be
appointed for two-year terms.
(4) The procedures of the Board are as follows:
(a) The Board shall elect from its members a Chairperson.
(b) The Board shall create rules and procedures for the
transaction of its business subject to the following regulations:
[1] A quorum for transaction of business shall consist of seven
of the Board's members.
[2] The Board shall keep minutes and records of all meetings
and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, recommendations, findings, determinations
and decisions. All such materials shall be public record.
C. The Board shall observe the laws and rules governing open public
meetings, N.J.S.A. 10:4-1 et seq. Agendas for the monthly meetings
shall be prepared by the secretary who shall send the agenda to all
members and alternates prior to the regular meetings.
D. The Board members shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of official
business.
A. Declaration of policy; finding of facts.
(1) The City of Trenton is composed of a variety of different races,
nationalities, religions and ethnic backgrounds. It is vital to the
future of this City that hostilities and prejudice be eliminated
among all of its people.
(2) The City of Trenton hereby finds and declares that the practice of
prejudice and discrimination tends to disturb the peace and
threatens not only the right and proper privileges of its inhabitants
but menaces the institutions and foundations of a free democratic
society. To end this prejudice and discrimination, this section shall
provide an instrument through which the City may officially
encourage and promote mutual understanding and respect among
all people in the City.
§ 2-75 TRENTON CODE § 2-77
1:96
(3) The City of Trenton further finds and declares that such an official
instrumentality is needed to organize, coordinate and stimulate the
City's efforts in promoting positive human relations among all of
the people in the City.
B. Commission established; purpose.
(1) Creation; purpose. There is hereby created the Human Relations
Commission of the City of Trenton. The mandate of the Commission
shall be to encourage and promote mutual understanding and
respect among all people in the City, and to provide support for the
informal resolution of human relations problems in Trenton.
(2) Composition; organization; appointment; compensation. The
Commission shall consist of 11 members who shall serve without
compensation and shall be appointed by the Mayor. A majority of
the members shall be residents of the City of Trenton. The Mayor
shall designate a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary
for the Commission. Each such officer shall serve a one-year term,
and may be redesignated by the Mayor.
(3) Terms; rules for governance of business. The Commissioners shall
serve a term of three years each, with 1/3 of its membership
completing their terms each year. Any such Commissioner may be
reappointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council. The Commission is empowered to adopt rules for the
governance of its business and for its procedure as it may
determine, consistent with the laws of the City, the state and
federal government.
(4) Goals. The Commission shall seek to establish programs and other
initiatives that will help to improve human relations and to
eliminate discrimination in all areas of the community, as more
particularly provided throughout this section.
C. Powers and duties. The Commission is authorized to and shall:
(1) Formulate and implement a comprehensive action plan designed to
improve human relations, diversity and eliminate prejudice and
discrimination in the City against persons because of their race,
creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status,
affectional or sexual orientation or sex.
(2) Hold public forums on a biannual basis, initiate studies where
necessary, and otherwise gather relevant information concerning
the current status of human relations in the City, which reports
shall be submitted to the Mayor.
(3) Establish community and educational activities that the
Commission finds will promote its goal of improved human
relations in the City.
§ 2-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-77
1:97
(4) Make recommendations regarding changes in the policies and
practices of the City and its various departments and divisions to
promote improved human relations in Trenton.
(5) Initiate programs designed to increase understanding and
communication among residents of Trenton.
(6) Act as advocates for multiculturism as an important aspect of city
life.
(7) Actively promote the Commission's desire to have all residents of
Trenton participate in artistic and multicultural activities for the
emotional growth and well-being of the City as a whole.
(8) Advise and support institutions and groups within the City
interested in developing artistic and multicultural activities and
programs.
(9) Develop, as well as support, a wide variety of programs which
reflect the cultural needs, diversities and life experiences of the
residents of Trenton.
(10) Make recommendations to the Trenton Board of Education
regarding programs, curriculum and policies that are designed to
improve human relations among youth and their families in
Trenton.
(11) Compile and publish an annual report and action plan describing
the work of the Commission over the prior year and the current
status on human relations in the City.
(12) Create such committees and subcommittees as are appropriate to
aid in carrying out the purpose of this section.
(13) Conduct inquiries and studies for the purpose of determining the
existence of discriminatory practices or conditions in the City,
including, but not limited to, the unlawful practices of employment
discrimination prohibited by N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
(14) To cooperate and negotiate on behalf of the City with any state or
federal agencies functioning or having jurisdiction in the same
areas as the Commission, with respect to the subject matter of this
section.
(15) To seek to resolve informally any conflict or complaint brought
before it that is, in the Commission's judgment, significantly related
to the Commission's mandate to improve human relations in the
City.
(16) To refer any complaint brought before the Commission to the State
Division of Civil Rights or to other bodies that, in the Commission's
judgment, appear able to assist in the resolution of the matter.
§ 2-77 TRENTON CODE § 2-77
1:98
§ 2-77.1. Americans With Disabilities Act Committee. [Added
12-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-56]
D. Cooperation with other organizations. The Commission shall invite and
enlist the cooperation of racial, religious and ethnic groups, community
organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veterans'
organizations, professional and technical organizations and other
groups in the City in carrying out its duties, functions and purpose
under this section.
A. Creation; purpose; duties. There is hereby established within the City of
Trenton an Americans with Disabilities Act Committee whose purpose
is to advise and counsel the Mayor and Council of the City of Trenton as
to the concerns of disabled persons, barrier-free facilities and facilities
maintenance, employment practices, services and activities, planning
and zoning concerns, and the like, as well as compliance with the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and any
appropriate legislation dealing with the subject matter hereof. The
Americans with Disabilities Act Committee shall have the following
purposes and duties:
(1) The Americans with Disabilities Act Committee shall be constituted
to meet at least bimonthly, shall by a majority vote select a
chairperson to serve for a one-year period, such selection to be
made each year, and shall act pursuant to bylaws to be created by
the Advisory Committee for the Disabled and adopted by a majority
vote thereof within 90 days from the formation of the Advisory
Committee for the Disabled.
(2) The record of proceedings of Committee meetings shall be kept,
and such record, as well as any recommendations or advice of the
Committee to the Mayor and Council, shall be provided to the
Mayor and Council no later than 60 days after each meeting.
B. Membership; appointments.
(1) The Committee shall have no fewer than seven and no more than 13
members, of which 51% shall be persons with disabilities, or
parents of a child with a disability or a resident family member who
is the caregiver of a person with a disability. The balance of the
Committee shall be either residents of, or those employed or
civically active in, the City of Trenton. The initial Committee shall
consist of five members appointed by the Mayor, and five members
appointed by the Council, with staggered terms so as to result in
the expiration of no more than three terms in any one year.
Vacancies that arise after the initial Committee has formed shall be
filled by alternating nominations of the Mayor and Council.
(2) The specific appointments to the aforesaid Committee shall be
made by the Mayor and Council for three-year terms, such
§ 2-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-77.1
1:99
appointments to be made within 60 days after the adoption of this
section.
(3) In addition to member appointments, the Mayor shall appoint one
liaison from each of the following groups:
(a) City Council;
(b) Department of Health and Human Services;
(c) Police Department;
(d) Department of Public Works;
(e) Department of Administration;
(f) Department of Recreation;
(g) Department of Housing and Economic Development;
(h) School District.
§ 2-77.1 TRENTON CODE § 2-77.1
1:100
ARTICLE XV
Budget and Expenditure Procedures
§ 2-78. Budget preparation.
§ 2-79. Budget operation.
A. The budget shall be prepared by the Mayor with the assistance of the
Business Administrator. During the month of November, the Mayor
shall require all department heads to submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year and to appear before the
Mayor or the Business Administrator at public hearings which shall be
held during that month on the various requests. On or before the 15th
day of January, the Mayor shall submit to Council his/her recommended
budget together with such explanatory comment or statement as (s)he
may deem desirable.
B. The Business Administrator, with the assistance of the Director of
Finance, shall prepare all estimates of nonproperty tax revenues
anticipated for the support of each annual budget.
C. The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by
law for municipal budgets and in accordance with the Charter. There
shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all items of
expenditure and revenue, which analysis shall include a comparison of
the total number of positions of each class and grade to be authorized
by the budget with the actual number thereof employed at the
beginning and ending of the preceding budget period. So far as
practicable, the analysis shall include appropriate statements of the
cost of performance of functional programs and activities in terms of
quantitative, countable units of work for operating and capital
expenditures.
A. The Business Administrator shall supervise the administration of each
annual budget. In consultation with department heads (s)he shall
establish quarterly or other periodic allotments of appropriations as he
may deem necessary. Each department shall plan and administer its
expenditure program within the limits of these allotments.
B. If at any time during the budget year the Business Administrator shall
ascertain that the City government is faced with the probability of
incurring a cash deficit for the current year, he shall reconsider the
work programs and allotments of the several departments. Upon such
reconsideration and with the approval of the Mayor, he may revise
budget allotments so as to forestall, so far as possible, the making of
commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized
during the fiscal year. (S)He shall file with the Director of Finance a
copy of such revised allotments, and the Director of Finance shall
control all expenditures within the limits thereof.
§ 2-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-79
1:101
§ 2-80. Award of contracts; execution.
Where contracts are let to public competitive bidding, the Council may upon
recommendation of the purchasing agent let the contract in the manner
prescribed by law. The Mayor or Business Administrator shall execute and
sign contracts let and authorized pursuant to the Charter and ordinances,
and their respective signatures shall be attested by the Clerk.
§ 2-81. Standards and tests.
The Division of Purchasing shall establish and approve uniform standards
for requisitions and purchases. The Division shall control the delivery of all
supplies, materials and equipment and other items purchased, and make or
cause to be made proper test checks and inspections thereof. The Division
shall ascertain whether supplies, materials, equipment and other items
purchased comply with the specifications, and cause laboratory or other
tests to be made whenever, in the opinion of the division head, it is
necessary to determine whether the materials or supplies furnished are of
the quality and standard required.
§ 2-82. Purchasing procedure.
C. Purchase control. There is hereby created the Office of Purchasing
Agent with all powers and duties set forth. All purchases of any
supplies, materials of equipment or contractual services for the City's
account shall be made by the Department of Finance pursuant to a
written requisition from the head of the department whose
appropriation will be charged and the certification of the Comptroller
that a sufficient unencumbered balance of appropriation is available to
pay therefor. All such purchase contracts in excess of $25,000 shall
conform to applicable requirements of state statutes for competitive
bidding. [Amended 6-2-2002 by Ord. No. 02-55; 2-5-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-6]
A. Each department shall, upon request of the Business Administrator,
submit a complete statement of the materials, supplies and equipment
and work and labor under contract which will be required by the
department during the ensuing year, half-year or quarter-year, as the
Administrator may determine, according to the best estimate of the
department head. This statement shall be in such form and detail as the
Administrator may require.
B. Purchases shall be made upon requisition of a department head to the
Purchasing Agent under such procedures and in such form as the
Business Administrator may prescribe or approve. Except as the
Business Administrator may authorize in case of emergency, no
purchase shall be made and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved
unless the procedures prescribed by or pursuant to this chapter have
been followed.
§ 2-79 TRENTON CODE § 2-83
1:102
§ 2-83. Audit, warrant and payment of bills and claims; listing for
Council.
§ 2-84. Independent annual audit.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the City's accounts
and financial transactions as required by law. The annual audit shall be
made by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey selected by the
Council.
A. Bills, claims and demands against the City shall be deemed approved or
disapproved by the Council in accordance with the action of the
Comptroller. A voucher on a form prescribed by the Comptroller shall
be presented for each bill, claim or demand and shall be paid only upon
the audit, warrant and approval of the Comptroller. All claims against
the City shall be submitted on a form adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
59:1-1 et seq., and shall be duplicated in sufficient quantities to be
readily available on demand in the office of the City Clerk to any
claimant or party requesting same. Disbursement shall be made by a
combination warrant-bank check or draft warranted by the Director of
Finance, the Comptroller or Assistant Comptroller, signed by the Mayor
and countersigned by the Treasurer or Assistant Treasurer, except that
payroll checks may be signed by the Treasurer or Assistant Treasurer
alone upon voucher and warrant of the Comptroller for a total payroll.
B. The Treasurer shall prepare for each regular meeting of the Council a
list of all bills, claims and vouchers which have been paid through the
close of business on the second day next preceding the meeting and
since the last preceding list was compiled. Such list shall be prepared in
sufficient quantity for each member of Council, the Mayor and the
Business Administrator, and at least one copy shall be filed with the
Clerk as a public record open to examination in his/her office.
§ 2-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-84
1:103

ARTICLE XVI
Officers and Employees
§ 2-85. Department directors and division heads.
A director may serve as a division head and a division head may serve as
a bureau head without additional compensation. Department heads shall
devote full time as required for the proper and efficient discharge of the
duties of their respective offices.
§ 2-86. Vacancies in divisions.
Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of the head of any division by
resignation, removal, disability or otherwise, the director of the department
may fill such vacancy temporarily by appointing an acting head of the
division, who shall have and perform all the functions, powers and duties of
the division until the office shall be filled permanently.
§ 2-87. Surety bonds.
§ 2-88. Delivery of funds and records.
Upon the termination of the term of office or the employment of any officer
or employee, (s)he shall forthwith deliver to his/her successor or, if there
be no successor, to the Clerk or other person who may be designated by
A. Every officer or employee of the City who by virtue of his/her office or
position is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds, and any officer or employee who may be required so
to do by the Council, before entering upon the duties of his/her office or
position, shall execute and deliver a surety bond in such amount as may
be fixed by resolution of Council, binding him/her to the City in its
corporate name and conditioned upon the true and faithful
performance of his/her duty. Each officer or employee required by law
to give bond shall execute the bond with sufficient surety and deliver it
to the City Clerk, except that the Clerk shall deliver his/her bond to the
comptroller before (s)he enters upon the discharge of the duties of his/
her office or employment.
B. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his/her
bond as herein required within 30 days after due notification of his/her
election or appointment, his/her office may be declared vacant by the
Council.
C. In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the state or
by any ordinance of the City to give a bond for the faithful performance
of his/her duties, the bond shall be secured by a corporate surety
authorized to do business in this state and the premium therefor shall
be paid by the City. Each bond shall be approved by the City Attorney as
to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
§ 2-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-88
1:105
the Council to receive the same, all moneys, papers, books, memoranda,
accounts and data of any nature whatever pertaining to the office. In
addition to any other penalty provided by law, any person who shall violate
the requirements of this section may be adjudged a disorderly person.
§ 2-89. Employee supervision; grievances.
§ 2-90. Removal by Mayor or Council.
Pursuant to the Charter (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37 and 40:69A-43):
§ 2-91. Council investigations.
Pursuant to the Charter (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37), the Council, in its discretion,
may require any municipal officer to prepare and submit sworn statements
A. Each department head shall have the power, except as otherwise
specifically provided by law, to appoint and, with the approval of the
Mayor, remove and suspend subordinate officers and employees within
the department, subject to applicable civil service rules and
regulations.
B. The Business Administrator may establish an Employee Grievance
Committee to hear, review and adjust informally such grievances that
any employee or department head may present to it. Such hearing,
review and adjustment shall be in accordance with Article I, Section 19
of the New Jersey Constitution (1947).
A. The Mayor, in his/her discretion, may remove any department head
after notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a
department head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of his/her
intention with the Council, and removal shall become effective on the
20th day after the filing of the notice, unless the Council shall prior
thereto have adopted a resolution by a two-thirds vote of the whole
number of the Council disapproving the removal.
B. The Council may for cause remove any municipal officer other than the
Mayor or a member of Council.
C. The Council will consider notices under Subsection A above, and
motions under Subsection B above, only after notice and an opportunity
to be heard to the affected officer. The Clerk shall forthwith cause a
copy of the notice or motion, as the case may be, together with a
statement of the charges involved and notice of the time and place fixed
for hearing, to be served personally or by registered mail upon the
officer affected. The hearing shall be held not less than 10 days nor
more than 15 days after the date of such service and shall be open to
the public.
D. Pursuant to the Charter, Council may veto a removal under Subsection
A above by a two-thirds vote of Council and may adopt or defeat a
motion under Subsection B above by a majority vote of the Council.
§ 2-88 TRENTON CODE § 2-91
1:106
regarding his/her official duties and the performance thereof, and the
Council may otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, office or
agency of the municipal government.
§ 2-92. Administrative regulations.
No rule or regulation made by any department, except upon written
approval of the Mayor, shall take effect until at least 10 days after it is filed
with the City Clerk as required by the Charter. This limitation of time shall
not apply, however, to any order, rule or regulation which related solely
to the organization or internal management of the City government or a
part thereof. The City Clerk shall maintain a docket of all orders, rules and
regulations filed in his/her office, which docket shall show the name of the
issuing department, a brief description of the subject matter and the date
of filing. At the close of each year the Clerk, with the advice and assistance
of the City Attorney, shall compile, codify and bind all of the orders, rules
and regulations which then remain in force and effect. The City Clerk may
arrange for the printing and sale of such compilation within the limits of
available appropriations.
§ 2-93. Preservation and inspection of public records.
§ 2-94. Public office hours; working during emergencies.
The public, administrative and executive business office of the City shall be
open for the transaction of public business daily except Saturdays, Sundays
and legal holidays, between such hours as the Mayor may prescribe with the
approval of Council. In times of emergency all departments shall provide
City services for 24 hours a day. The Business Administrator or a
A. All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other
documents whatsoever acquired or produced in any City department
shall be carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved, shall be
and remain the sole property of the City, and shall not at any time be
removed from the offices of such department, except when required for
use in the official business of the City and shall then be returned to such
office without delay. Each City officer shall be responsible for assuring
that the requirements of this section are complied with in respect to his/
her particular office. This section shall be subject to the provisions
Destruction of Public Records Law (1953), N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq.
B. All documents and records of the City shall, during office hours, be open
to public search, inspection and examination; provided, however, that
such research, inspection and examination shall not extend to work
papers of any department, nor to materials prepared for the
prosecution or defense by the City of any legal action or right; and
further provided that such search, inspection and examination be made
under such regulations as the officer in whose custody the records,
books and documents may be, shall establish for the safety and
preservation thereof.
§ 2-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-94
1:107
department head may require any officer or employee to be in attendance
for work on any day or days whenever (s)he determines that a public
exigency or emergency so requires.
§ 2-95. Residence requirements; exception; waiver.
A. Required.
(1) All officers and employees of the City of Trenton, New Jersey, now
in the employ of or hereafter to be employed by the City, are hereby
required as a condition of their continued employment to have a
place of abode in the City and to be bona fide residents therein. All
officers, commissioners, directors and employees and regular legal
representatives of all quasi-municipal boards, authorities,
commissions and all other bodies which the City Council is by law
empowered to create shall be bona fide residents of the City within
the meaning of this section, except as otherwise specifically
provided by state law or where specific creating ordinances
provide for or expressly permit the appointment or employment of
nonresidents or designate membership by reference to some
specific qualifications or characteristic other than residency. 18
(2) A bona fide resident for the purpose of this section is a person
having a permanent domicile within the City.
(3) Candidates for open competitive examinations shall meet City
residency requirements by being a bona fide City resident as of the
announced closing date of the examination. Continuous bona fide
residency must be maintained within the City from the announced
examination closing date up to and including the date of
appointment. Should a candidate discontinue his/her residency
prior to appointment (s)he will be subject to removal from
consideration for employment.
B. Exceptions. [Amended 10-2-2014 by Ord. No. 14-33]
(1) Present and future employees with 15 years of continuous
employment shall be exempt from the residency requirement.
(2) In the event that any person who is not presently a bona fide
resident of the City of Trenton but shall be found qualified for
employment, then such person shall be required to establish bona
fide residency within 90 days of the date of employment and shall
be required to execute an affidavit stating such. The execution of
said affidavit and compliance with the terms stated therein shall be
a condition to employment.
C. Waiver to expand hiring class. [Amended 10-2-2014 by Ord. No.
14-33]
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 2-94 TRENTON CODE § 2-95
1:108
§ 2-96. Longevity pay plan.
(1) Whenever the hiring authority of the City of Trenton shall
determine that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of
qualified residents for available specific positions or employments,
the City of Trenton shall advertise for other qualified applicants.
The City of Trenton, or the hiring authority thereof, shall thereupon
classify all qualified applicants for such positions or employments
so determined in the following manner:
(a) Other residents of the county in which the municipality is
situate.
(b) Other residents of counties contiguous to the county in which
the municipality is situate.
(c) Other residents of the state.
(d) All other applicants.
(2) The hiring authority shall first appoint all those in Class 1 and then
those in each succeeding class in the order above listed and shall
appoint a person or persons in any such class only to a position or
positions, or employment or employments, remaining after all
qualified applicants in the preceding class or classes have been
appointed or have declined an offer of appointment. The preference
established by this section shall in no way diminish, reduce or
affect the preferences granted pursuant to any other provisions of
the law.
D. Waiver for exceptional persons. Whenever the hiring authority of the
City of Trenton shall determine that there are certain specific positions
and employments requiring special talents or skills which are necessary
for the operations of the City of Trenton and which are not likely to be
found among the residents of the City, such positions or employments
so determined shall be filled without reference to residency. This
provision shall be used for positions or employments for (1) officers that
are subject to the advice and consent of the City Council and (2)
positions requiring persons with scientific or technical licenses or
certifications required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, New Jersey Division of Community Affairs or any other state
governing agency. [Amended 10-2-2014 by Ord. No. 14-33]
E. Cause for discharge. Failure of any officers or employees to comply with
this section, except when otherwise permitted by law, shall be cause for
removal or discharge from the City's service or employment.
A. Full-time employees. All full-time employees of the City shall be
compensated as set by ordinance.
B. Applicability. This subsection is intended to be a complete longevity
plan for the employees of the City of Trenton.
§ 2-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-96
1:109
§ 2-97. Termination of employees after 20 years continuous service.
No permanent employee shall be terminated for reasons of economy after
20 years of continuous service from the date of employment, except for
cause arising from the performance of his/her duties. It is understood that
this provision cannot be enforced if the Mayor and City Council determine
that the City faces extreme financial/budgetary hardship. In such cases, the
Mayor shall have the right to report to Council that this provision cannot
be enforced and by a vote of Council only shall another alternative be
instituted.
C. Administration. The Department of Administration shall promulgate
such rules and regulations as may be necessary to assure an equitable
and proper administration of this subsection.
D. Pay period. The longevity pay plan provided for herein shall commence
upon the effective date of this subsection.19 [Amended 2-21-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-07]
E. Longevity pay plan. There shall be no additional increases for longevity
pay for all noncontractual employees and elected officials above and
beyond those received prior to the effective date of this subsection.
[Added 2-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-07]
19.Editor’s Note: The “effective date of this subsection” refers to the effective date of Ord.
No. 13-07, adopted 2-21-2013.
§ 2-96 TRENTON CODE § 2-97
1:110
ARTICLE XVII
Municipal Insurance Funds
§ 2-98. Comprehensive Liability Insurance Fund.
§ 2-99. Workers' Compensation Insurance Fund.
A. N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6 provides for the establishment of an insurance fund
by the City to insure against liability for its negligence and that of its
officers, employees and servants and to insure against liability resulting
from its use or operation of motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus
owned by or controlled by it.
B. There shall be an insurance fund established which shall be designated
and known as the "Comprehensive Liability Insurance Fund."
C. The City Council may annually appropriate to the fund such money as
may be deemed to be necessary for the purposes aforesaid. [Amended
2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
A. N.J.S.A. 40A:10-13 provides for the establishment of a Workers'
Compensation Insurance Fund for the purposes of paying obligations of
the City under the provisions of N.J.S.A.34:13-1 et seq.
B. An insurance fund shall be established which shall be designated and
known as the "Workers' Compensation Insurance Fund."
C. The City Council may annually appropriate to the fund such money as
may be deemed to be necessary for the purposes aforesaid.
D. Payment of such obligations shall be governed by the procedures set
forth in § 2-5C.
§ 2-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-99
1:111
Chapter 6
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 6-1. Definitions.
The following terms wherever used or referred to in this chapter shall have
the following respective meanings:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence of substance in the atmosphere in
quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life, or to property,
or which unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property throughout the City of Trenton.
AIR POLLUTION NUISANCE — The presence in the atmosphere of smoke,
fumes, dust, soot, fly ash, cinders, noxious acids, oxides, alkalies, volatile
matter, vapor, mist, gas, radioactive material, odor, lint or any combination
thereof, of a character and in a quantity which, as to any group of persons,
interferes with their health, repose or safety, causes severe annoyance
or discomfort, tends to lessen normal food and water intake, produces
irritation of the upper respiratory tract or symptoms of nausea, is offensive
or objectionable, or both, to normal persons because of inherent chemical
and physical properties, causes or is likely to cause injury or damage
to real or personal property of any kind, interferes with normal conduct
of business, or is detrimental or harmful to the health, comfort, living
conditions, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the City.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — The Ringelmann's scale for grading the
density of smoke as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, or any recorder,
indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density which is approved
by the New Jersey State Department of Health and Human Services as the
equivalent of the Ringelmann scale.
§ 6-2. Open burning prohibited.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse, or
conduct salvage operation by open burning, nor shall open fires be used to
supply heat to tar or asphalt kettles.
§ 6-3. Smoke from fuel-burning equipment.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuel-burning
equipment, the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 2 of
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the atmosphere. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to:
§ 2-99 TRENTON CODE § 6-3
6:112
§ 6-4. Other emissions.
No person shall emit into the atmosphere smoke, fumes, dust, soot, fly ash,
cinders, noxious acids, oxides, alkalies, volatile matter, vapor, mist, gas,
odor or lint in such quantity as to cause air pollution or an air pollution
nuisance as herein defined. The provisions of this section include but are
not limited to such operations as disposing of refuse, process furnace
operations, paint, varnish or lacquer spraying and painting operations,
rendering plant operations, sand blasting or chemical processing, and the
storing, handling or transporting of dust-producing substances and dustsize
materials in such manner as to cause air pollution or an air pollution
nuisance.
§ 6-5. Emission of radioactive material.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit an article, machine,
equipment, contrivance or other exhaust system to emit airborne
radioactive material into the atmosphere in violation of any rules and
regulations of the United States of America and the New Jersey State
Department of Health and Senior Services.
§ 6-6. Emissions from parking yards.
No person shall operate a parking lot or yard for the storage of motor
vehicles in such manner as to cause emission into the atmosphere of dust
or cinders in such quantity so as to cause air pollution or an air pollution
nuisance as herein defined.
§ 6-7. Emissions causing contaminated water.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the dumping of any materials
into the waters within the jurisdiction of the City of Trenton or shall cause,
suffer, allow or permit an article, machine, equipment, marine installation,
contrivance, or their discharge or exhaust systems to emit materials into
the waters within the jurisdiction of the City so as to cause contaminated
water.
A. Smoke emitted during the cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new
fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than No. 3 of the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period or periods aggregating no more
than three minutes in any 15 consecutive minutes.
B. Smoke from locomotives, the shade or appearance of which is equal but
not darker than No. 3 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart in any period or
periods aggregating no more than 30 seconds in any three consecutive
minutes, or smoke of such density for a period or periods aggregating
no more than four minutes in any 15 consecutive minutes when building
a new fire.
C. Smoke resulting from any fire ignited solely for the purpose of training
or research in fire protection or prevention.
§ 6-3 AIR POLLUTION § 6-8
6:113
§ 6-8. Emissions from internal combustion engines.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit an internal combustion
engine, stationary or otherwise, to emit during its operation and from its
exhaust systems, smoke, fumes, volatile matter, vapor or odor in a quantity
so as to cause an air pollution nuisance.
§ 6-9. Administration.
A. Powers of Health Officer. The Health Officer shall have the power and
duty to investigate complaints, make observations of smoke and other
air polluting conditions and air pollution nuisances, and require the
necessary and proper steps to minimize or eliminate the effect, hazard
or nuisance therefrom. He/She shall have the power to inspect from
time to time any installation, equipment, devices and appurtenances
thereto that may, can or do cause air pollution or an air pollution
nuisance. No person shall interfere or attempt to interfere with the
Health Officer in the performance of any duty hereunder or refuse to
permit the inspection or examination of any premises for the purpose of
investigating compliance with this chapter and the regulations issued
under it. The Health Officer shall upon entering any premises for
investigation or inspection comply with all safety regulations on the
premises. The Health Officer shall keep confidential all information
obtained while on the premises, except as it relates directly to air
pollution or an air pollution nuisance.
B. Notice of violation. In case of failure to correct or remedy a violation of
this chapter within a reasonable time, the Health Officer shall cause to
be issued and served a written notice, together with a copy of the
complaint made by him/her or a copy of the complaint made to him,
requiring the person so complained against to answer the charges of
the complaint at a hearing before the Health Officer at a time and place
to be specified in the notice. Notices, orders, rulings or decisions
required to be served pursuant to this chapter may be served personally
or by certified mail, directed to the last known address of the person
required to be served. If service cannot be effected by either of the
foregoing methods, a copy of the notice, order, ruling or decision may
be served by posting it in a conspicuous place on the premises involved.
C. Compliance period. If it reasonably appears to the Health Officer that
compliance with the terms of this chapter cannot be effectively and
immediately made, he/she shall have the authority to grant permission
for the continued operation of such noncomplying equipment, upon the
condition that the person has in good faith and will continue to take all
necessary steps to secure compliance with this chapter. Such
permission shall not be granted for a period of more than six months;
provided, however, that the period may be extended for good cause
shown for an additional period not exceeding six months. Failure to
comply with the provisions of this chapter at the expiration of the
period of grace, or extension thereof, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
§ 6-8 TRENTON CODE § 6-10
6:114
§ 6-10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 10
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing in general – See Ch. 146.
§ 6-10 AIR POLLUTION § 6-10
6:115

ARTICLE I
Licensing; Regulation of Establishments
§ 10-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition, performance, or dance of any
type conducted in premises where such exhibition, performance or dance
involves a person(s) who is unclothed or clothed in such costume, attire,
or clothing as to expose, directly or through translucent coverings, their
breasts, genitals or buttocks. The exhibition, performance, or dance is
distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction,
description or simulation of, or relation to, sexual activities. The exhibition,
performance, or dance may or may not involve interaction with patrons,
including separate consideration paid by said patrons directly or indirectly
to the exhibitors, performers, or dancers. For purposes of example and
not limitation, such exhibitions, performances, or dances are commonly
referred to as table dancing, couch dancing, private dancing or straddle
dancing.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any liquid (or solid that can be converted to
liquid) that is fit to drink and has an alcoholic content of more than 1/2 of 1%
by volume is an alcoholic beverage and is subject to control and licensing
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
BAR — A business establishment, or any portion of a nonprofit entity, which
is devoted to the selling and serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption
by the public, guests or patrons, or members on the premises and in which
the serving of food (if served) or public dancing is only incidental to the sale
or consumption of such beverages.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass, cup or similar receptacle suitable for
or used to hold any liquid.
DRINK GIRL/GUY — A person allowed, permitted or employed to solicit an
alcoholic beverage at the expense of or as a gift from the public, guest or
patron.
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of an underage
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
NIGHTCLUB — A business establishment, which may collect a cover charge
for entrance, which is devoted mainly to the promotion of live or
prerecorded music for the purposes of dancing or listening and in which the
serving of alcoholic beverages and food (if served) is only incidental to the
collection of a cover charge and/or promotion of music.
OPEN CONTAINER — The condition of the container, containing liquor,
beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage, as the same is defined by the
Alcoholic Beverage Law of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 31:1-1 et seq.),
§ 10-1 AIR POLLUTION § 10-1
6:117
whose cap, cork, top or other closing device has been removed, or the
condition of a can which is punctured or pulled open so as to break its seal.
POSSESS/POSSESSION — Exercise of dominion over the container or
beverage.
RELATIVE — An underage person's parent, grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
RESTAURANT — A business establishment which is devoted to the serving
of food and in which the selling and serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by the public, guests or patrons is only incidental to the sale
or consumption of food products.
§ 10-2. License issuing authority; inspections.
§ 10-3. Licensing.
A. The City Council of the City of Trenton, being the governing body of the
municipality, shall constitute the authority for the administration of the
issuance of licenses within the municipality and shall report the
issuance of all licenses to the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage
Control. The Council shall have the authority to create an independent
board to assume the duties of the administration of alcoholic beverage
control within the municipality.
B. Inspections.
(1) City Inspectors. Alcoholic Beverage Inspectors of the City, duly
appointed to inspect, investigate and supervise licensed premises,
shall possess, enjoy and exercise, and are hereby vested with all the
powers and duties possessed, enjoyed and exercised by members of
the Police Department of the City of Trenton, for the purpose of
properly inspecting, investigating and supervising licensed
premises and of enforcing the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, the
general rules and regulations and special rulings and findings
promulgated or to be promulgated by the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, and all rules and regulations,
resolutions and ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages
adopted or to be adopted by the City Council.
(2) Hindering investigation. No licensee shall interfere with any
inspection or search of premises for which a license has been
issued, or of any building containing the same, or of licensed
buildings, by any duly authorized agent or agents of the City,
county, state or federal government; nor shall any licensee refuse
or interfere with any authorized agent or agents of the City or state
testing or taking reasonable samples of any alcoholic beverages
found on the premises for which a license has been issued, or in any
building containing the same, or in the licensed buildings.
§ 10-1 TRENTON CODE § 10-3
6:118
A. It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the City
of Trenton without a license.
(1) No person other than the licensee shall have any interest, directly
or indirectly, in the license granted or the business to be conducted
under the license without a full disclosure first having been made,
either in the application for the license or as soon after the interest
in the license or in the business conducted under the license shall
have come into being.
(2) All applications for licenses and place-to-place transfers of existing
licenses shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the
current rules and regulations prescribed by the Director of the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, Department of Law and
Public Safety, State of New Jersey; provided that, in addition to all
such requirements, each such applicant shall be required, in
connection with the advertising of such applications, to give
personal notice of such application to all owners of property
situated within 200 feet of the premises for which the license or
place-to-place transfer is sought, provided further that the notice
provisions shall not be applicable either to applications for placeto-
place transfers seeking to expand an existing licensed premises
by adding additional interior floor space not exceeding 150 square
feet and without substantially changing the character, volume or
mode of the licensed activity, or to a place-to-place transfer of an
existing license or premises or structure which is being taken for
public use.
(3) Such notice shall be given either by handing a copy thereof at the
usual place of abode of the property owners or by leaving a copy
thereof at the usual place of abode of the property owners, if the
owners are occupants of the property so situated or are residents of
the City of Trenton. Whenever the owners are nonresidents of the
City, or cannot be located despite diligent efforts of the applicant,
such facts shall be verified by the applicant by affidavit and notice
shall be given to such owners by certified mail to the last known
address of the property owner or owners as shown by the most
recent tax lists of the City. Where the owner is a business entity,
service upon any partner or agent shall be sufficient.
(4) The identity of properties situated within 200 feet of the premises
to be licensed shall be determined, upon request and payment of a
fee as authorized by the office of the City Engineer, Department of
Public Works.
(5) The applicant shall file, along with his/her application, an affidavit
verifying compliance with the notification requirements set forth
above.
(6) All licenses issued hereunder shall be for a term of one year from
July 1 in each year to June 30 of the year following, both inclusive.
§ 10-3 AIR POLLUTION § 10-3
6:119
(7) The office of the City Clerk shall distribute alcoholic beverage
applications to holders of licenses in the City, for which the charge
of $3 per application shall be made.
B. Classes of license; fees and limitation. Annual license fees for the sale of
alcoholic beverages in the City of Trenton are hereby established and
fixed by the Council for the City of Trenton in an amount equivalent to
the maximum permitted by state law, and such fees on a yearly basis
shall be the equivalent of the maximum allowable pursuant to state law
in the calendar year state schedule:
(1) Plenary retail consumption license: The fee shall be the maximum
allowable by state ABC regulations in that annual schedule and
shall adjust yearly pursuant to the same $2,478 (maximum fee
permitted per state statute for future years) annually by June 30.
Thirty-two licenses are permitted within the municipality; no new
licenses shall be created until the number of valid licenses within
the municipality is below this number. The license authorizes the
sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed
premises, by the glass or other open receptacle, and also allows the
sale of alcoholic beverages in original containers (packaged goods)
for consumption off the licensed premises. Sales of package goods
may only take place in the public barroom and may only be
displayed for sale on the perimeter walls. This provision shall
include all hotel licenses per state law.
(2) Plenary retail consumption license with "Broad Package Privilege":
The fee shall be the maximum allowable by state ABC regulations
in that annual schedule and shall adjust yearly pursuant to the
same $2,478 (maximum fee permitted per state statute for future
years) annually by June 30. Thirty-two licenses are permitted
within the municipality; no new licenses shall be created until the
number of valid licenses within the municipality is below this
number. This license is another form of plenary retail consumption
license, except the sale of packaged goods is not restricted to the
public barroom.
(3) Plenary retail distribution license: The fee shall be the maximum
allowable by state ABC regulations in that annual state schedule
and shall adjust yearly pursuant to the same $2,250 (maximum fee
permitted per state statute for future years) annually by June 30.
Twelve licenses are permitted within the municipality; no new
licenses shall be created until the number of valid licenses within
the municipality is below this number. The license authorizes only
the sale of alcoholic beverages in original containers for
consumption off the licensed premises.
(4) Club license: The fee shall be the maximum allowable by state ABC
regulations in that annual state schedule and shall adjust yearly
pursuant to the same $188 (maximum fee permitted per state
statute for future years) annually by June 30. Fifteen licenses are
§ 10-3 TRENTON CODE § 10-3
6:120
§ 10-4. Regulations.
permitted within the municipality; six licenses are available for
issuance. Issuance can only be to a corporation, association or
organization that is nonprofit and operating for benevolent,
charitable, fraternal, social, religious, recreational, athletic or
similar purpose.
C. Renewals; ad interim permit.
(1) All renewals must be approved by resolution of the City Council.
(2) New Jersey sales tax clearance must be obtained prior to renewal
by City Council, and all licenses must be renewed by June 30.
(3) Establishments that have not renewed their license by June 30
must obtain an ad interim permit as established by N.J.A.C.
13:2-2.10.
A. No licensee shall:
(1) Directly or indirectly solicit from house to house, personally or by
telephone, the purchase of alcoholic beverages, nor allow, permit
or suffer such solicitation.
(2) Receive, possess or sell any alcoholic beverages transported into
this state in violation of the rules governing the transporting of
alcoholic beverages into New Jersey promulgated or to be
promulgated by the State Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
(3) In the case of a retail distribution license, permit any alcoholic
beverages sold by him/her to be consumed on the licensed
premises, nor permit containers thereof to be opened on the
licensed premises. Other than "tasting events" as defined by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
(4) Serve or deliver or suffer and permit the sale, service or delivery of
any alcoholic beverages directly or indirectly to any mentally
impaired, habitual drunkard, or any person actually or apparently
intoxicated, or permit the same to congregate in or about the
licensed premises.
(5) Possess, sell, offer for sale, distribute or otherwise dispose of any
alcoholic beverages unless the containers of same shall have
affixed or attached thereto stamps or crowns as required by the
Alcoholic Beverage Tax Law, P.L. 1933, c. 434 (N.J.S.A. 54:41-1 et
seq.), as amended and supplemented.
(6) Serve any person in any room or place which is not opened to the
public generally, except that in hotel guests may be served in their
rooms or in private dining rooms, and further provided that this
regulation shall not apply to club licenses.
§ 10-3 AIR POLLUTION § 10-4
6:121
(7) Except for bona fide pharmacies to the extent that they may be duly
authorized by law to handle such merchandise, allow, permit or
suffer the sale or distribution of any contraceptive or contraceptive
device, either chemical or mechanical, or possess, allow, permit or
suffer any mechanical device designed or used for such sale or
distribution upon or about the licensed premises.
(8) Deliver within this state, to any person not holding a license under
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, any alcoholic beverages
intended by such person for delivery, by gift or otherwise, to
customers or prospective customers, in the course of his/her
business.
(9) Engage in, allow, suffer or permit on or about the licensed premises
any lottery other than government authorized to be conducted or
any ticket or participation right in any lottery to be sold or offered;
or any unlawful game or gambling of any kind or any device or
apparatus designed for such purpose; or any slot machine or device
in the nature of a slot machine which may be used for the purpose
of playing for money or other valuables.
(10) Allow, permit or suffer in or upon licensed premises any
disturbances, lewdness, immoral activities, brawls or unnecessary
noises; or allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to
be conducted in such a manner as to become a public nuisance.
(a) It shall be the duty of each licensee, acting through its officers,
agents and employees, to take all reasonable measures to
maintain order, to abate breaches of the peace, including the
generation of excessive noise, and to abate the accumulation of
litter and debris and other unsanitary conditions within the
licensed premises and upon the public sidewalk, alley, curb and
street immediately adjacent to the licensed premises. It shall
be a complete defense to any charge of a violation of this
subsection that any such condition complained of occurred or
existed despite the diligent and reasonable efforts of the
licensee to monitor, control and abate the condition
complained of, including, where appropriate, engagement of
security personnel or utilization of municipal public safety
assistance.
(b) Licensed premises shall at all times be kept in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition. All rooms, passageways, entrances, exits
and stairways must be well lighted.
(11) Allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises the
promotion of the purchase of drinks by patrons of the premises
from employees, agents, or representatives of the licensee in
exchange for promised or perceived companionship of another for
any length of time. For purposes of example and not limitation,
§ 10-4 TRENTON CODE § 10-4
6:122
§ 10-5. Restrictions. [Amended 6-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-22]
such employees, agents, or representatives may commonly be
referred to as drink girls/guys.
B. Display of licenses. It shall be the duty of all licensees to display
prominently the license issued pursuant to this chapter and all other
city, state and federal licenses and permits where they can be readily
seen by the public. The license shall be framed under glass, and a copy
of this license shall be kept with the licensee's application for license
and kept in a place convenient for inspection in the main business room
of the licensed premises. The licensee may be cited for a violation if
documents are not displayed.
C. Annual meeting. Every year the local ABC officer shall host a meeting
prior to annual renewals, with mandatory attendance that will be
verified by signature of the licensee. Failure to attend the meeting will
result in a delay in the renewal of the license until such time
arrangements can be made for a make-up session with the ABC officer.
D. Business licenses. All licensees who sell items other than alcoholic
beverages, including juice, soda, gum or other incidentals, are required
to obtain a City of Trenton business license annually.20
A. Hours.
(1) Excluded hours of sale. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold,
served, delivered or consumed, nor shall any licensee suffer or
permit the sale, service, delivery or consumption of, any alcoholic
beverage, directly or indirectly, upon the licensed premises
between the following hours, prevailing time:
(a) Weekdays: 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(b) Sundays: 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
(2) Closing of premises. No licensee shall permit any person, patron or
customer to consume any alcoholic beverages upon the licensed
premises during the hours when the sale, delivery, service or
consumption of alcoholic beverages is forbidden, and said premises
must remain closed and locked to all persons except for employees
who clean or perform other necessary work in and about the
premises during such prohibited hours, and no person other than
such employees shall be permitted to remain on the premises.
Exemptions to the restriction for allowance of any person, patron
or customer in licensed premises are restaurants and public dining
rooms in hotels and premises operated by club licenses or other
licensees who could qualify for club licenses.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 146, Licensing.
§ 10-4 AIR POLLUTION § 10-5
6:123
B. License limits. No person shall acquire a beneficial interest in more
than two alcoholic beverage retail licenses. Nothing herein shall
require any person who had an effective interest in two licenses on or
before August 3, 1962, to surrender, dispose of or release his/her
interest in any license. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply
in the case of a hotel containing at least 50 sleeping rooms, or for use in
connection with the operation of a restaurant, nor shall the provisions
of this subsection affect the right of any person to dispose of an interest
in a license by will or to transfer the same by dissent and distribution,
provided that a license acquired for use in connection with a restaurant
pursuant to the above exception shall be limited to the sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the licensed premises.
C. District regulations.
(1) Restaurant District (B Zone). Nothing contained in Subsection B
above shall prevent an otherwise valid place-to-place transfer to
occur to a location which is at least 400 feet from another premises
holding a sale or consumption license if said premises is suitable
for dining facilities and used as a restaurant with more than 50
seats or a banquet hall with a seating capacity of more than 150
people and is located in a Business B Zone. The playing of live
music or the use of a DJ shall be restricted to the hire for catered
events and shall not include concerts or events that require cover
charges or ticket sales.
D. Building specifications. All establishments must provide for an
unobstructed clear window, door, or other viable view point into the
establishment from the street, except for those establishments within a
portion of the district known as the "Roebling Entertainment District,"
which shall be known as the "Wire Rope District" and is defined as
Block 15704, Lot 1, Block 15704, Lot 1.01, Block 15704, Lot 1.02, Block
15704, Lot 1.03, Block 15704, Lot 1.04, Block 15704, Lot 1.05, Block
15704, Lot 1.06, Block 15704, Lot 1.07, Block 15704, Lot 1.08, Block,
15901, Lot 1, Block 15901, Lot 2, Block 15901, Lot 3, Block 15901, Lot
4, Block 16001, Lot 1, Block 16001, Lot 10, Block 16001, Lot 12, Block,
16001, Lot 13, Block 16001, Lot 2, Block 16001, Lot 3, Block 16001, Lot
4, Block 16001, Lot 5, Block, 16001, Lot 6, Block 16001, Lot 6.01, Block
16001, Lot 6.02, Block 16001, Lot 6.03, Block 16001, Lot 7, Block
16001, Lot 8, Block 16001, Lot 9 and set forth on the attached map.21
Such window, door, or view point shall be no less than 216 square
inches (or 12 inches by 18 inches) at a height of between four feet to six
feet from the floor level of the premises, so as not to prevent an
examination of the interior from the entrance by a police officer,
inspector, or other public official. The view must not be obstructed by
goods, blinds, shade, advertisement or any other signage.
Establishments that do not structurally comply with this code as of June
30, 2016, shall be given an additional one-year period to meet the
21.Editor's Note: The map of the Wire Rope District originally attached to this ordinance is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 10-5 TRENTON CODE § 10-5
6:124
§ 10-6. Retirement of licenses.
standard. No establishment shall be given a "grandfathered" exemption
for compliance with this section at the conclusion of the June 30, 2016,
to June 30, 2017, amortization period.
E. Adult entertainment. No establishment may provide entertainment, live
or recorded, that involves lewd or immoral activity as defined under
"adult entertainment" in § 10-1 herein.
F. Distilling apparatus. No person shall have in his/her possession or
custody or under his/her control any still or distilling apparatus set up,
dismantled or in the process of construction, or parts thereof, without
having registered the same in accordance with the provisions of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
G. Signage. No establishment shall post or allow a third party to post
advertisement of special events, happy hour, live shows or any such
activity that is to occur at the establishment on any public street,
building (other than their own), pole or billboard.
H. Location. No new plenary retail consumption or plenary retail
distribution license shall be hereafter issued, nor shall a place-to-place
transfer of a license be granted, to any person, corporation or group of
persons, under the following circumstances:
(1) For the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within 200 feet
of any church or public school or private school not conducted for
pecuniary profit, said distance being measured in the normal way
that a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest entrance of
said church or school to the nearest entrance of the premises
sought to be licensed, and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-76;
provided, however, that the foregoing provision shall not prevent
the future renewal or person-to-person transfer of any plenary
retail distribution license that is in existence at the time of adoption
of this section.
(2) For the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within 1,000
feet of another premises holding either of said licenses, said
distance being measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would
probably walk from the nearest entrance from one premises to the
other, except that this restriction shall not apply within a portion of
the Roebling Entertainment District as defined in § 10-5D.
A. Authorization. It is determined that it is in the public interest to reduce
the number of plenary retail consumption licenses in the City of
Trenton. Authorization is hereby granted for the acquisition and
retirement of said licenses by the City of Trenton in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.40.
B. Annual surcharge. In addition to the annual license fees set forth in
§ 10-3, every plenary retail consumption license shall be assessed, at
§ 10-5 AIR POLLUTION § 10-6
6:125
§ 10-7. Place-to-place and person-to-person transfers.
Transfers are approved by the issuing authority.
§ 10-8. Corporate structure changes.
the time of application for renewal of said license, an annual fee in
the amount of $200 for the express purpose of purchasing and retiring
existing licenses, as authorized, and in the manner prescribed, by
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.42.
A. A full twelve-page license application must be filed. Photographs of the
front and each entrance of the premises (no less than five inches by five
inches each) shall accompany each application.
B. Notice of transfer must be published in the local newspaper, stating the
intent to transfer the license.
C. There must be written consent of transfer from the current license
holder provided to the issuing authority.
D. A fee equal to 10% of the annual license fee must be provided at the
time of application (20% of the annual fee if both person-to-person and
place-to-place is to take place).
E. Any written objection to the transfer will require a hearing before the
issuing authority prior to approval of the transfer.
F. A completed background check is required for all interested parties.
G. The licensed premises is the portion of the licensed property on which
or where alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, or stored. Once the
premises has been established, any expansion or reduction requires a
place-to-place transfer.
H. Extension of premises to expand the area on which alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises may be sold or served requires a
place-to-place transfer.
(1) The area must be contiguous to or adjoined to the permanently
licensed premises.
(2) Application must include a physical description and drawing of the
area, reason for the extension, and date and time for its use.
(3) If the extension is for an open area, a description on how to restrict
access to minors must be included.
A. Any change of interest in the stock of the corporation must be reported
within 10 days to the issuing authority. If the change is less than 1/3 of
the stock, pages seven, eight and 11 of the twelve-page application
must be amended. If the change is more than 1/3, the full twelve-page
application must be completed.
§ 10-6 TRENTON CODE § 10-8
6:126
B. Publication of a legal notice advising of the change must be published in
the local newspaper.
C. All new shareholders must be fully qualified to hold a license, and a full
investigation shall be conducted by the issuing authority, including
background check and fingerprinting of each shareholder.
D. Proof of qualification as a license holder must be obtained prior to the
application to amend the license before a change of shareholder is
forwarded to the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 10-8 AIR POLLUTION § 10-8
6:127

ARTICLE II
Minors
§ 10-9. Sale to minors prohibited.
§ 10-10. Consumption on premises.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to enter any premises licensed for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of purchasing or having served
or delivered to him/her any alcoholic beverage. It shall be unlawful for a
minor to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or
have another purchase for him/her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 10-11. Misstatement of age.
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his/her legal
age, or the age of any other person, for the purpose of inducing any retail
licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
§ 10-12. Consumption by underage persons on private property.
[Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-7522]
Consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons on private
property is prohibited without the presence and permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has obtained the legal age of 21 years.
§ 10-13. Performing in licensed premises.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to sing, dance,
perform, act, play in any orchestra, or in any manner exhibit himself/herself
in any performance or entertainment held, given, offered or conducted on
the licensed premises, without a proper permit from the Director of the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
A. No licensee and no employee or agent of a licensee shall sell, serve or
deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of 21 years;
nor shall a licensee allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery
to or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any such person upon the
licensed premises.
B. If a licensee's employee or agent, authorized to sell, serve or deliver
alcoholic beverages, shall sell, serve or deliver such beverages in
violation of this section, the sale, service or delivery shall be deemed
the act of the licensee, as well as that of the employee or agent, and the
licensee as well as the employee or agent shall be guilty of a violation of
this article.
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 10-12, Frequenting of licensed
premises. See now Art. V, Consumption in Public.
§ 10-9 AIR POLLUTION § 10-14
6:129
§ 10-14. Teen night.
A licensed premises may be opened and operated in accordance with the
State of New Jersey regulations for "teen night" activities, during which
activities, minors who shall have attained the age of 17 years shall be
permitted to be present on the licensed premises subject to the following
rules and regulations:
A. A permit for the operating of a teen night shall be issued by the Police
Director upon application made at least four weeks prior to the event,
stating, in addition to all other pertinent information required, the time
and place of the activity, the nature of any and all entertainment or
activities, the maximum number of persons who are to be admitted, the
availability of security personnel, parking and other factors relating to
security and public safety. The Police Director, after consultation with
all appropriate code enforcement officials, shall deny the permit or
revoke the application whenever, by reason of location, number of
attendees, parking, traffic or other aspect of the activity conducted
under the permit, public health, safety and welfare will be adversely
affected to a material degree.
B. Compliance with all regulations relating to the conduct of teen nights
adopted by the State of New Jersey shall be a condition for the granting
of a permit thereunder. In the event that alcoholic beverages are found
to be present on the premises, other than the stock of the licensee fully
concealed from view, the licensee shall be presumed to be in violation of
the teen night regulations and shall be subject to license disciplinary
charges and the penalties attendant thereto under this section. In
addition to any and all disciplinary penalties, the licensee shall be
disqualified from teen night permit applications for a period of time to
be determined by the City Council following a disciplinary hearing on
any and all charges or violations hereunder.
C. No licensee shall be entitled to conduct more than one teen night in any
one calendar week commencing Sunday and ending Saturday.
D. The applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount of $150, which shall
be effective for all applications made and permits issued during one
calendar year.
§ 10-14 TRENTON CODE § 10-14
6:130
ARTICLE III
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
§ 10-15. Findings.
§ 10-16. Prominent display of signs required.
All licensees under this chapter who sell alcoholic beverages shall
prominently post on their premises a warning of the dangers to the unborn
children of women who consume alcoholic beverages while pregnant. The
nature and type of warning signs shall be determined by the Trenton Health
Officer, who shall prepare and distribute the warning signs. Any licensee
violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties
provided for in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. In 1981, the infant mortality rate in the City was 17.8 deaths per
thousand births, while the infant mortality rate for the County of
Mercer as a whole was 15.3 deaths per thousand.
B. In 1988, 739 babies of the 6,163 babies born in Mercer County were
born to women who drank excessively during their pregnancy.
C. Medical evidence indicates that pregnant women who drink during
pregnancy may be harming their unborn children, including causing
mental retardation, curvature of the spine, facial abnormalities and
emotional problems, which problems are collectively known as fetal
alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect.
D. Fetal alcohol syndrome warning signs are likely to bring about
increased awareness of the risk of consuming alcohol while pregnant.
E. The Mercer Council on Alcoholism and Drug Addiction has
recommended the posting of the warning sign prescribed herein.
F. The City of Trenton has the power to pass ordinances for the
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
§ 10-15 AIR POLLUTION § 10-16
6:131

ARTICLE IV
License Suspension or Revocation; Violations and Penalties
§ 10-17. General violations, suspensions and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, in addition to any other penalty as
provided by law.
A. No alcoholic beverage retail license which requires the approval of the
City or an officer of the City, pertaining to or in relation to any property
or activity to be conducted upon the property, shall be issued or permit
granted to an applicant who is a property owner unless such applicant
pays all delinquent property taxes on same property. Any license or
permit previously issued to such applicant shall be subject to revocation
or suspension whenever property taxes shall become delinquent for
three consecutive quarters or more and shall stay revoked or
suspended pending full payment.
B. Hearings. Prior to any suspension or revocation of a license, the
licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before City Council for a violation
of this Code or any law or regulation of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1.1 et seq. The
licensee shall be given at least five days' notice of the violation/charge
and a hearing date by personal service or by mailing the same by
registered mail addressed to him at the licensed premises or the
address provided in the licensee's current application. A licensee shall
have the right to legal representation. A postponement may be granted
for good cause only. If any licensee is in need of an interpreter he/she
must provide his/her own. The interpreter must speak English and the
licensee's language fluently. A licensee may enter a plea of guilty, not
guilty, or non vult (no contest). In the event of a finding of a violation
either by hearing, guilty plea, or non vult plea, a licensee shall be
permitted to present mitigating factors. A licensee may enter into a plea
agreement subject to the approval of City Council for a lesser
suspension or other conditions to be imposed upon his/her license.
C. Appeals.
(1) Finding. In the event of suspension or revocation of any license by
City Council, the licensee may, within 30 days after the date of
service or of mailing of said notice of suspension or revocation,
appeal to the New Jersey State Director of Alcoholic Beverage
Control for the action of City Council in suspending or revoking
such license. Said appeal shall act as a stay of such suspension or
revocation pending the determination thereof unless the Director
shall otherwise order.
(2) In the event a licensee files for an appeal with the New Jersey
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control and the decision of the City
is upheld after all appeals have been exhausted, the licensee may
§ 10-17 AIR POLLUTION § 10-17
6:133
be held responsible for the costs of prosecution of the City of
Trenton.
D. Drink girl/guy. Under N.J.S.A. Title 33, 33:1-1 et seq., and Chapter 13:2,
Administrative Code Charging Matrix, the applicable Administrative
Code for Drink1 and Drink2 is N.J.A.C. 13:2-23.18, Solicitation
prohibited; the penalty is defined as a custom charge, to be set by the
municipality. The City of Trenton has defined the penalty for Drink1 as a
ten-day suspension and Drink2 as a thirty-day suspension.
§ 10-17 TRENTON CODE § 10-17
6:134
ARTICLE V
Consumption in Public
[Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-75]
§ 10-18. Prohibitions.
§ 10-19. Exceptions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit:
§ 10-20. Violations and penalties.
Persons found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the general penalty as provided in Chapter I, Article III, General
Penalty.
A. No person shall consume or possess, in any open container, any
alcoholic beverage in or upon any public or quasi-public place,
including but not limited to any public street, alley, sidewalk, mall, park,
playground, public conveyance or parking facility, or in any public
building.
B. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in or upon any private
vehicle while it is in motion or parked upon any such public or quasipublic
place.
A. The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages within or upon
premises duly licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages;
B. The possession of beer in pitchers or other unsealed containers as may
be lawfully sold by licensed premises while in transit to a lawful place
for consumption;
C. The possession, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages in
any public park, recreation area, or public building in connection with
any organized function or social affair for which a permit, issued by the
New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, has been obtained;
D. The possession, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages in
any public park, recreation area, or public building, owned by the City
of Trenton, in connection with any organized function or social affair for
which prior permission has been authorized by resolution of the City
Council;
E. Any underage person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony or rite,
while in the presence of and with permission of a parent, guardian or
relative who has obtained the legal age of 21 years.
§ 10-18 AIR POLLUTION § 10-20
6:135

ARTICLE VI
Smoke-Free Air Act
[Added 9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-44; amended 2-7-2019 by Ord. No.
19-5]
§ 10-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAR — A business establishment, or any portion of a nonprofit entity, which
is devoted to the selling and serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption
by the public, guests, patrons or members on the premises and in which the
serving of food, if served at all, is only incidental to the sale or consumption
of such beverages.
CIGAR BAR — Any bar, or area within a bar, designated specifically for
the smoking of tobacco products, purchased on the premises or elsewhere;
except that a cigar bar that is in an area within a bar shall be an area
enclosed by solid walls or windows, a ceiling and a solid door and equipped
with a ventilation system which is separately exhausted from the
nonsmoking areas of the bar so that air from the smoking area is not
recirculated to the nonsmoking areas and smoke is not backstreamed into
the nonsmoking areas.
CIGAR LOUNGE — Any establishment, or area within an establishment,
designated specifically for the smoking of tobacco products, purchased on
the premises or elsewhere; except that a cigar lounge that is in an area
within an establishment shall be an area enclosed by solid walls or windows,
a ceiling and a solid door and equipped with a ventilation system which is
separately exhausted from the nonsmoking areas of the establishment so
that air from the smoking area is not recirculated to the nonsmoking areas
and smoke is not backstreamed into the nonsmoking areas.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo,
or pipe.
INDOOR PUBLIC PLACE — A structurally enclosed place of business,
commerce or other service-related activity, whether publicly or privately
owned or operated on a for-profit or nonprofit basis, which is generally
accessible to the public, including, but not limited to: a commercial or other
office building; office or building owned, leased or rented by the state or
by a county or municipal government; public and nonpublic elementary or
secondary school building; board of education building; theater or concert
hall; public library; museum or art gallery; bar; restaurant or other
establishment where the principal business is the sale of food for
consumption on the premises, including the bar area of the establishment;
garage or parking facility; any public conveyance operated on land or water,
or in the air, and passenger waiting rooms and platform areas in any
stations or terminals thereof; health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.
§ 10-21 AIR POLLUTION § 10-21
6:137
1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.); patient waiting room of the office of
a health care provider licensed pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes;
child care center licensed pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1
et seq.); race track facility; facility used for the holding of sporting events;
ambulatory recreational facility; shopping mall or retail store; hotel, motel
or other lodging establishment; apartment building lobby or other public
area in an otherwise private building; or a passenger elevator in a building
other than a single-family dwelling.
PERSON HAVING CONTROL OF AN INDOOR PUBLIC PLACE OR
WORKPLACE — The owner or operator of a commercial or other office
building or other indoor public place from whom a workplace or space
within the building or indoor public place is leased.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device, including but not limited to hookahs or e-cigarette.
TOBACCO RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment in which at least
51% of retail business is the sale of tobacco products and accessories, and
in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
VAPING — The act of inhaling and exhaling the aerosol, often referred to as
"vapor," which is produced by an e-cigarette, hookah, or similar device.
WORKPLACE — A structurally enclosed location or portion thereof at which
a person performs any type of service or labor.
§ 10-22. Smoking prohibited in specific locations.
A. Smoking, vaping, the use of e-cigarettes and hookahs is prohibited by
any person in any indoor public place or workplace, except as otherwise
provided by law.
B. Smoking or vaping, the use of e-cigarettes and hookahs is prohibited in
any area of any building of, or on the grounds of, any public or
nonpublic elementary or secondary school, regardless of whether the
area is an indoor public place or is outdoors.
C. Smoking or vaping, the use of e-cigarettes and hookahs is prohibited in
any establishment that holds and operates under a liquor license within
the City of Trenton, except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 10-21 TRENTON CODE § 10-22
6:138
Chapter 14
TRAFFIC
§ 14-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein.
§ 14-2. Parking regulations.
14-2.1No stopping or standing. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at
any time upon any of the streets or portions of streets described in
Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.2No stopping or standing during certain hours. No person shall stop or
stand a vehicle during the hours designated upon any of the streets or
portions of streets described in Schedule II attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
14-2.3No parking. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of
the streets or portions of streets described in Schedule III attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.4No stopping or standing between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. No person
shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m. on any weekday on any of the streets or portions of streets
described in Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.5No parking during certain hours. No person shall park a vehicle
during the hours specified on any of the streets or portions of streets
described in Schedule V attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.6 Two-hour parking. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two
hours at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or as
otherwise indicated, on any day except Saturday, Sunday and public
holidays upon any of the streets or portions of streets described in
Schedule VI attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.7 One-hour parking. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one
hour at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or as
otherwise indicated, on any day except Saturday, Sunday and public
holidays upon any of the streets or portions of streets described in
Schedule VII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.8 Thirty-minute parking. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than
30 minutes at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or
as otherwise indicated, on any day except Saturday, Sunday and public
holidays upon any of the streets or portions of streets described in
Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 10-22 AIR POLLUTION § 14-2
6:139
14-2.9 Fifteen-minute parking. No person shall park a vehicle for longer
than 15 minutes at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., or as otherwise indicated, on any day except Saturday, Sunday
and public holidays upon any of the streets or portions of streets
described in Schedule IX attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.10 Emergency snow removal. Whenever snow has fallen and the
accumulation is such that it covers the street or highway, no vehicle
shall be parked on the major roadways referred to in Schedule X
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
A. The prohibitions provided by this subsection shall remain in effect
after the snow has ceased until the streets referred to have been
plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere
with the normal flow of traffic.
B. Upon the declaration of an emergency there shall be no parking
upon streets or portions of streets where temporary emergency noparking
signs are displayed. The Police Director or, in his/her
absence, the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of emergency no-parking signs
are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the
signs.
14-2.11 Illegally parked vehicles; towing; immobilizing procedures;
scofflaws; fees; penalties.
A. Towing. Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter or any
amendments added thereto shall be deemed a nuisance and any
peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage which
may result from such removal, in addition to posting collateral
provided for hereinbelow in connection with immobilization
procedures, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
B. Immobilization. Any police or ordinance compliance officer may
also immobilize any such vehicle by means of a clamping device.
The officer employing an immobilizer shall affix a notice to the
vehicle stating the basic procedures for obtaining release of the
device.
C. Release. Any person having satisfactory proof of ownership or
authorization to operate an immobilized vehicle may obtain its
release from immobilization by depositing with the Violations Clerk
of the Municipal Court the collateral required for his/her
appearance before the Municipal Court of the City of Trenton to
answer for the current citation and all prior unanswered citations,
or by paying all outstanding fines and costs in full, together with an
immobilization release fee of $40.
§ 14-2 TRENTON CODE § 14-2
6:140
D. Failure to respond; removal. If the owner or operator of an
immobilized vehicle fails to respond to the immobilization release
notice within 24 hours of the installation of the device, or if the
interests of public safety require such action, the immobilized
vehicle shall be towed and stored in accordance with procedures
applicable to illegally parked automobiles. Notice of the removal of
any such vehicle shall be provided by certified mail to the
registered owner of the vehicle, specifying the procedure for
obtaining release, which shall include a charge for towing and
storage.
E. Tampering. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt
to remove an immobilization device applied to a vehicle pursuant to
this section or to move the immobilized vehicle in any manner
without first having complied with the release procedures herein
provided.
F. Scofflaw vehicles; nuisance. Any motor vehicle which has been the
subject of the issuance of five or more parking violation citations,
each offense constituting a separate occasion, and each summons
and citation remaining unresponded to and unsatisfied and in
default, shall constitute a public nuisance and an impediment to the
traffic and the orderly movement and circulation and parking of
motor vehicles on the streets of the City of Trenton as an
impediment and burden upon the limited parking resources of the
portions of the City of Trenton in which parking is required to be
regulated and, in addition to inhibiting access to public parking,
constitutes a display of contempt of such parking regulations.
G. Nuisance procedures; hearing. Whenever any vehicle shall have
been the subject of five or more parking citations which are in
default, the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall issue to the
registered owner of such vehicle, as shown by the records of the
Division of Motor Vehicles, Department of Law and Public Safety,
State of New Jersey, or state of registration, a notification of a
hearing on the issue of whether such vehicle constitutes a public
nuisance as above defined.
(1) Such notification shall include the following information:
(a) The license number of the vehicle.
(b) The name of the registered owner of the vehicle as shown
by the records of the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles or of the department of licenses of the state of
registration.
(c) The date and nature of each violation which will form the
basis of the declaration of the vehicle as a nuisance.
(d) A statement that the vehicle will be declared a nuisance
unless:
§ 14-2 AIR POLLUTION § 14-2
6:141
[1] All outstanding, unpaid penalties for violation of the
Parking Code of the City of Trenton are paid or
sufficient collateral has been deposited with respect to
all citations within 14 calendar days of the date of
mailing of the notification; or
[2] A request for hearing is filed within 14 calendar days
of the date of mailing with the Business Administrator,
or his/her designee, acting as hearing officer.
(e) A statement that if the vehicle is declared a nuisance it will
be subject to immobilization pursuant to this section.
(f) The address and telephone number where additional
information may be obtained.
(2) Upon receipt of a timely request for hearing, the Business
Administrator, or his/her designee, shall promptly set and
conduct a hearing in accordance with such procedures as (s)he
shall establish. The parties shall be notified promptly of the
result.
(3) The hearing officer shall enter a finding of nuisance only upon
making the following determinations:
(a) The identity of the registered owner of the vehicle as
shown by records of the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles or the state of registration.
(b) The identity of the cited vehicle including the license
number of such vehicle.
(c) Not fewer than five citations were issued for parking
violations within the City which remain in default.
(d) The person requesting the hearing has failed to
demonstrate good cause for failing to answer the summons
for each of the outstanding citations or has failed to
demonstrate an intention to respond to the summons of
which (s)he was made aware during the nuisance hearing.
H. Default; nuisance determination. If the registered or legal owner
shall fail to request a hearing within 14 calendar days of the
mailing of the notice, or if the hearing officer shall make a finding
that the vehicle is a nuisance as defined above, (s)he shall
thereupon issue a written order declaring the vehicle a nuisance
and advising the registered owner and the appropriate police
officials that the vehicle is subject to immobilization if found on a
public street in the City until further notice. Copies of this
notification shall be mailed to the registered owner and legal owner
of the vehicle, as shown on the registration record.
§ 14-2 TRENTON CODE § 14-2
6:142
I. Violations during immobilization. The parking regulations and
restrictions otherwise applicable to parked vehicles shall not apply
to any vehicle after it has been and during the period in which it is
immobilized pursuant to this section.
J. Penalties. Violations of this subsection shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of
the City of Trenton.
14-2.12 No parking for street cleaning. No person shall park a vehicle
between the hours and on the days specified, except public holidays,
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in a notice
promulgated by the Director of the Department of Public Works. Such
notice shall be filed with the City Clerk and a copy published in a
newspaper circulating within the City at least 10 days prior to its
effective date. A copy of the notice shall also be filed with the Police
Department. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall also
cause no-parking signs to be posted on the street or portion thereof
upon which parking is prohibited.
14-2.13 Parking restrictions for vans or trucks in residential areas.
[Amended 8-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-34]
A. No person shall park or store any truck, truck tractor, step van or
omnibus having a motor vehicle registration weight in excess of
6,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight or any vans or trucks with
four tires or more displaying writings, markings, signs or phone
numbers and/or having attached ladders and/or scaffolding on any
street situated within a residential area, defined as within 100 feet
of an occupied residential dwelling within the City, at any time
between 8:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day,
except when necessary for the performance of any service or to
meet any temporary need, in which case the owner or operator of
the vehicle shall promptly notify the Police Department of the need
for such parking and shall display a legible notice behind the
windshield of the vehicle indicating the address of the property
which is being serviced by the vehicle.
B. The foregoing restrictions shall not be construed to apply to
vehicles which are designed and used primarily as recreation
vehicles.
C. There shall be posted at each public roadway entrance point to the
City a sign sufficient to provide notice of the above prohibition and
to advise motorists of the prohibition and to advise motorists of the
telephone number of the Police Department to obtain information
as to the application of the restriction.
D. Upon such properties and streets and in such locations as shall be
designated by subsequent ordinance and set forth in Schedule
XXVIII, the above prohibitions shall be extended to include all
§ 14-2 AIR POLLUTION § 14-2
6:143
trucks, truck tractors, vans, trailers and omnibuses of any weight
classification and meeting the definition provided under N.J.S.A.
39:1-1. Specifically excluded from such classification and
restrictions shall be vehicles designed primarily for the
transportation of persons, rather than property, and having a
seating capacity of 10 passengers or fewer. The City Council, by
ordinance, shall designate such streets or portions within
residential districts as shall be subject to the provisions of this
subsection. The City Clerk shall report to the City Council the
receipt of verified petitions containing signatures of a majority of
registered voters residing wholly or partially within the boundaries
of the street or section for which a designation is sought.
The term "residential street" shall refer to the portion of any
residential street lying between two consecutive intersecting
streets. Whenever a residential street is only partially intersected
so as to form a "T" or "Y" intersection, the center line of the
intersecting street shall be projected to its point of intersection
with the center line of the street proposed for designation and,
from the point of intersection of the center line, a line shall be
projected perpendicularly from that center line to the far side of
the curb marking the far side point of intersection. Any dispute or
controversy or ambiguity in the application of this section to any
particular street or street intersection shall be finally determined
by City Council in the adoption of any designation ordinance.
Within 30 days after filing of an appropriate certified petition,
the Director of the Department of Housing and Economic
Development shall submit to Council a written report upon the
merits of the request for designation. Final action on the petition
shall be in accordance with the rules of the procedure governing
the Council for adoption of ordinances. Upon adoption of an
ordinance under this subsection and upon approval of such
ordinance by the Commissioner of Transportation, the areas
designated shall be posted in accordance with the requirements of
Title 39.
E. Violations of this subsection or of any ordinance adopted pursuant
to the foregoing paragraph of this subsection shall be punishable in
the manner provided forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
14-2.14 Special vehicle parking (handicapped). Restricted parking spaces
shall be established and set forth in Schedule XIX, attached to and
made a part of this chapter. Only those persons who are handicapped
and who possess a special vehicle identification shall park in such
designated parking spaces.
14-2.15 Resident parking districts.
A. Findings.
§ 14-2 TRENTON CODE § 14-2
6:144
(1) The City Council finds that on-street parking spaces in certain
areas of the City are insufficient in number to meet the
reasonable needs of the residents of those areas as a result of
excessive use of such spaces by major office, institutional,
educational or transportation facilities of City-wide or regional
scale; and
(2) The City Council finds that the public interest will be served by
increasing access by residents to parking spaces in such areas,
where that can be done without deleterious effect to
neighborhood businesses and community serving institutions,
through the establishment of limitations on parking as set forth
in this section.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BLOCK — Both sides of any public street from its intersection with
one public street to its intersection with another public street.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the City of
Trenton. Except where stated to the contrary, the functions of the
Department under this section shall be performed by the Division
of Engineering and Operations established within the Department.
BUSINESS — The occupation, work or trade in which a person is
engaged. This can be commercial, industrial or professional.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — The hours between 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, except that where the
Department determines that the peak hours of the facility justifying
the creation of a resident parking district are otherwise, the
Department may establish other hours for the purpose of
Subsection C(3)(b) below.
RESIDENT PARKING DISTRICT — The street frontage of one or
more blocks found to be impacted by excessive use of parking
on such blocks by major office, institutional, educational,
entertainment or transportation facilities of City-wide or regional
scale; and meeting the standards of Subsection C below.
VISITOR — An individual, or group of individuals, who is physically
present in or about the premises to which the visitor pass (s)he
is using has been assigned, and whose use of the visitor pass
shall not exceed a continuous period of seven days, except where
an extended visitor pass is obtained as provided in Subsection D
below.
C. Standards for creation of resident parking districts. No resident
parking district shall be established by City Council, except in
keeping with the standards set forth in this subsection.
(1) Criteria.
§ 14-2 AIR POLLUTION § 14-2
6:145
(a) Every district shall meet the following criteria:
[1] At least 75% of the buildings in the district are used in
whole or part for residential purposes.
[2] Not less than 200 legal on-street parking spaces of 20
linear feet each are included in the district.
(b) City Council, upon recommendation by the Department,
may waive the latter requirement where it finds that the
impact of the facility prompting the creation of the district
is limited to a smaller area, and that enforcement of the
requirement will result in arbitrary inclusion of one or
more City blocks not appropriately included in the district.
(2) Prior to the Department initiating any study to determine
whether a district should be established, the residents of the
area in which a district is proposed shall meet with tenants
and/or owner-occupied commercial and professional
establishments within the district to determine their inclusion
or exclusion in the proposed resident parking district.
Thereafter, the residents of the area in the proposed resident
parking district shall submit a written petition to the Director
of the Department. Such petition shall contain signatures,
including legible names and addresses, of individuals
representing at least 75% of the residential tenants or owneroccupants
and include commercial and professional
establishments of each block proposed to be included in the
district, and shall specify names of streets to be included and
the boundaries of the area for which the district is proposed
and the hours for which restricted parking is sought. The
petition shall be on forms provided by the Department, which
shall clearly state that, in the event the district is created, each
signer agrees to accept the rules of district management as set
forth in Subsection D below.
(3) Upon receipt and verification of such a petition, the
Department shall undertake a study of the proposed district. In
order for the Department to recommend creation of a district,
it shall find:
(a) That the district meets the standards set forth herein, or
that justification exists for a waiver of any standard as
provided herein.
(b) That the district is significantly impacted by excessive use
of on-street parking spaces, or can reasonably be expected
to be significantly impacted by use associated with a major
facility being planned or under construction; for purposes
of this section, a finding that 75% of the legal parking
spaces in the district are in use at any time during normal
business hours and that at least 25% of the spaces are
§ 14-2 TRENTON CODE § 14-2
6:146
occupied by nonresidents shall be considered facial
evidence of excessive use.
(c) That creation of the district will not result in an adverse
spillover effect with respect to parking in any area in
proximity to, but outside, the proposed district.
(d) That creation of the district will not have a deleterious
effect on businesses or community-serving institutions
within the district, which may include measures to be
enacted simultaneously with creation of the district to
accommodate parking needs of businesses and institutions
in the district.
(4) Upon conclusion of its study, the Department will present its
recommendations to Council which may create a resident
parking district by ordinance, which districts and the streets
pertaining thereto shall be listed in Schedule XXIX.
D. District management. The following rules shall be applied to the
management of resident parking districts:
(1) The Department shall design and print resident permit decals
and visitor passes with appropriate colors and lettering to
ensure that permits and passes shall only be usable in the
district for which they are issued, and for the year and month
in which issued.
(2) Residents shall be entitled to one permit decal for each
registered vehicle in the household on submission of proof that
the vehicle is registered with the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles and registered to the address of the household, and
for two visitor passes for each household without regard to the
number of residents in the household.
(3) If it is determined that commercial and professional
establishments located within the boundaries of the resident
parking district should be entitled to visitor passes, then each
commercial and professional establishment within the district
shall be entitled to receive two temporary visitor passes per
establishment.
(4) Nonresident owners of buildings in the district shall be entitled
to up to two temporary visitor passes per owner, without
regard to the number of buildings owned.
(5) Any house of worship within any district may obtain such
number of permit decals and visitor passes as the Department
may determine to be appropriate, upon request by the house of
worship. Each such house of worship shall also be permitted to
obtain, upon request made at least one week before the event,
special event passes valid for no more than three consecutive
§ 14-2 AIR POLLUTION § 14-2
6:147
days, up to such number as the Department may determine
can be issued without detriment to residents and commercial
establishments in the district.
(6) The permit decal shall be visibly mounted in the lower corner
of the operator's side of the rear windshield of the vehicle, or
as close as possible to that location. The visitor pass shall be
visibly mounted in the lower corner of the operator's side of the
front windshield, or as close as possible to that location.
(7) There will be a charge of $15 to replace a lost permit decal or
visitor pass. Replacement permit decals or visitor passes will
be issued to cover only the balance of the year for which the
permit decal or pass was initially issued. The Department shall
void any permit decal and/or visitor pass that has been
reported as missing. Any person who uses a decal and/or pass
which has been voided will result in that person being
subjected to the fines described in Subsection D(10) below.
Multiple violations of the conditions concerning usage of
visitor passes may result in the loss of visitor pass privileges.
(8) No permit decal or visitor pass may be used at any time, except
for the purpose for which it was issued and by the individual,
firm or organization to whom it was issued, and with respect to
permit decals, on the vehicle for which it was issued. Any new
visitor passes issued to a person in a household whose previous
owner(s) did not return the prior issued visitor passes to the
Department or transfer the visitor's passes to the new
person(s) or tenant(s) of the household will be subject to
reviews by the Department. There will be a charge of $25 for
each replaced visitor pass not returned to the Department by
the previous owner.
(9) Vehicles in violation of the standards of the district shall be
ticketed and shall be subject to fines as set forth in § 14-5. That
schedule shall provide for fines for vehicles with illegally
obtained or expired decals or passes.
(10) Persons found in violation of any provision of this section,
including unauthorized sale, transfer, physical modification or
mutilation, or falsification of any permit decal or visitor pass
shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense, and a fine
of $500 and loss of the privilege of obtaining permit decals or
visitor passes for any subsequent offense.
E. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) All resident parking districts previously created shall remain in
effect under this section. All provisions of this section, where
different from the provisions of prior ordinances under which
such districts were established, shall become effective in such
districts 20 days after September 2, 1999.
§ 14-2 TRENTON CODE § 14-2
6:148
§ 14-3. Traffic regulations.
(2) The Department of Public Works shall be authorized to adopt
such regulations consistent with the provisions of this section
as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
14-2.16 Twenty-minute parking. No person shall park a vehicle for longer
than 20 minutes at any time between the hours indicated, except
Sundays and public holidays, upon any streets or portions of streets,
described in Schedule XXX, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-2.17 Parking of boats, trailers and dumpsters.
A. Definition. Trailers shall include, but not be limited to, machinery
with wheels which can be self-propelled, moved manually or towed
by a motor vehicle.
B. Prohibited. No person shall park, store or leave unattended any
boat, trailer or dumpster on any street within the City, except for
the purpose of loading or unloading.
C. Exception. Subsection B above shall not apply to construction
trailers and dumpsters which are being used for on-site work.
Persons engaged in on-site work are permitted to park trailers and
dumpsters on any streets only when work is actively in progress. All
trailers and dumpsters left on City streets must be equipped with
reflective devices.
D. Approval required. Trailers and dumpsters shall not be placed on
city streets without first obtaining approval for placement from the
Department of Public Works. When a trailer or dumpster is to be
located in a parking meter zone, an approved application shall also
be obtained from the Division of Traffic and Parking in accordance
with § 188-11, Parking meter bags, of Chapter 188, Parking Meters.
E. Violation and penalties. Failure to observe restrictions listed on an
approved application, parking restriction under Title 39 or City
ordinance will subject the owner of the trailer or dumpster to
removal of same and its contents by the City. The cost of such
removal will be borne by the owner of the trailer or dumpster. The
Director of the Division of Traffic and Parking shall formulate any
further rules or regulations necessary to implement the intent and
purpose of this section.
14-2.18 Angle parking permitted at all times on certain streets. No person
shall park a vehicle at any time upon the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XXXI, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle described therein.
14-2.19 Emergency vehicle parking only. The locations described in
Schedule XXXIII, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as emergency vehicle parking only.
§ 14-2 AIR POLLUTION § 14-3
6:149
14-3.1 Turning restrictions. No person shall turn any vehicle in the direction
indicated at any of the locations described in Schedule XI, or turn a
vehicle which weighs more than five tons in the direction indicated at
any of the locations described in Schedule XI-A, said schedule being
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-3.2 One-way streets designated. The streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
14-3.3No U-turns. No persons shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street or part of a street designated in
Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-3.4 Truck route for trucks over four tons gross weight. Pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the following streets or parts of
streets listed in Schedule XIV, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as routes for trucks over four tons gross
weight. Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby excluded from all
other streets, except for pickup or delivery of material along such
streets.
14-3.5 Crossing fire hose. No vehicle shall be operated or driven over any
unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street
or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without
consent of the Fire Department official in command.
14-3.6 Improper parking. No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any
roadway for the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying it for sale.
B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle for gassing, except for
repairs necessitated by an emergency.
C. Advertising.
14-3.7 Other regulations. Bus stops, taxi stands, loading zones, through
streets, stop intersections and yield intersections shall be designated by
resolution of the City Council as required with the approval of the
Commissioner of Transportation.
14-3.8 Speed zones. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-98, the
roadways or parts of roadways described in Schedule XVI, attached to
and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as speed zones
with speed limits as specified. Regulatory and warning signs shall be
erected and maintained to effect the designated speed limits as
prescribed by the Commissioner of Transportation.
14-3.9 Public and quasi-public parking yards; operating and parking motor
vehicles. No person shall operate, park or leave parked any motor
vehicle upon any public or quasi-public parking yard contrary to the
demand or orders of the person, institution or organization, public or
§ 14-3 TRENTON CODE § 14-3
6:150
private, having dominion, control or ownership thereof, whether such
demand or orders be by sign, placard or given orally, whether or not
appropriate permission has been given to any other person at any time
and whether or not the vehicle is attended while parked.
14-3.10 Applicability to property of Trenton Housing Authority. Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be and is hereby
declared to be applicable and enforceable upon the properties and
housing sites of the Trenton Housing Authority, as more particularly
described on the attached plans, particularly upon its private streets,
driveways, terraces, parking areas and other roadways used for
vehicular travel, prohibiting vehicles from stopping and/or standing or
parking in restricted areas (as shown and described on attached plans
and legend), showing emergency or garbage disposal sites, properly
posted by appropriate signs of particular violations, and providing for
towing or removal of any vehicles in violation. The owner or driver shall
be assessed reasonable costs for towing, removal and storage of such
vehicle before regaining possession thereof, and said owner or driver,
upon a plea or hearing and upon conviction thereof before the
Municipal Court of the City of Trenton, shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days,
or both, in the discretion of the court, unless the statutes of New Jersey
provide another or different penalty pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1.
14-3.11 Authorization of street closing by Mayoral regulations. The Mayor is
hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street
or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during
specified hours whenever (s)he finds that such closing is necessary for
the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
A. Any regulations promulgated by the Mayor under and in
accordance with the above shall provide for the posting of proper
warning signs of such closing of any street or portion thereof
during the time it is closed in pursuance thereof.
B. Any violation of this subsection or of any regulation promulgated
thereunder shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
C. Any regulation adopted under the provisions of this subsection
shall not become effective unless and until it has been submitted to
and approved by the Commissioner of Transportation of the
Department of Transportation.
14-3.12 Right turn on red prohibition. No person shall turn a vehicle to make
a right turn when facing a steady red signal (STOP) indication at any of
the locations described in Schedule XVII attached to and made a part of
this chapter. Signs indicating "NO TURN ON RED," as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Transportation, shall be installed in the appropriate
places at the locations indicated.
§ 14-3 AIR POLLUTION § 14-3
6:151
14-3.13 Lane use restrictions. All vehicles shall move on certain designated
streets in the directions set forth and described in Schedule XVIII
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
14-3.14 (Reserved)
14-3.15 State traffic regulations to apply to certain private property; other
regulations.
A. Trenton Lutheran Housing Corporation. Subtitle I of Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey shall be and is hereby
declared to be applicable and enforceable upon the property of
Trenton Lutheran Housing Corporation, known as Luther Towers,
located at 489 West State Street, and in particular upon its private
streets, driveways, terraces, parking areas and other roadways
used for vehicular traffic, in accordance with the plans attached
hereto, pursuant to provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle at any time on roadway "A" for
the entire length.
(2) Parking in Area A shall be for staff only.
(3) Parking in Area B shall be for residents, employees and
visitors.
(4) All vehicles shall park between the painted lines in the parking
area shown on the plan.
(5) Roadway "A" shall be hereby designated as a one-way street in
a clockwise direction from West State Street to West State
Street.
B. Mercer Medical Center; regulations. The following traffic
regulations, as shown on the site plan attached to Ordinance No.
78-3, shall be established on the lands and grounds of the Mercer
Medical Center pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:1, made applicable by City
Ordinance No. 73-65 and approved by the Commissioner of
Transportation.
(1) Parking.
(a) Parking of vehicles shall be prohibited alongside, in front
or in back of any buildings shown on the site plan, which is
hereby made part of this subsection. All vehicles shall park
between the painted lines in parking areas also shown on
plan.
(b) No person shall stop or stand on either side of Roadway
"A," for the entire length.
(c) No person shall park in or on any other roadway or aisle.
(d) Parking in Area A, for doctors only.
§ 14-3 TRENTON CODE § 14-3
6:152
(e) Parking in Area B, for ambulance and emergency vehicles.
(f) Parking in Areas C and D, for handicapped only.
(g) Vehicles permitted to park shalt be properly identified.
(2) Roadway "E" shall be hereby designated as a one-way street in
a general easterly direction between Bellevue Avenue and
Roadway "E."
(3) The following roadways shall be hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed in all intersecting
roadways or aisles:
(a) Roadway "A."
(b) Between Bellevue Avenue and the Helipad.
(c) Roadway "B."
(d) Between Bellevue Avenue and Roadway "C."
(4) The following intersection shall be hereby designated as a stop
intersection, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140:
(a) Roadway "E" and Roadway "G."
(b) A stop sign shall be installed on Roadway "G."
C. City Hall and Annex. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 39-1 et seq. shall be
and is hereby declared to be applicable and enforceable upon the
property of the City of Trenton, known as the "City Hall and
Annex," located behind 319 East State Street, bordered by South
Stockton Street, Front Street and Armory Drive, and in particular
upon its private streets, driveways, terraces, parking areas and
other roadways used for vehicular traffic, in accordance with the
plans attached hereto, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(1)(g).
(1) No person shall park a vehicle at any time on Roadway "A" for
the entire length.
(2) No person shall park a vehicle at any time in any aisle.
(3) All vehicles shall park only between the painted lines in the
parking areas shown on the plan attached hereto.
(4) Parking in Area 1 shall be for employees of the City Hall and
Annex only for vehicles displaying A, C or D City of Trenton
parking permits.
(5) Parking in Area 2 shall be only for visitors while conducting
business at the Trenton Municipal Building or Annex, except
for the four most westerly spaces. The most westerly space
shall be reserved for the Mayor; the second most westerly
space shall be reserved for the City Council President; the
§ 14-3 AIR POLLUTION § 14-3
6:153
third and fourth most westerly spaces shall be reserved for
City Council members. All visitors' parking spaces in Area
2 shall have a maximum time limit of 30 minutes between
8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays.
(6) Parking in Area 3 shall be for visitors conducting business at
the City Hall or Annex only. The two most westerly parking
stalls shall be reserved for handicapped parking only. All
parking spaces in Area 3 shall have a maximum time limit of 30
minutes between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, excluding holidays.
(7) Roadway "A:" and all aisles shall be hereby designated as twoway
with two exceptions, as follows:
(a) Aisle G shall be a one-way aisle in a westerly direction
from its intersection with Aisle B to its terminus at Aisle D.
(b) Aisle H shall be a one-way aisle in an easterly direction
from its intersection with Aisle F to its terminus at Aisle D.
(8) The Front Street Aisle A driveway shall be egress only.
(9) The following intersection shall be hereby designated as a stop
intersection, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140:
Roadway "A" and Armory Drive
A STOP sign shall be installed on Roadway "A".
(10) Violators of these regulations shall be subject to tow away in
addition to other penalties provided in § 14-5 herein.
(11) Parking in Area 4 shall be reserved parking by permit only,
placard or registration, for City of Trenton officials. The most
easterly parking space shall be reserved for handicapped
parking.
D. Trenton Police Department. Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey shall be and is hereby declared to be applicable
and enforceable upon the property of the City of Trenton, known as
the "Trenton Police Department," located behind 225 North Clinton
Avenue, bordered by North Clinton Avenue, Perry Street and Esher
Street, and in particular upon its private streets, driveways,
terraces, parking areas and other roadways used for vehicular
traffic, in accordance with the plans attached hereto, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(1)(g).
(1) No person shall park a vehicle at any time on any roadway.
(2) No person shall park a vehicle at any time in an aisle.
(3) All vehicles shall be parked only between the painted lines.
§ 14-3 TRENTON CODE § 14-3
6:154
(4) No vehicle shall be parked so as to block the entrance of any
reserved parking space or so as to block the exit of any vehicle
from any parking space.
(5) Those areas set aside for specific persons or functions shall be
signed to indicate such intent; and parking in those areas shall
be restricted to authorized persons and vehicles.
(6) Pursuant to Subsection 14-3.9, during the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
parking within the Police Department parking yard will be
restricted to those persons possessing authorized permit. Such
permits shall be issued through the office of the Police
Director.
(7) Every vehicle, except those owned or controlled by the Police
Department, shall prominently display the required parking
permit in accordance with the guidelines promulgated by the
Police Director.
(8) Suitable signs bearing the qualifications, restrictions or
regulations or parking and traffic flow shall be posted and
conspicuously displayed. Defacing, tampering with or
damaging such signs when posted shall constitute a violation
of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-3.1.
(9) Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no
parking on the police department parking yard where
temporary emergency no-parking signs are displayed. The
Police Director, or in his/her absence the ranking police officer,
is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of such emergency no-parking signs whenever conditions exist
which pose a potential threat to public safety, and such
conditions require that the entire parking yard be readily
available to facilitate an appropriate response. The Police
Director is further authorized to impose a parking ban, full or
partial as (s)he deems necessary, to provide for the safety and
maintenance of the parking yard.
(10) Violators of Subsections (1) through (7) and (9) are subject to
penalties pursuant to § 14-5 and/or tow away pursuant to
Subsection 14-2.11.
14-3.16 Mid-block crosswalks. The locations described in Schedule XX
attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as
mid-block crosswalks.
14-3.17 Bus stops. The locations described in Schedule XXI attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
14-3.18 Taxi stands. The locations described in Schedule XXII attached to
and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 14-3 AIR POLLUTION § 14-3
6:155
§ 14-4. Weight limit.
14-3.19 Loading zones. The locations described in Schedule XXIII attached
to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as loading
zones between the hours specified, Monday through Saturday, except
as otherwise specified. No person shall park a vehicle in such location
during the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of
goods and materials.
14-3.20 Through streets. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXIV attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as through streets.
Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street, except where yield right-of-way signs
are provided for in the designations.
14-3.21 Stop intersections. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140,
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXV attached to
and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
14-3.22 Four-way stop intersections. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule XXVI, attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as four-way stop
intersections. Stop signs and supplemental four-way panels shall be
installed as provided herein.
14-3.23 Yield intersections. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140,
the intersections described in Schedule XXVII, attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided herein.
14-3.24 Multiway stop intersections. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:1-140, the
intersections herein described are designated as multiway stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein. [Added
9-5-2002 by Ord. No. 02-79]
Intersection Stop Sign on
Landing Street and Lamberton
Street
All approaches
14-4.1 South Clinton Avenue Bridge. The weight limit for a single vehicle on
the South Clinton Avenue Bridge over AMTRAK shall be 15 tons gross
load weight, total vehicle weight including load.
14-4.2 North Clinton Avenue Bridge.
A. The weight limit for a single vehicle on the North Clinton Avenue
"Old Stone" bridge over CONRAIL shall be five tons gross load
weight, total vehicle weight including load.
§ 14-3 TRENTON CODE § 14-4
6:156
§ 14-5. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any
amendment or supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 14-6. Exceptions.
Where an emergency or temporary condition is declared by resolution of
City Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.3 and subject to the approval of
the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey, all rules and
regulations set forth hereinafter shall be subject to such changes as shall be
provided by such resolution.
§ 14-7. Honorary street naming. [Added 1-3-2019 by Ord. No.
18-76]
B. City of Trenton Fire Department apparatus and Sanitation Division
vehicles shall be exempt from the five-ton gross load weight limit.
C. The five-ton gross load weight limit shall not apply to vehicles of
Public Service Electric and Gas Company necessary to the repair
and maintenance to facilities accessible only by the use of the
North Clinton Avenue Bridge, provided that the utility company
shall assume all risks associated with such usage.
14-4.3 Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain streets.
Vehicles having a registered gross weight plus load in excess of the
weight prescribed for certain streets in Schedule XXXII, attached to
and made part of this chapter, are hereby excluded from those streets.
14-7.1 Approval criteria. The potential honoree must be a natural person,
living or deceased, who has made a demonstrable and significant
positive impact on the community or contributed to the cultural,
economic, educational, intellectual, political, or scientific vitality of the
community or have made an extraordinary contribution in the service of
humanity.
14-7.2 Restrictions.
A. Only a segment of a street between one and three contiguous
blocks may be proposed for honorary street dedications, and in the
case of walkways, trails, or bicycle paths, the designation shall
apply to the entire length of the way.
B. The proposed name should be appropriate, easy to read and shall
not exceed 30 letters or spaces, including street type and direction.
C. Names having the same or similar pronunciation but with different
spellings are prohibited (e.g., Smith, Smyth or Smythe).
§ 14-4 AIR POLLUTION § 14-7
6:157
D. Avoid the use of derogatory names.
E. Avoid the use of frivolous, complicated or unconventional spellings
in the name (e.g., Pointe, Greene, Olde) and standard suffixes or
prefixes as part of the street name (e.g., Boulevard Drive or Street
Avenue).
F. Avoid the use of abbreviations and special characters such as
hyphens, apostrophes or periods.
G. Street names shall not be duplicated.
14-7.3 Honorary street dedication signage.
A. Honorary street dedication signs must be mounted in a way that
distinguishes them and does not distract from the primary street
sign. These honorary signs may therefore be only mounted below
the primary street sign in a way that is otherwise clearly
distinguishable from the primary street sign.
B. Honorary street dedication signs shall have a distinct design, as
determined by the City, and be in a contrasting color to distinguish
them from primary street name signs, as approved by the City. This
official design shall be used for all honorary street dedication signs.
C. Honorary signs can be removed at any point as deemed necessary
by resolution of the City Council.
14-7.4 Costs.
A. The applicant shall remit a $450 application fee to the City Clerk at
the time of submission. Applicants are additionally responsible for
all costs associated with the fabrication, installation and
maintenance of honorary street dedication signs. In addition, the
applicant will pay all costs, as determined by the Department of
Public Works, for the updating and modification of City, county and
state maps and documents.
B. The Department of Public Works will evaluate the cost of the
signage, labor, and associated parts and equipment for honorary
street dedication signs. This cost will be the full responsibility of
the applicant.
14-7.5 Application and approval process.
A. An application for an honorary street dedication must be submitted
to office of the City Clerk.
B. The application shall include the following:
(1) A petition signed by no less than 2/3 of the record property
owners whose property abuts the street in which the proposed
name change is being requested.
§ 14-7 TRENTON CODE § 14-7
6:158
Chapter 17
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 146.
(2) The applicant shall remit a $450 application fee to the City
Clerk to cover the costs associated with administrative review.
(3) Name and contact information of the person or group
requesting honorary street naming.
(4) Location of proposed honorary street dedication, including
total length of the street to be affected and bounding streets or
other boundaries, subject to the limitations in Subsection
14-7.2 and a map correctly identifying the precise location of
the subject street and the cross streets that intersect with the
street.
(5) Proposed honorary dedication name, which must comply with
Subsection 14-7.2.
(6) A biography of the person to be honored, or a description of the
organization, object, or event to be honored, whichever is
applicable.
(7) An explanation of the reason for the honorary dedication,
including the person's relevance to the location being
proposed.
C. Upon submission of a completed application, the City Clerk shall
forward it to the Department of Public Works, which shall produce
a statement of costs for the installation and maintenance of the
sign(s) and an impact statement to ensure the proposed signage
will not be confusing to the public. These documents shall be
returned to the City Clerk within 45 days of receipt.
D. Upon receipt from the Department of Public Works, the City Clerk
shall prepare an ordinance for placement on the Council agenda for
Council action.
E. If an ordinance to effectuate the proposed honorary street naming
is adopted, the applicant shall deposit funds for the cost of the
fabrication and installation of the signage with the Department of
Public Works prior to its fabrication or installation on the street.
Only upon receipt of funds in full will the signage be created and
installed by the Department of Public Works.
§ 14-7 AMUSEMENTS § 14-7
17:159

ARTICLE I
Carnival and Amusement Rides
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.11 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 17-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Carnival-Amusement
Rides Safety Ordinance."
§ 17-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARNIVAL RIDE or AMUSEMENT RIDE — Any mechanical device or
devices for which a permit is required pursuant to the Carnival-Amusement
Rides Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 5:3-31 et seq., and any amendments thereto.
MAJOR RIDE and KIDDIE RIDE — A carnival or an amusement ride
classified as such by the Commissioner of Labor of the State of New Jersey,
or his/her designee, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:3-31 et seq.
OWNER — A person who owns, leases, controls or manages the operations
of a carnival amusement ride, including the state and any of its subdivisions.
RIDE OPERATOR — Any person or persons actually engaged in, or directly
controlling, the operations of a carnival or amusement ride.
§ 17-3. Height restrictions.
§ 17-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Neither the owner nor ride operator of a major ride shall permit a
passenger who is under age 18 and under 60 inches in height on the
ride, except when the approved height restriction for the ride is less
than 60 inches and the passenger meets it.
B. This restriction shall apply notwithstanding the presence of a guardian
who indicates a desire or intention to accompany the minor passenger
on the ride.
§ 17-1 AMUSEMENTS § 17-4
17:161

ARTICLE II
Pool and Billiards
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.8 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 17-5. Licensed portions of premises.
The license for keeping a pool or billiard table or tables shall include the
rooms or premises devoted to this activity.
§ 17-6. Exemptions.
The license fees provided by this chapter and the regulations contained
in this article shall not apply to any duly incorporated social club, golf
club, field club, religious, charitable, benevolent or nonprofit association or
fraternal organization having a membership in excess of 100 members and
having pool or billiard tables solely for the recreation and amusement of
its members; nor shall it apply to the use of a pool or billiard table in a
private residence, except that in the case of a private residence persons
or organizations claiming exemption shall file a form of application for
exemption with the City Clerk disclosing the information required in
applications for license and the information that discloses their exempt
status.
§ 17-7. Investigation of applicants.
The City Clerk shall transmit copies of all applications for a pool or billiard
license to the Police Director, the Fire Chief and the Building Inspector, who
shall investigate the aspects of the licensed premises in accordance with
their respective jurisdictions and report back, in writing, to the City Clerk
their findings of fact and recommendations. The City Clerk shall complete
whatever additional investigation is required by the terms of this article
within a reasonable time and at the completion thereof shall transmit to
the City Council all materials in his/her possession concerning the license
application.
§ 17-8. Publication and hearing.
After receipt of the information and reports required in § 17-7, the City
Council shall then publish once in the official newspaper of the City
notification of the application and shall conduct a public hearing thereon no
less than 10 days after publication and at the first regular meeting of the
City Council after the expiration of the ten-day period, at which time further
information as to the applicant or the licensed premises may be received.
§ 17-9. Notice to abutting owners.
All applicants under the terms of this article shall also, at least five days
prior to the time appointed for a hearing, give notice to all owners and
occupants of property within 200 feet of the property involved in the
application. Such notice may be given by personal service or by registered
§ 17-5 AMUSEMENTS § 17-9
17:163
or certified mail, return receipt requested; provided, however, that notice
shall not be deemed necessary or required in the case of any application
for the renewal of any such licenses outstanding as of July 8, 1963, or to
applications for the renewal of any such licenses hereafter issued.
§ 17-10. Ineligibility for license.
Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe by the written report
of the Building Inspector or a fire hazard by the written report of the Fire
Chief shall be deemed to be ineligible for a license.
§ 17-11. Location restrictions.
No license shall be issued for the operation of any pool or billiard parlor
which is located within 500 feet of any school, church, or publicly owned
building or within 1,000 feet of another pool or billiard parlor. All distances
shall be measured as the shortest distance between the nearest building
entrances, across the street if the entrances are on opposite sides of a
street, and along street frontages if both entrances are on the same side of
a street or within the same block.
§ 17-12. Issuance of licenses.
If the City Council finds that all of the preceding provisions concerning
conditions for licensing under this article have been complied with and that
the issuance of a license to conduct, maintain or operate a pool and billiard
parlor, as described in § 17-5 of this article, and that the issuance of the
license shall not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the City, the license shall be issued by the City Clerk upon
resolution being duly passed by the City Council and after payment of the
prescribed license fee.
§ 17-13. Additional regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all licensed pool and billiard parlors
and, in addition, shall apply to every room or premises where games similar
to pool or billiards, but differing in the size of table, style, added or missing
elements or equipment, from the standard game of pool or billiards, are
operated.
A. Hours of operation. The hours of operation of such pool or billiard
rooms shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on weekdays and
Saturdays and between 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays.
B. Minors. No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to or
permitted to play pool or billiards in any licensed premises or to
frequent, lounge, congregate or gather in such room or place unless
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
§ 17-9 TRENTON CODE § 17-13
17:164
§ 17-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
C. Card playing. In no event shall card playing be permitted on premises
licensed under this article, even if such card playing is for social
purposes.
D. Outside view of premises. All premises in which the games of pool and
billiards are played shall be on the street floor of any building and shall
be so arranged and so lighted that a full view of the interior may be had
from the public thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the
public is admitted at all hours.
E. Insurance coverage. No pool or billiard parlor or place where billiards
or pool is played for hire shall be operated unless there is in force a
public liability insurance policy to cover any injury suffered as a result
of the use of the equipment or the operation of the billiard or pool
parlor or place where billiards or pool is played for hire, in the amount
of $50,000 for any one occurrence and $25,000 for injury to any one
person. A certificate of the policy shall be filed with the City Clerk with
the application for a license.
§ 17-13 AMUSEMENTS § 17-14
17:165

ARTICLE III
Miniature Golf
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.6 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 17-15. Lighting restrictions.
The lighting system installed on open-air public miniature golf courses shall
be so designed and arranged that the rays from all of the lamps and/or
reflectors forming the lighting system shall not interfere with the comfort
and privacy of the occupants of adjoining or adjacent premises and shall not
dazzle the vision of persons using the public streets.
§ 17-16. Music.
No licensee shall cause or permit any vocal or instrumental music or cause
or permit any sound by means of any mechanical device or contrivance to
be made for the purpose of entertaining or attracting patrons.
§ 17-17. Hours.
No open-air public miniature golf course shall be operated or conducted
between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 17-18. Employment of special officer.
Whenever deemed necessary, in the opinion of the Police Director, a special
officer whose employment shall be approved by the Police Director, in
writing, shall be employed by the licensee and stationed at or near the
licensed premises.
§ 17-19. Landscaping.
The grant of any license under this article with respect to any site subject
to a redevelopment plan adopted by City Council or within the capital
district established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:9Q-1 et seq. shall be subject to
review by the Department of Housing and Economic Development, which
may condition the award of a license on such physical and landscape
improvements to the properly as are needed to ensure the public safety, and
to ensure that the use is not incompatible with adjacent land uses and with
the intent of the redevelopment plan.
§ 17-20. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 17-15 AMUSEMENTS § 17-20
17:167

ARTICLE IV
Automatic Amusement Devices
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.3 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 17-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words and terms shall have the meanings given herein.
DISTRIBUTOR OF MACHINE JUKEBOXES — Any person who leases, rents
out or places under any kind of arrangement one or more machine
jukeboxes.
DISTRIBUTOR OF MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES — Any person
who leases, rents out or places under any kind of arrangement one or more
automatic amusement devices.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plat, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine, which upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, place or disc, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical bowling
machines, video amusement devices and all games, operation or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any machine jukebox
or automatic amusement device is displayed for public patronage or is
placed or kept for operation by the public.
OWNER-OPERATOR — Any person who owns and operates any machine
jukebox or automatic amusement device.
SITE — The building or other premises any jukebox or automatic
amusement device is placed for operation.
WEIGHING MACHINE — A mechanical device which, upon the insertion of
a coin or slug, records the weight of the person using the device.
§ 17-22. License required of distributors and operators.
A. No distributor of automatic amusement devices or machine jukeboxes
shall distribute to any person or to the owner, occupant, lessee or
licensee of any premises in the City for the purpose of operation thereof
any automatic amusement devices or machine jukeboxes without first
having obtained from the City Clerk a license to do so.
B. No operator shall display for public patronage or keep for operation any
machine jukebox or automatic amusement device without first having
obtained a license to do so from the City Clerk.
§ 17-21 AMUSEMENTS § 17-22
17:169
§ 17-23. Applications for licenses.
C. No operator shall be issued a license to permit the operation or
maintenance of more than four automatic amusement devices, as
herein defined, for any one licensed premises; provided, however, that
application may be made for the licensing of a fifth machine which
application shall be determined by the City Clerk following an
investigation by the appropriate municipal officials as to whether four
machines can be operated without substantial detriment to the public
health, safety and welfare by reason of the characteristics of the
licensed premises, including special and structural consideration and
consideration of noise, pedestrian and vehicular traffic and other
related consequences of the granting of the additional license.
D. No operator shall be issued a license if it shall be determined on the
basis of his/her application or any investigation conducted in
connection therewith that the issuance of the license shall be
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare by reason of the
physical circumstances of the proposed licensed activity as set forth
above or by reason of the prior criminal conviction of the applicant, or
any other reasons constituting a substantial basis for denying the
application, which reason shall be specified, in writing, to the applicant
at the time of the denial of the application.
E. The operator to whom one or more licenses have been issued shall
maintain such licenses prominently on display in reasonable proximity
to each machine so licensed such that it can be observed freely by any
person upon the premises.
A. Distributors of mechanical amusement devices. The application for
license shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant. If applicant is an individual, the
age, date and place of birth of applicant. If applicant is a firm,
partnership or association, the names and addresses, ages, places
of birth of all members of the firm, partnership or association. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the registered
agent and the names and addresses, ages and places of birth of all
the stockholders owning 10% or more of all of the issued and
outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
(2) Prior criminal conviction of applicant, if any. The word "applicant"
shall mean and include all persons whose names, addresses, ages
and places of birth must be furnished under Subsection C(1) above.
(3) The particular number of automatic amusement devices which the
applicant will distribute in the City of Trenton.
(4) Such other information as the City Council shall from time to time
deem necessary and proper.
§ 17-22 TRENTON CODE § 17-23
17:170
§ 17-24. License fees.
B. Distributor of machine jukeboxes. The application for licenses shall
contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant. If applicant is an individual, the
age, date and place of birth of applicant. If applicant is a firm,
partnership or association, the names and addresses, ages, places
of birth of all members of the firm, partnership or association. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the registered
agent and the names and addresses, ages and places of birth of all
the stockholders owning 10% or more of all of the issued and
outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
(2) Such other information as the City Council shall from time to time
deem necessary and proper.
C. Operators. The application for license shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name and address of applicant, if applicant is an individual, the
age, date and place of birth of applicant. If applicant is a firm,
partnership or association, the names and addresses, ages, places
of birth of all members of the firm, partnership or association. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the registered
agent and the names and addresses, ages and places of birth of all
the stockholders owning 10% or more of all of the issued and
outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
(2) Prior criminal conviction of applicant, if any. The word "applicant"
shall mean and include all persons whose names, addresses, ages
and places of birth must be furnished under Subsection C(1) above.
(3) Place where machine or devices are to be displayed and the
business conducted at that place.
(4) The name and address of the owner of the machine.
D. Age and residence requirements. No license or licenses provided for in
this article shall be issued to any applicant unless (s)he is over 18 years
of age and a citizen of the United States. In the case of a corporate
application, all of the beneficial holders of stock having a greater than
ten-percent interest shall meet the age and citizenship requirements of
this subsection.
A. Amusement devices and weighing machines.
(1) The annual license fee for operating, maintaining or using an
automatic amusement device or weighing machine in any one place
shall be as follows:
(a) One-cent machine or device (fee per year):
§ 17-23 AMUSEMENTS § 17-24
17:171
[1] Amusement device: $10.
[2] Weighing machine: $1.
(b) Five-cent machine or device:
[1] Amusement device: $30.
[2] Weighing machine: $30.
(c) Over five-cent machine or device (fee per year):
[1] Weighing machine: $30.
[2] Amusement device, site license, each site: $60.
[3] One to four machines, each machine at one site: $30.
[4] Each additional machine at one site: $50.
(2) Payment of the above fees shall permit the operation of the
requisite number of machines at a given site and the owner or
distributor may freely substitute one machine for another up to and
including the total number of machines licensed for such site and
provided, further, that each such machine shall have affixed to its
front or side, in a visible place, the name, address and telephone
number of the owner or distributor and the current year's license
number of the owner or distributor.
B. Music machines.
(1) Five-cents-or-over music machine or device:
(a) Machine or device over and through which music by wire or
telephone from central office is played and received, for each
unit located in any place or establishment: $2.
(b) Machine or device known as the "automatic hostess": $15.
(2) Token- or slug-operated machines or devices not included in
Subsection A and B(1) above: $50.
(3) Coin-operated radios: operation, maintenance and use, for each
unit: $2.
(4) Coin-operated televisions: $5.
(5) Music machine owners or distributors: For each mechanical music
machine operated within the City, the owner or distributor thereof
shall pay a fee of $75, which fee shall include both the right to
distribute such machine and to operate it or a substitute at a given
site within the City.
C. Owners or distributors of other mechanical amusement devices.
§ 17-24 TRENTON CODE § 17-24
17:172
§ 17-25. Gambling devices.
Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to
law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of New Jersey,
including any mechanical amusement device that dispenses any kind of
payoff, prize or reward.
§ 17-26. Prohibitions and restrictions.
(1) For each owner or distributor of mechanical amusement devices
other than mechanical music machines provided for in the
preceding subsection based upon number of machines permitted to
be distributed:
Number of Machines Fee Per Year
1 to 10 $100.00
1 to 20 $150.00
1 to 30 $200.00
1 to 40 $250.00
1 to 50 $300.00
More than 50 $400.00
(2) No license fee shall be charged for the issuance of any owner's or
distributor's license to the owner or distributor of the machines if
the machines are maintained or used by the owner or distributor in
connection with his/her own place of business, and the license for
the use and operation of the machines has been issued to the owner
or distributor and the license fee hereinabove prescribed has been
duly paid.
A. No distributor licensed to distribute automatic mechanical amusement
devices within the City shall knowingly distribute for operation in and
upon any licensed premises any mechanical amusement device which,
together with all other mechanical amusement devices upon the
premises, exceeds the number of machines for which the premises has
licenses on display.
B. No operator holding a license for the operation of a machine jukebox or
mechanical amusement device which, when operated produces noise
from the ringing of bells or the simulation thereof, shall permit the
playing of any such device between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on any day.
C. No operator holding a license for the operation of jukeboxes of
mechanical amusement devices shall permit the playing of jukeboxes of
mechanical amusement devices within 200 feet of any church, public or
parochial school or playground, provided that the City Council shall
§ 17-24 AMUSEMENTS § 17-26
17:173
§ 17-27. Seizure and destruction of machines.
If the Police Director shall have reason to believe an automatic amusement
device is used as a gambling device, the machine may be seized by the
police and impounded. If upon trial of the operator for allowing the machine
to be used as a gambling device the operator shall be found guilty, the
machine shall be destroyed by the police. Revocation and seizure are in
addition to all other penalties.
§ 17-28. Revocation and nonrenewal.
Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to revocation
and the number of machines previously licensed shall be subject to
reduction by revocation or by denial of application for renewal whenever
the City Council shall determine, following a public hearing, that the
revocation or nonrenewal of any such license is necessary to the
preservation and protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The
City Council shall make such determination upon the basis and in the
manner provided for under Chapter 146, Licensing.
§ 17-29. Violations and penalties.
Failure to obtain the requisite distribution, operation or site licenses shall
subject the distributor, owner or operator of an automatic amusement
device or machine jukebox to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
review and consider applications for a variance from the distance
restrictions when it shall determine upon presentation by an applicant
for a license that the enforcement of the restrictions would not service
a substantial public purpose and that the issuance of a license would
not be detrimental to or inconsistent with the proper conduct of church,
school or playground activities and would not constitute an adverse
influence upon children expected to be in the vicinity of the licensed
premises and would not have an adverse impact upon the circulation of
the vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Such determination shall be made
following a public hearing to be conducted on notice provided by the
applicant to all persons owning property or having a church, school
or playground within 200 feet of the premises for which the license is
proposed.
D. No distributor or operator of mechanical amusement devices shall offer
or permit to be offered any prize, free games or other reward to any
person playing any machine required to be licensed by the provisions of
this article.
§ 17-26 TRENTON CODE § 17-29
17:174
Chapter 21
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 171. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 193,
§ 193-11.
§ 17-29 AMUSEMENTS § 17-29
17:175

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Dogs
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as Ch. VII of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 21-1. License required.
Pursuant to Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941 of the State of New Jersey
(N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq.), any person who shall own, keep or harbor a
dog of licensing age, as defined in that act, within the limits of the City of
Trenton shall, in the month of January and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Division of Health a license and official metal registration
tag for each dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such
dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for the dog within 10 days after acquisition or age attainment.
§ 21-2. Application for license.
Applications for dog licenses shall be made to the Division of Health and
shall contain the information required by the aforesaid act. The Division of
Health shall forward to the State Department of Health and Senior Services
each month, on forms furnished by that Department, the information
contained in the application.
§ 21-3. Issuance.
All registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the application. The
license forms and uniform official metal registration tags designed by the
State Department of Health shall be issued by the Division of Health, be
numbered serially and bear the year of issuance.
§ 21-4. Dog license fees. [Amended 10-18-2001 by Ord. No. 01-91;
2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6; 10-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-45]
A. Any person applying for a license and registration tag shall pay an
annual fee of $12 for each dog licensed, the sum of $1 for the
registration tag for each dog, and the sum of $0.20 for each dog license.
In addition, there shall be an additional fee of $3 for each dog which has
not had its reproductive capacity permanently altered through
sterilization.
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons, commonly known as "Seeing Eye
dogs," hearing-ear dogs and service dogs shall be licensed and
registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the
owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee
therefor.
C. An additional fee of $15 shall be made for anyone applying for a dog
license renewal on or after the first day of February of each year.
§ 21-1 AMUSEMENTS § 21-4
17:177
§ 21-5. Running at large. [Amended 10-18-2001 by Ord. No. 01-91]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog, male or female, shall
permit it to run at large or to accompany him/her on or in any public street
or public place within the City at any time unless such dog shall wear a
substantial muzzle of adequate size securely fastened about the nose and
covering the whole mouth, except that a dog shall be permitted on or in the
streets or public places within the City without such muzzle if it is on a leash
not exceeding three feet in length and is under the control of a competent
person above the age of 14 years, so as to prevent injury to persons
or property, and provided that such dog is not of a vicious propensity.
Police canine corps dogs under the direct control and supervision of Police
Department personnel shall be exempt from the provisions herein.
§ 21-6. Female dogs.
No owner of a female dog shall suffer or permit her to be in or upon any
street, highway or alley or other public place in the City, or to trespass upon
the property of other persons in the City at any time while such female dog
may be in heat. Such female dog running at large or trespassing in violation
of this section may be impounded and destroyed, as provided in this chapter,
not less than seven days after her capture or seizure unless the owner shall
reclaim her within the aforementioned said seven-ay period and pay the
penalty for violation of this article.
§ 21-7. Nuisances committed by dogs.
D. A charge of $3 shall be made for the replacement of a dog license tag
after the applicant has provided proof or sufficient evidence that the
initial license was issued for the dog in question.
E. In addition to any fees imposed by this or any other section, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-31, the annual fee to license any dog declared "potentially
dangerous" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23 shall be $700.
A. No dog owner shall suffer or permit any dog to annoy neighbors and
other persons living within the immediate vicinity in the City by barking
and howling, nor permit his/her dog to trespass upon the property of
any other persons in the City, nor suffer or permit his/her dog to
damage shrubbery, flowers, gardens or any other property of any kind
or character belonging to any neighbor or other person in the City. A
person who owns, possesses or controls a dog or dogs shall not permit
the animal to commit a nuisance on a sidewalk of any public place, on a
floor, wall, stairway or roof of any public or private premises used in
common by the public or on a fence, wall or stairway of a building
abutting on a public place.23
B. Any police officer shall, upon receipt of a complaint of a continuing
annoyance or trespass, use reasonable diligence to determine
23.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter, Removal of Canine Waste.
§ 21-4 TRENTON CODE § 21-7
17:178
§ 21-8. Seizure and redemption. [Amended 10-18-2001 by Ord. No.
01-91; 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6; 10-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-45]
§ 21-9. Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. [Added 10-18-2001
by Ord. No. 01-91]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-26, the fee for boarding and maintenance of any
dog deemed by the Municipal Court to be either vicious or potentially
dangerous is hereby fixed at $25 per day plus any out-of-pocket costs
expended for medical care and related items. The fee to euthanize and
dispose of any dog declared vicious or potentially dangerous shall be $75.
§ 21-10. Canvass.
The Health Officer of the City of Trenton shall annually cause a canvass
to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the
City and shall cause a report of the result thereof to be filed with the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, setting forth the details
of compliance as provided in the New Jersey statutes.
§ 21-11. Inoculation for rabies.
No person in the City shall own, possess, harbor or have in custody any
dog over six months of age unless the dog has been vaccinated against
rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey. Such
independently the existence of the annoyance or trespass and to issue
appropriate warnings to persons deemed to be responsible. After using
appropriate warnings, the officer shall sign a complaint and issue a
citation to any person (s)he finds to be in violation of this section.
A. Whenever any licensed dog wearing a registration tag is impounded,
the Animal Control officer shall immediately notify the Division of
Health of the license number of the dog, and the Division of Health shall
notify the owner forthwith that the dog has been taken up and
impounded and will be offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed
within seven days after service of the notice. Any dog seized under the
provisions of this section may be redeemed by the owner of the dog
upon payment of a pickup fee of $20, a six-in-one vaccine of $5, plus a
sum not to exceed $4 per day for each day the dog is kept in the dog
shelter, provided that such redemption shall be made within seven days
of the impounding or seizure of any dog as provided in this section.
B. Adoption fees shall be as follows:
(1) Male cat: $100.
(2) Female cat: $100.
(3) Male dog: $120.
(4) Female dog: $120.
§ 21-7 AMUSEMENTS § 21-11
17:179
vaccination shall be repeated annually, unless a longer period of protection
is specified on the veterinarian's certificate of vaccination, to consist of
one injection of rabies vaccine approved for marketing in accordance with
existing standard requirements set forth by the Veterinary Biology Division,
Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, provided
that any dog may be exempt from the requirement of vaccination for a
specified period of time upon the presentation of a certificate from a duly
licensed veterinarian stating that by reason of limitations of the vaccine as
applied to the physical condition of the animal, the vaccination of the dog
for a specified period of time is contraindicated, and provided further that
nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require the vaccination of any
dogs located in and confined to duly recognized and licensed kennels, dog
pounds, pet shops, etc., where dogs are offered for sale, as provided by the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 21-12. Certificate of inoculation. [Amended 10-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-91]
§ 21-13. Free vaccinations.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to provide free
vaccination of dogs at a suitable clinic and place designated by him/her
to be conducted by a licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey.
The Health Officer is hereby further authorized and empowered to make
and adopt such rules and regulations not inconsistent nor in conflict with
the terms and provisions of this chapter as (s)he may deem proper and
necessary for the enforcement of the aforementioned sections.
§ 21-14. Dog kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
A. Any person owning, harboring or having custody of a dog or dogs shall
obtain from the veterinarian who vaccinates the dog or dogs against
rabies a certificate and shall within 10 days of the vaccination or within
10 days after bringing the dog into the City of Trenton, if the dog was
vaccinated before being brought into the City, deliver the certificate to
the Division of Health, which certificate shall be filed with the records
of the Health Officer.
B. No license required for the owning and keeping of dogs, by virtue of any
law of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of the City of Trenton, shall
be issued to any person unless a certificate issued by a duly licensed
veterinarian of the State of New Jersey, as hereinabove provided, is
presented to and filed with the Division of Health so showing that such
dog has been vaccinated against rabies in the manner provided herein,
which certificate shall show and certify that vaccination has been made
and said vaccination has a duration which extends throughout at least
10 of the 12 months of the licensing period.
A. License required. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the City
§ 21-11 TRENTON CODE § 21-14
17:180
Clerk or a license to keep or operate such establishment. The
application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located and the purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained
and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the Health Officer
of the City of Trenton, showing compliance with local and state rules
and regulations governing the location and sanitation of the
establishment.
B. Issuance. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop or shelter shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained and shall expire
on the last day of January of each year and shall be subject to revocation
by the City on recommendation of the State Department of Health and
Senior Services or the Health Officer of the City for failure to comply
with the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health and
Senior Services or of the Health Department of the City of Trenton,
after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the state
department or local department aforementioned. Any person holding
such license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs
owned by the licensee and kept at such establishments; such licenses
shall not be transferable to another owner or to different premises.
C. Fees. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for
10 or a fewer dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The
annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged
for a shelter or pound.
D. Biological research laboratories. No person or business association
shall operate or engage in the business of a biological research
laboratory or any similar business activity for profit or not for profit and
regardless of state or federal certification without first procuring an
annual license from the City Health Officer for such purposes, the
annual fee for which shall be $35. The license for biological research
laboratories shall apply to all activities which involve the housing or
keeping of animals of any description including dogs, cats, guinea pigs,
hamsters, rabbits, rodents or other species for the purpose of
subjecting them to any form of experiment or observation for any
purpose whatsoever other than for individual therapy in the manner
normally associated with the practice of veterinary medicine. A person
or business association having procured a license to conduct such
activities shall be exempt from any and all requirements provided by
the Code of the City of Trenton which would otherwise require the
separate licensing of each animal or the procuring of any other form of
license pertaining to the keeping of animals or birds. The term
"biological research laboratories" shall not be construed to include the
activities normally associated with the operation of a pet shop or
veterinary hospital, unless the activities actually conducted by such
persons or business associations constitute the operation of a biological
research laboratory in addition to the activities of a pet shop or
veterinary hospital. The issuance of any license hereunder shall be
subject to the initial and any subsequent inspections by the Division of
§ 21-14 AMUSEMENTS § 21-14
17:181
§ 21-15. Disposition of fees.
All license fees collected or received under the provisions of this chapter,
except registration tag fees, shall be received and disposed of in the manner
provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-5.1 et seq.
§ 21-16. Violations and penalties.
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-5.1 et seq., violations of the provisions of
this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty.
Health of the Department of Health and Human Services with respect
to the maintenance of sanitary conditions consistent with the interests
of the public health of the City of Trenton.
E. Recording of license. The City Clerk shall forward to the State
Department of Health and Senior Services a list of all kennel, pet shops,
shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses therefor
are issued, which list shall include the names and addresses of the
licensees and the kinds of licenses issued.
§ 21-14 TRENTON CODE § 21-16
17:182
ARTICLE II
Removal of Waste
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-21 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 21-17. Removal by owner or handler required.24
An owner or handler shall remove feces left by his/her dog or other animal
on any sidewalk, gutter, street, grass strip or other public or quasi-public
area, or upon any private property without the prior consent of its owner.
§ 21-18. Exemptions.25
The provisions of this article shall not apply to guide dogs accompanying
any blind person, hearing-ear dogs or service dogs.
§ 21-19. Enforcement.
The inclusion of this provision within this chapter shall not be considered
to vest exclusive jurisdiction to the Department of Health in terms of
enforcement of this provision; violations of this article may be enforced
by other City officials, including the uniformed members of the Police
Department.
§ 21-20. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-17 AMUSEMENTS § 21-20
17:183

ARTICLE III
Keeping of Birds and Animals
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-4 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 21-21. Keeping of birds and animals regulated.
No person shall keep any birds or animals except in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 21-22. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to the keeping of dog kennels or pet shops
licensed and regulated under Article I of this chapter. Animals kept as
pets, provided they are of a species and of a number usually kept for that
purpose, shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 21-24 and 21-26, but
shall be kept in compliance with all other provisions of this article.
§ 21-23. Sanitary requirements.
The premises on which birds and animals are maintained shall meet and
constantly conform to the following requirements:
§ 21-24. License required; inspections; suspension of license.
A. Location is such as to preclude odors and sounds from interfering with
the comfortable enjoyment of life and property on neighboring
premises.
B. Buildings, food storage bins, appliances, equipment, feeding areas and
other facilities on premises which are constructed and maintained in
such fashion as to permit proper cleansing.
C. Water supply is adequate for proper sanitation.
D. Water or other liquid to which mosquitoes may have access is properly
treated to prevent their breeding.
E. Disposition is made of animal wastes, garbage, refuse or vegetable
matter deposited upon the premises in such manner as to prevent
insect breeding or rodent harborage or pollution of the air or any body
of water, or the creation of any other unhealthy or unsanitary condition.
F. Rodents or insects hazardous to public health do not exist or reproduce
therein or thereon.
G. Adequate measures are taken to prevent birds or animals from
escaping.
H. Adequate equipment is available to maintain the premises in a sanitary
condition at all times.
§ 21-21 AMUSEMENTS § 21-24
17:185
§ 21-25. Nuisances declared.
Premises on which birds or animals are maintained in violation of any
provision of § 21-23 are hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental
to public health.
§ 21-26. License fees.
The fee for a license to keep birds or animals shall be $10 per year.
§ 21-27. Limitation on number of animals.
Except as a licensee to operate a kennel, pet shop or other lawful activity
involving the keeping of animals, no person shall keep or house animals of
any species in such numbers or of such size or innate characteristics as to
constitute a public nuisance. The keeping of animals shall be deemed to
be a public nuisance if the property within which they are kept is not of
a size, configuration, or improved with appropriate facilities to adequately
provide for the containment of all such animals or to accommodate the
natural spatial needs of each individual animal, sheltered or unsheltered
from the elements, while providing simultaneously for the minimal spatial
needs of the regular human occupants of the property. A public nuisance
shall also be deemed to exist when, by reason of the physical structure or
other characteristic of the property or of an adjoining property, the public or
occupants of neighboring property are exposed to an unreasonable degree
of dangerous contact with the animal or of an odor or noise.
§ 21-28. Administrative hearing.
Whenever in the opinion of the Health Officer, or his designee, the keeping
of any animal constitutes a nuisance as defined under this article, he shall
give written notice to the owner, tenant or other occupant of the property
A. Birds or animals shall not be maintained on any premises until the
Health Officer has given formal approval therefor by the issuance of a
license.
B. Application for a license shall be made by letter of request therefor
submitted to the Health Officer, together with a report of facts relating
to each provision of § 21-23.
C. A license to maintain birds and animals shall not be issued until the
Health Officer has inspected and approved the site and the facilities
where birds or animals are to be maintained.
D. Premises on which birds or animals are maintained shall be subject to
inspection by the Health Officer.
E. The license of any person to maintain birds or animals may be
suspended at any time when, in the opinion of the Health Officer, such
action is necessary to obtain abatement of a nuisance as defined in
§ 21-25.
§ 21-24 TRENTON CODE § 21-28
17:186
advising of the basis for his complaint and giving notice of the time and
place for a hearing, at the election of the owner, tenant or occupant, on
the complaint. The Health Officer, whenever he deems it necessary to
determine any matter involving expertise in the area of animal keeping,
may engage the services of a veterinarian, the services of a qualified
representative of the Trenton Kennel Club, or utilize such other resources
as shall be available and within budgetary limits. The hearing shall be
conducted in such a manner as to permit the owner, tenant or occupant a
reasonable opportunity to learn the basis of the complaint and the nature
of the violations and the scientific authority or references relied upon. The
owner, tenant or occupant shall also be given an opportunity to present
any evidence, authority or reasons in opposition to the complaint. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Health Officer, or his designee, shall reissue,
modify or withdraw the complaint, with or without conditions. Thereafter,
unless the complaint is withdrawn unconditionally, if the violation persists,
the Health Officer shall cite the owner with a violation of this article.
§ 21-29. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this section shall be punishable in the manner provided for in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 21-28 AMUSEMENTS § 21-29
17:187

ARTICLE IV
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 9-7-2006 by Ord. No. 06-65]
§ 21-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the City of
Trenton, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for failure to comply.
§ 21-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 21-32. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the City of Trenton, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 21-33. Enforcement.
§ 21-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, as stated in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty.
A. This article shall be enforced by the City of Trenton's Police
Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 21-30 AMUSEMENTS § 21-34
17:189

ARTICLE V
Humane Treatment
[Adopted 8-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-22]
§ 21-35. Reporting animals hit by motor vehicles.
§ 21-36. Tethering.
A. Any person operating a motor vehicle who hits, runs over or causes
injury to any animal shall stop at once, ascertain the extent of the injury,
render such assistance as may be possible, provided it can be
accomplished safely and without danger to the motorist, pedestrians or
other motorists, and promptly report to the nearest police station,
police officer or the pound.
B. The motorist shall promptly report his name, address, operator's
license and registration number and the location of the injured animal.
A. Definition. "Tethering" shall mean the restraining of an animal by the
tying to any object or structure, including, without limitation, a house,
tree, fence, post, garage, weight or shed, by any means, including,
without limitation, rope, cord, leash or running line, but shall not
include the use of a leash used to walk the animal or to forms of
restraint used in the transportation of the animal.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, tie, restrain or
cause any unattended dog to be fastened, tied or restrained to houses,
trees, fences, garages, stakes or other stationary or highly immobile
objects by means of a rope, strap or other physical restraint for the
purpose of confinement, except in circumstances where all the
following requirements are satisfied:
(1) The tethering is for a total of no more than seven hours within a
twenty-four-hour period, with a maximum of four hours at any one
interval and a minimum period of one hour between confinements.
(2) The tether is attached to the dog by a non-choke-type collar, swivels
at both ends and is attached to the stationary object by anchors,
latches or similar devices in a manner in which the dog is able to
move freely and prevents the tether from becoming entangled
around the dog or any object so as to limit the dog's freedom within
the tethered area or to prevent the dog, or any of its appendages,
from becoming entangled by the tether.
(3) The tether shall be of a type commonly used for the size of the dog
involved.
(4) The construction of the tether shall be of a lightweight, yet durable,
material, shall not exceed 20% of the animal's weight and may not
be thicker than 1/8 inch.
§ 21-35 AMUSEMENTS § 21-36
17:191
§ 21-37. Leaving animals outdoors.
(5) The tether must be a minimum of 15 linear feet in length, less than
six feet above the ground and shall remain tangle free.
(6) The tethered dog has easy access to potable drinking water, edible
food, dry ground and adequate shade and/or shelter within the
tethering area.
(7) The tethering area shall be clean, clear of obstructions and/or
debris and no less than 150 square feet per dog in total area.
(8) The dog, whether used for hunting, farming or breeding or is an
otherwise working dog, is regularly monitored while tethered for
the aforementioned period of time.
C. No dog shall be tethered by means of a choke-type, pinch-type, prongtype
or improperly fitting collar.
D. Chains shall be prohibited for use as a tethering device.
E. If there are multiple dogs, each dog shall be tethered separately and in
such a manner that the tethers shall not become entangled with each
other.
F. No dog shall be tethered within five feet of another person's property,
public thoroughfare and/or right-of-way.
G. No dog shall be tethered at a vacant structure or premises for any
purpose when it is not monitored by a competent adult who is present
at the property for the duration of such tethering.
H. Dogs that are not spayed or neutered shall not be tethered for any
period of time.
I. No dog under the age of one or under 20 pounds shall be tethered.
J. No dog that is sick or injured shall be tethered.
K. No dogs shall be tethered between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any animal outdoors and
unattended for a continuous period of time greater than 1/2 hour if the
National Weather Services has issued a weather alert or storm warning
or if the temperature during such period is either below 32° F. or above
85° F. The animal shall be considered outside regardless of access to an
outdoor doghouse or similar structure, unless such structure is a
properly functioning climate-controlled and weather-resistant
structure.
B. No animal shall be left outside during snowstorms, ice storms or
thunderstorms.
§ 21-36 TRENTON CODE § 21-38
17:192
§ 21-38. Collars.
§ 21-39. Prohibited activities and treatment.
§ 21-40. Outdoor animal enclosures.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collar an animal with a choke-type
collar, prong-type collar, pinch-type collar or rope.
B. The collar must be at least as large as the circumference of the animal's
neck plus one inch and cannot be constructed primarily of metal.
A. No owner, caretaker, guardian or handler shall withhold proper shelter,
light, space, protection from weather, veterinary care, and/or immune
care from any animal.
B. No owner, caretaker, guardian or handler shall fail to provide his or her
animal with sufficient edible food and potable drinking water on a daily
basis. Food and water must be in an animal food consumption or water
consumption type of container, feeder or waterer.
C. No animal shall be subjected to unnecessary suffering or cruelty, such
as subjecting the animal to prolonged confinement, fear, injury, pain or
physical abuse. Interaction with humans and other animals shall not be
reasonably withheld.
D. No animal shall be confined in a parked or standing vehicle or enclosed
trailer for a period of 15 or more minutes when the temperature during
such period is either below 32° F. or above 85° F.
A. Animals shall be provided access to an enclosure/structure which
protects them against inclement weather, is water resistant and keeps
them dry, provides shade from direct sunlight and allows them to
preserve a normal body temperature.
B. Animals shall not be housed on a temporary or permanent basis in any
enclosure/structure constructed of metal, unless adequately insulated
from inclement weather.
C. Outdoor animal enclosures, including pens, doghouses or other similar
structures, shall be soundly constructed, safely and properly positioned
on a raised platform and properly maintained. The top of the enclosure
shall be covered to provide the animal with shade and protection from
the elements. The floor of the enclosure shall be constructed in such a
manner that it protects the animal's feet and legs from injury.
D. Pet taxis, plastic carriers, boxes, vari-kennels or metal houses shall not
be acceptable as adequate outdoor enclosures.
E. Outside animal enclosures shall be no less than four feet in height, not
less than 64 feet in square footage and must allow for the animal to
freely turn around, stand, sit or lie in a normal position. The animal
must be able to lie down while fully extended without the animal's head,
§ 21-38 AMUSEMENTS § 21-40
17:193
§ 21-41. Enforcement.
§ 21-42. Notice of seizure and impoundment.
§ 21-43. Violations and penalties.
tail, legs, face or feet touching any side of the enclosure. The interior
height of the enclosure shall be at least six inches higher than the head
of the animal in the enclosure when it is at a normal standing position.
F. Outdoor animal enclosures shall contain bedding, such as straw or
other absorbent material, in a sufficient quantity to provide adequate
insulation for the structure. Bedding shall be maintained in a dry
condition and renewed or changed as necessary.
G. Outdoor animal enclosures shall be kept dry, clean and free of animal
waste.
A. In addition to imposing penalties set forth in this chapter, and
notwithstanding other seizure and impounding sections of the chapter,
any officer or agent authorized or empowered to enforce and perform
any duty under this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any
premises and seize for impounding any animal when such officer
reasonably believes that any provision of this article has been violated,
except upon the premises of the owner of the animal if the owner is
present and forbids the entry of the officer or agent; then a warrant
shall be issued according to law at the request of such officer or agent.
B. Prior to seizing any animal under this article, such officer or agent shall
provide written notice to the owner, either in person or by posting such
written notice upon the premises, of the nature of the violation and
such.
C. Notice must contain an order to bring the violation into compliance
within 24 hours of receipt of such notice.
A. If such animal has been seized for impounding pursuant to § 21-41, then
the officer or agent shall notify the Health Officer immediately that he/
she has seized and impounded the animal pursuant to § 21-41. If the
identity of the owner is not known, then the officer shall, through a
reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
animal seized and impounded pursuant to § 21-41. If its owner cannot
be identified within 14 days, then that animal shall be made available
for adoption.
B. Any owner of any animal removed under this article may gain
possession of the animal within 14 days upon an adequate showing to
the confiscating officer or agent that the violation has been brought into
compliance. Should an owner fail to adequately show that the violation
has been brought into compliance within 14 days, then said animal shall
be made available for adoption.
§ 21-40 TRENTON CODE § 21-43
17:194
A. The owner of the seized animal pursuant to § 21-42 who is found by
clear and convincing evidence to have violated this article, or any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or to have failed to comply with
a court's order, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000 per day of the violation, and each day's continuance of the
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
B. Any fines or penalties imposed under this article shall be in addition to
and not in lieu of any fines or penalties set forth in this chapter or
pursuant to any other applicable law.
§ 21-43 AMUSEMENTS § 21-43
17:195
Chapter 25
AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 146.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 197.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 213.
§ 21-43 TRENTON CODE § 21-43
25:196
ARTICLE I
General Auctioneers
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.1 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 25-1. License required.
Every general auctioneer shall obtain a license by filing an application as
provided by Chapter 146, Licensing, of the Code of the City of Trenton.
§ 25-2. Fee.
The fee for the license shall be $60 per year.
§ 25-3. Application information.26
Every licensed general auctioneer shall provide the information required by
N.J.S.A. 45:17-1 et seq. upon receipt by him/her of any personal property for
sale at auction.
§ 25-4. Bond.27
Every general auctioneer shall, before any license is issued to him, enter
into a bond with sureties sufficient to be approved by the City Attorney in
the sum of $5,000 and conditioned for the due observance of all ordinances
of the City of Trenton during the continuance of his license.
§ 25-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 25-1 AUCTIONEERS § 25-5
25:197

ARTICLE II
Jewelry Auctioneers
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 25-6. License required; fee.
Every jewelry auctioneer shall obtain a license by filing an application as
provided by this article. The fee for conducting each auction shall be $50.
A jewelry auctioneer's license shall be required for the sale at auction of
any platinum, gold, silver, plated ware, precious or semiprecious stones,
watches, or any other kind of jewelry, except that the provisions of this
article shall not apply to any person who shall have been engaged in the
retail jewelry business within the City of Trenton for at least three years
immediately preceding an auction sale which is held for the purpose of
going out of business, but in such case the auction sale shall not be carried
on or conducted for a period exceeding 15 days.
§ 25-7. Additional application information.
The application for a jewelry auctioneer's license shall, in addition to the
information required by Chapter 146, Licensing, of this Code, show that the
applicant has not been convicted of violating the laws of the State of New
Jersey or the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City of
Trenton relating to auctions and auctioneers or for fraud and deceit in the
conduct of auctions.
§ 25-8. Bond.28
Every jewelry auctioneer shall, before any license is issued to him, enter
into a bond with sureties sufficient to be approved by the City Attorney in
the sum of $5,000 and conditioned for the due observance of all ordinances
of the City of Trenton during the continuance of his license.
§ 25-9. Days and hours; daily report required.
All auctions shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays,
except that they shall not continue for more than 30 days in all from the
commencement of the sale. Sales shall be conducted only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. During the pendency of a sale the licensee
shall file a daily report with the City Clerk containing an itemized list of the
articles sold on the previous day. Failure to comply with this provision may
result in suspension of the sale pending compliance. No jewelry auctioneer
shall conduct any auction during the month of December.
§ 25-10. Truth in labeling.
Every article offered for sale at a jewelry auction shall have securely
attached a tag or label upon which shall be plainly written or printed in
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 25-6 AUCTIONEERS § 25-10
25:199
English a true and correct statement of the kind and quality of the metal of
which the article is made or composed and the percentage or carat of purity
of the metal. In case the articles are plated or overlaid, the tag or label shall
contain a true statement of the kind of plate and the percentage of purity
of the plating and the kind of material or metal covered. When precious
or semiprecious stones are offered for sale or sold the written statement
shall set forth the true name, weight, quality and color of the stones and
imitations shall be described as such. When watches and clocks are sold
the true name of the manufacturer shall be stated in writing, and no parts
of the movements or mechanism thereof shall be substituted or contain
false and misleading names or trademarks, neither shall secondhand or old
movements be offered for sale in new cases without a true statement to
that effect. Tags or labels shall remain securely attached to any articles of
merchandise and shall be delivered to the purchaser as a true and correct
description and representation of the article sold.
§ 25-11. Sales book.
At each jewelry auction there shall be kept and maintained a sales book
which must be signed by the purchaser of each article at the time of the
purchase and, before any other article shall be exposed for sale, opposite
a description of the article sold which shall conform to the description on
the tag or label required by § 25-10 of this article. Failure to keep and
maintain such sales book shall be sufficient cause for immediate revocation
of the license. Sales books shall be open and available for inspection during
business hours.
§ 25-12. Misleading practices.
No person shall act or employ another to act as a by-bidder or what is
commonly known as a "capper" or "booster" at any auction sale or to make
or accept any false or misleading bid or pretend to buy or sell any article
sold or offered for sale at any auction.
§ 25-13. Return of sale proceeds.
The jewelry auctioneer shall retain in his/her possession proceeds of any
sale for at least 48 hours. If any purchase shall within 48 hours make a claim
against the licensee upon the ground that the article or thing sold to him/
her at auction was not as represented and shall offer to return the article
or thing purchased, then the licensee shall either return the proceeds of the
sale or deposit them with the Police Director, provided that if the purchaser
does not commence an action within 15 days, the proceeds so deposited
shall be returned to the licensee. This section shall not be construed to
prevent an action on the bond by the purchaser.
§ 25-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 25-10 TRENTON CODE § 25-14
25:200
Chapter 38
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 150.
§ 38-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NOXIOUS PLANT — Any plant likely to have an adverse effect on the
health or comfort of human beings, including but not limited to ragweed,
goldenrod, poison oak, poison ivy and sumac (poisonous and nonpoisonous).
§ 38-2. Trimming of brush and hedges near intersections.
The owner or tenant of lands lying within the City of Trenton shall be
required to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10
feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways
cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet, as deemed necessary and
expedient for the preservation of public safety after a determination by
the Director of the Division of Inspections or the Police Director, or any
subordinates acting under their direction.
§ 38-3. Growth of noxious plants prohibited.
The growth or existence of any noxious plant in a public or private place
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to public health. No
owner, occupant or other person having control over any parcel of land shall
cause or permit noxious plants to grow thereon.
§ 38-4. Notice to remove.
After such determination, a written notice to remove shall be forwarded
to the owner or tenant of the lands, and (s)heshall comply in accordance
therewith within 10 days after its receipt. The notice shall contain a
description of the property affected, sufficiently definite in terms to identify
it, and shall set forth that unless such brush, hedges and other plant life are
cut or noxious plants removed, the City shall cut or cause the same to be
cut pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26.
§ 38-5. Service of notice.
A notice under this chapter may be served on the owner or tenant residing
within the City in person or by leaving it at his/her usual place of residence
or with a member of his/her family above the age of 14 years. If an owner
or tenant shall not reside within the City, the notice may be served on him/
§ 25-14 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 38-5
38:201
her personally or it may be mailed to his/her last known post office address,
or it may be served on the agent of the owner or tenant in charge of the
property. Notice to an infant owner or tenant, or owner or tenant of unsound
mind, shall be served on his/her guardian. When any property is held in
trust, service of notice shall made on the trustee. When any property is held
by two tenants by the entirety, or two or more as joint tenants or tenants in
common, service on one shall be deemed as notice to all. If for any reason
notice cannot be served as directed above, it shall be published at least once
in any newspaper circulating in the City, and publication of the notice shall
have the same effect as if served in any other manner.
§ 38-6. Failure to comply; removal by City.
If an owner or tenant shall neglect, after notice is given, to cut such brush,
hedges or other plant life or remove such noxious plants, and the same is
cut or removed under the direction of an officer of the City, such officer
shall certify the cost thereof to the City Council, which shall examine the
certificate and if found correct shall cause the cost to be charged against
the lands, or in the event such cost is excessive, shall cause a reasonable
cost to be charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien on the lands and shall be added to and become and form a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied on the lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and be collected and enforced
in the same manner as taxes.
§ 38-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 42
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 46.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 97.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 42-1. Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
A. Establishment; composition. There is hereby established a State
Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency to be known as the
Division of Technical Services, consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official, Elevator Subcode
Official and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as
the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
§ 38-5 TRENTON CODE § 42-1
38:202
§ 42-2. Appeal from determination of inspectors.
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Qualifications of members. Each official position created in Subsection
A shall be filled by a person qualified for such position pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, inclusive.
Additionally, all provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:23, inclusive, shall be in effect.
C. One location. The public shall have the right to do business with the
enforcing agency at one office location, except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
D. Conflict of interest of enforcement officials. No personnel with the
Division of Technical Services to whom complete or partial enforcement
responsibilities have been delegated shall engage directly or indirectly
in the furnishing of any labor, materials or supplies, or the preparation
of plans or specification, or in any other way be interested in any
enterprise dealing with the construction of buildings or other
operations within his/her official jurisdiction, provided that this
restriction shall not prohibit any such person from owning property or
engaging in any activities aforesaid which are of a noncommercial
nature and are for the benefit of himself/herself personally or his/her
immediate family, in which case it shall be the obligation of such person
to disqualify himself/herself from exercising any or all of his/her
enforcement authority or power with regard to any such permissible
activity. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit such
enforcement officials from engaging in activities of any nature beyond
the jurisdiction of the City of Trenton, Division of Technical Services, if
such activities are otherwise permissible under appropriate state law
and local ordinance.
E. Violations and penalties. Any violations of the sections contained in this
chapter shall be punishable in the same manner and subject to the same
penalties as are presently provided; as detailed in those subchapters of
the Uniform Construction Code, State of New Jersey that apply; or
those actions or penalties as stipulated Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty of Code of the City of Trenton.
A. Any person aggrieved by an adverse decision with regard to the
application or interpretation of the State Uniform Construction Code or
this chapter, or any other provisions of state or local law which directly
affects the performance or progress of any work or project within the
jurisdiction of the Construction Official, the aggrieved party shall be
entitled to file a notice of appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of
the City in the manner provided by the Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.40; N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.35 through 5:23-2.37.
§ 42-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-2
38:203
§ 42-3. Administration.
B. A hearing fee for appeals made to the Construction Board of Appeals
shall be as set forth in § 42-11.
A. General. The provisions of this section shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures. The construction, alteration, repair,
addition or removal of all structures shall comply with this chapter.
B. Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing as of
November 3, 1994, or for which it has been heretofore approved shall
be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically
covered in this chapter or as deemed necessary by the code official for
the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.
C. Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or
orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
D. Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under
this chapter.
E. Permit application. An application shall be submitted to the code official
for the following activities, and these activities shall not commence
without a permit being issued:
(1) Construct or alter a structure.
(2) Construct an addition.
(3) Demolish or move a structure.
(4) Make a change of occupancy.
(5) Install or alter any equipment which is regulated by this chapter.
(6) Move a lot line which affects an existing structure.
F. Repairs. Application or notice to the code official is not required for
ordinary repairs to structures. Such repairs shall not include the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or
cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, the removal or
change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of parts of a
structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs
include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste,
vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work
affecting public health or general safety.
G. Form of application. The application for a permit shall be submitted in
such written form as the code official prescribes and shall be
accompanied by the required fee.
§ 42-2 TRENTON CODE § 42-3
38:204
H. Submission of construction documents. The application for a permit
shall be accompanied by not less than two sets of construction
documents. The code official is permitted to waive the requirements for
filing construction documents when the scope of the work is of a minor
nature. When the quality of the materials is essential for conformity to
this chapter information shall be given to establish such quality, and
this code shall not be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent used as
a substitute for specific information.
I. Right of entry.
(1) The code official shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable
time any structure or premises for which a permit has been issued
by has not received a certificate of occupancy.
(2) For all other structures or premises, when the code official has
reasonable cause to believe that a code violation exists, the code
official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect. Prior to entering into a space not
otherwise open to the general public, the code official shall make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge
or control of the structure or premises, present proper
identification and request entry. If the requested entry is refused or
not obtained, the code official shall pursue recourse as provided by
law.
J. Preparation of construction documents. The construction documents
for new construction, alteration, repair, expansion, addition or
modification for buildings or structures shall be prepared by a
registered design professional. The appropriate code official is
permitted to waive the requirements for filing construction documents
when the scope of the work is of a minor nature. All construction
documents required for a building permit application shall be prepared
by a registered design professional consistent with the professional
registration laws of the state in which the project is to be constructed.
The construction documents shall include the name and address of the
registered design professional and shall be signed, sealed and dated by
the registered design professional in accordance with the professional
registrations laws of the state in which the project is to be constructed.
The construction documents shall include the name and address of the
registered design professional and shall be signed, sealed and dated by
the registered design professional in accordance with the professional
registrations laws of the state in which the project is to be constructed.
K. Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy indicating
completion of the work for which a permit was issued shall be obtained
prior to any occupancy of a structure.
L. Temporary occupancy. Upon the request of the holder of a permit, a
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued before the
completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such
§ 42-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-3
38:205
portion or portions shall be occupied safely prior to full completion of
the structure without endangering life or public welfare.
M. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(1) Upon written request from the owner of an existing structure, the
code official shall issue a certificate of occupancy, provided that
there are not violations of law or orders of the code official pending,
and it is established after inspection and investigation that the
alleged occupancy of the structure has heretofore existed.
(2) The code official shall not require the removal, alteration or
abandonment of, or prevent the continuance of the occupancy of a
lawfully existing structure, unless such use is deemed to endanger
public safety and welfare.
N. Unsafe structures and equipment.
(1) Conditions. All structures or existing equipment which are or
hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of
inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and
ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise
dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve
illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be
deemed an unsafe condition. All unsafe structures shall be taken
down and removed or made safe, as the code official deems
necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure
that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
(2) Record. The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an
unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the
structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
(3) Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the code official shall serve
upon the owner, agent or person in control of the structure a
written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and
specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate
the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be
demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the
person thus notified to declare immediately to the code official
acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.
(4) Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a
copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally or sent by
certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last
known address with the return receipt requested. If the certified or
registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such
notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the
person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of
notice upon the owner.
§ 42-3 TRENTON CODE § 42-3
38:206
(5) Restoration. The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe
by the code official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition.
To the extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a
change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure,
such repairs, alterations, additions or change of occupancy shall
comply.
(6) Disregard of notice. Upon refusal or neglect of the person served
with an unsafe notice to comply with the requirements of the order
to abate the unsafe condition, the legal counsel of the jurisdiction
shall be advised of all the facts in order to pursue recourse
provided by law.
O. Imminent danger.
(1) When, in the opinion of the construction official, there is imminent
danger of failure or collapse of a building, structure or any part
thereof which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the
building or structure, the Construction Official shall order and
require the occupant to vacate the same forthwith. The
Construction Official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to
such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure is
Unsafe and its Occupancy has been Prohibited by the Construction
Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of
demolishing the structure.
(2) When, in the opinion of the Construction Official, there is imminent
danger due to an unsafe condition, the Construction Official shall
cause the necessary work to be done to render such structure
temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted.
(3) When necessary for the public safety, the Construction Official shall
temporarily close structures and close or order to be closed
sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe
structures and prohibit the same from being used.
(4) The Construction Official shall employ the necessary labor and
materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as
possible.
(5) Costs incurred in the performance of the emergency work shall be
placed as a lien on such property.
(6) Equipment deemed unsafe by the Construction Official shall not be
operated after the date stated in the notice unless the required
repairs or changes have been made and the equipment has been
approved, or unless an extension of time has been secured from the
Construction Official in writing.
§ 42-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-3
38:207
§ 42-4. Registration of builders and contractors.
(7) In the case of any emergency, the Construction Official shall have
the authority to seal out of service immediately any unsafe device
or equipment regulated by this chapter.
(8) Any device or equipment sealed out of service by the Construction
Official shall be plainly marked with a sign or tag indicating the
reason for such sealing. The sign or tag shall not be tampered with,
defaced or removed except by the Construction Official.
A. Registration required. All persons performing work under the
provisions of this chapter which does not come within any exceptions
set forth herein shall be required to register prior to the issuance of any
permit for such work.
B. Registration information. Registration shall be made with the
Construction Official on forms furnished by him/her. The registrant
shall supply the following information, in addition to such other data as
the Construction Official may require:
(1) The name and address of the registrant; if the registrant is a
partnership, the names and addresses of all its members; if the
registrant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers,
directors and principal stockholders holding in excess of 10% of the
outstanding shares of common stock.
(2) The type or types of work customarily performed by the registrant.
(3) A statement as to whether the registrant has ever been convicted of
violating a Building Code, and if so, the date and place of
conviction, the nature of the violation and the punishment imposed
therefor.
(4) Appropriate information as to the registrant's skill, experience and
business responsibility, including the names and addresses of at
least two persons who are familiar with the same.
(5) A certificate showing that the applicant carries public liability and
workers' compensation insurance for all work of the type to be
done under a building permit.
C. Registration fee; expiration. The fee for registration shall be as set forth
in § 42-12I. The registration shall be in effect for one full year from the
date of issuance or renewal.
D. Suspension and revocation. The Construction Official may suspend or
revoke a registration in any case where the registrant has been guilty of
repeated or continued violations of the State Uniform Construction
Code or this chapter, has failed to complete work or perform under a
contract, has deviated from work specifications made a part of a
contract, or has shown a lack of financial responsibility by failing to pay
§ 42-3 TRENTON CODE § 42-4
38:208
§ 42-5. Sidewalks.
suppliers, subcontractors or creditors. The person whose registration
is proposed to be suspended or revoked shall be afforded notice, an
opportunity to be heard and an opportunity to appeal in the same
manner as provided in Chapter 142, Licensing, for the suspension and
revocation of licenses. Any person whose registration is revoked shall
not be reregistered. Suspension or revocation of a registration shall be
in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed for a violation of
this chapter.
E. By whom work done.
(1) All work done under the provisions of this chapter for which a
construction permit is required is to be performed by a registered
builder or contractor, his/her agents or employees.
(2) This section shall not apply to work performed by any owner on a
single-family dwelling occupied by himself/herself which does not
entail the employment of others.
A. Porch and step encroachments.
(1) Steps leading to any stoop or porch platform may approach either
from the front, at right angles to the street line or from the side,
parallel to the street line. Where the steps approach from the front
or at right angles to the street line the combined projection beyond
the street line, including both platform and steps, shall not exceed
5/12 of the total width of the sidewalk, and the width of such
platform and steps shall not be greater than 1/2 of the front width
of the building. Where the steps approach from the side or parallel
to the street line the steps and porch platform shall not extend
more than four feet beyond the street line, and the width of the
platform, measured parallel with the street, shall not be greater
than 1/2 of the front width of the building.
(2) If it is desired to have the steps approach from the front instead of
from the side, this may be permitted, provided that no part of the
construction extends more than four feet beyond the street line and
the overall width measured along the street is not greater than
would be permitted by the hereinabove provisions applying to steps
approaching from the side or parallel with the street.
(3) No covered porch, stoop or steps projecting beyond the street line
shall be permitted.
B. Minimum sidewalk width. In no case shall any porch, stoop, steps or
other projection, appendage or building addition be constructed so as
to leave less than four feet of clear and unobstructed sidewalk, provided
that, with any particular existing sidewalk or porch, if the existing
physical circumstance prevents full compliance with this provision it
shall be within the discretion of the Construction Official to prescribe
§ 42-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-5
38:209
§ 42-6. Securing of vacant buildings.
Whenever in accordance with the Building and Housing Codes of the City
of Trenton, including such standard, state-wide codes as shall be adopted
by the City, it shall be required to secure windows, doorways and other
entrances to buildings, residential, commercial or otherwise, by the use of
boards or other temporary closing materials, it shall be the responsibility
of the owner of such property, and of his/her agents for the custody and
special dimensions, boundaries or other limitations for such porch
construction consistent with the public safety and welfare.
C. Encroachments; business zone.
(1) Prohibited. No porch, stoop or steps, decks, projection, appendage
or addition to a building shall be constructed in a manner which
encroaches upon any part of a public sidewalk in the Downtown
Business A Zone, regardless of whether the encroachment would
leave a remaining width of four feet or more, as required in other
zones.
(2) Exception; variance. Notwithstanding any other provisions or
regulation within the jurisdiction of the City, a structure may be
constructed in such a manner as to occupy or extend from an
existing or proposed structure lawfully used for a business,
commercial or industrial purpose into or over a portion of a public
sidewalk, street or alley upon application to the City Council for a
variance and permit for such purposes. Variances shall be granted
by resolution of City Council following a public hearing on such
schedule and notice as shall be determined by the City Council to
be appropriate, only upon an affirmative finding that the structure
in question:
(a) Would not, by virtue of its physical characteristics and related
activities be substantially detrimental to the aesthetics and
other characteristics of the neighborhood.
(b) Complies with all other requirements of the construction code
and Chapter 315, Zoning and Land Use Procedures.
(c) Would leave sufficient sidewalk or right-of-way area remaining
for the free flow of pedestrian traffic.
(d) Would serve a specific public convenience or interest, which
need not be restricted to the existing activity within the main
structure, which is identified by the City Council.
(e) Has had its location approved by the director of traffic and
parking as to vehicular traffic safety concerns.
D. Applicability of section. This section shall apply to porches, stoops,
steps, decks, projections, appendages and/or additions to a building.
§ 42-5 TRENTON CODE § 42-6
38:210
management of such property, to maintain such property in full compliance
with such codes and to paint such materials, using colors matching the color
of the trim of the rest of the building.
§ 42-7. Demolition.
A. Compliance with specifications; waiver. Any person to whom or for
which a demolition permit has been issued for the demolition of any
structure shall comply with the provisions of this section. Where
conditions are such that the specifications cannot fully be compiled
with, a waiver of any sections of these specifications shall be granted by
the Construction Official. These specifications, or sections thereof, may
be waived for those projects where there is an approved site plan
prepared by a licensed engineer or a sealed report on file for that site.
B. Specifications.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to visibly inspect the
site prior to submittal of a bid to demolish.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to file all the
necessary applications and obtain all required permits before
commencement of demolition operations.
(3) Prior to the issuance of a permit to demolish, the contractor shall
provide for the disconnection and termination of all water, sewer,
gas, electric and telephone service facilities that are connected to
the building, in conformance with the requirements of the City and
the utility companies owning or controlling them. The contractor
shall notify the City and utility companies of the time any such
disconnections need be made, and shall perform the work
according to their standard practices and requirements and under
their supervision, or arrange for its performance by their forces.
The cost of any and all such utility work, including charges, if any,
which may be made by the City or governmentally owned utility
companies, shall be borne by the demolition contractor. NOTE: The
contractor shall seal all sewer lines at the curb prior to the
commencement of demolition operations.
(4) It shall be the sole responsibility of the demolition contractor to
remove and dispose of all demolition debris, rubble, building
materials, contents of the building and other debris not associated
with the demolition in conformance with the County of Mercer
Master Plan, as well as all applicable state and federal regulations,
with regard to waste removal and disposal.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the demolition contractor to obtain
all prior approvals from the various City and state agencies prior to
the issuance of a demolition permit and the commencement of
demolition operations.
§ 42-6 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-7
38:211
(6) All bids shall be accompanied by a copy of the Bidders Certificate of
Public Conveyance and Necessity issued by the New Jersey Board
of Public Utility Commissioners, Department of Environmental
Protection certificate number.
(7) All backfilling shall be made with suitable on-site or imported
materials which are not too wet for proper placement. Filling
materials shall be free from vegetation, masses of roots or
individual roots, wood, mulch, blacktop paving materials or other
organic or undesirable matter of any nature. Inert material, such as
brick, broken concrete or plaster, shall be allowed only by direction
of the Construction Official, by approved site plan or a report
prepared by a licensed engineer.
(8) Basement fills shall be placed and compacted. The fill shall be
placed in layers not more than six inches thick, loose measurement,
and mechanically compacted.
(9) The site shall be graded so as to drain to the curb and away from
adjacent properties, unless noted otherwise on approved plans or
specially prepared for that project.
(10) All walls, foundations, footings, concrete pads, slabs and the like
shall be demolished to a depth of not less than three feet below
finished grade, or as directed by the Construction Official.
(11) All concrete floors, slabs or similar constructions that are not
ordered removed shall be broken sufficiently to prevent the
accumulation or holding of any water.
(12) All underground tanks and piping shall be removed from the site, in
compliance with federal, state and City regulations.
(13) Any sidewalks damaged or removed during the demolition shall be
replaced with sidewalks that comply with specifications of the
Department of Public Works.
(14) The Construction Official shall have the authority to modify any one
or more of the above standards if, in his/her judgment, the
applicability of the particular standard would not be beneficial to
the safety and integrity of any adjoining structures and if relaxation
of the standards would not adversely affect the same.
C. Permits. All demolition permits shall specify the quantity of materials to
be recycled, where they will be taken and how they will be handled.
D. Bonds.
(1) Demolition of a building. Each applicant for a permit to demolish
any building shall present the following documents as evidence of
responsibility for the proper and thorough completion of such
projects:
§ 42-7 TRENTON CODE § 42-7
38:212
§ 42-8. Diligent prosecution of work under permit.
(a) A certificate of public liability in amounts not less than $100
per individual and $500 per occurrence.
(b) If the application is for demolition work having an estimated
cost of $5,000 or more, a performance bond in an amount
equal to 100% of the true cost of demolition work specified in
the permit application is required, whenever the work is to be
completed by a contractor on behalf of the owner of the subject
property, guaranteeing the completion of such project as
specified, at no additional cost to the owner or other person for
whom the work is to be performed. The cost estimate
submitted with the permit application shall be considered by
the Building Inspector as presumptive evidence of the true cost
of the project in determining the amount of the bond, provided
that the Building Inspector shall not be bound by such
estimates and, in his/her discretion, upon the basis of
substantial and competent information, may establish a
different true cost for the purposes of fixing the bond amount.
(2) Relocation of a building. If the application is for removal of a
building or structure from one lot to another, a performance bond
equal to 100% of the estimated cost of work to be done shall be
filed with the Construction Official. This bond shall cover the cost
to relocate, as well as to complete the work and restore the site.
The bond will protect and indemnify the City against loss or
damage. All work involved to move or relocate a building shall be
performed by a registered contractor.
A. Responsibility of permittee. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, whenever a construction permit shall be issued by the City for
the performance of any work within the City, the recipient thereof, or
the principal officers or agents of any corporate entity to whom such a
permit is issued, shall be responsible for the reasonable, continuous
and diligent prosecution of the work authorized thereunder. All work
shall be conducted, installed and completed in a workmanlike and
acceptable manner so as to secure the results as intended by the Code.
[Amended 11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-72]
B. Discontinuation of or delay in construction.
(1) No person shall abandon or otherwise discontinue work
commenced under a construction permit, allow the progress on
such project to stop or to otherwise abandon such project, within
the meaning of this chapter, without the prior written approval of
the Construction Official.
(2) Work or progress on a project shall be presumed to be stopped,
abandoned or otherwise delayed in violation of this chapter if
reasonable and necessary steps toward the completion thereof are
§ 42-7 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-8
38:213
§ 42-9. Removal of tanks at automobile service stations.
Owners of automobile service station facilities which cease operation for
more than one year shall be required to removal all underground tanks used
for the storage of gasoline, oil and other combustible liquids.
§ 42-10. Electrical subcode.
not taken for a period in excess of 20 calendar days without the
prior written approval of the Construction Official.
C. Approval of Construction Code Official. The Construction Official shall
grant approval for any such stoppage for good cause shown, including
delays or interference arising from labor disputes, supply interruption
inclement weather or other circumstances beyond the control of the
applicant. The Construction Official shall be entitled to grant an
applicant one or more periods of extension of not more than 20 days
each for good cause shown if, in doing so, the public health, safety and
welfare are not jeopardized.
A. Permit required; exceptions. No electrical or wiring for light, power or
communication shall be installed in a building or structure, nor shall an
alteration or extension of existing systems be made until a permit has
been issued therefor as provided for in this code, except in the case of a
system designed for the following purposes or which is by or for the
following agencies:
(1) Minor repair work, such as the replacement of lamps, receptacles,
switches, fuses and fixtures.
(2) The connection of approved portable electrical appliances to
suitable permanently installed receptacles.
(3) Any work involved in the testing, servicing or repairing of electrical
equipment or apparatus, provided that this exemption shall not
include permanent wiring.
(4) Mines, ships, railway cars or automotive equipment.
(5) Municipal plants or public utilities operating under the authority
granted by the State of New Jersey for the generation, control or
distribution of electrical energy.
(6) A public utility operating under due authority granted by the State
of New Jersey in the furnishing of communication or signal service,
or both, to a public utility or to the public as an integral part of a
communication or signal system.
(7) A railway utility in the exercise of its functions as a utility and
located in or on buildings or premises used exclusively by such
agency.
§ 42-8 TRENTON CODE § 42-10
38:214
(8) Commercial radio and television transmission equipment;
provided, however, that electrical equipment and construction used
for radio transmission in amateur stations and outdoor receiving
materials more than 20 feet in height shall not be exempt.
(9) Federal construction or construction by any branch of the federal
government.
B. Heating systems. In addition to the requirements of the Electrical Code
for heating systems, a clearly identified heating equipment disconnect
switch for the wiring and controls shall be installed in a readily
acceptable location at the entrance to the area in which the heater is
located.
C. Emergency lighting in multifamily dwellings. In every structure
designated by the laws of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of the
City to be a multifamily residential dwelling of four or more stories,
there shall be provided for every stairway and elevator a means of
emergency reserve lighting sufficient to operate and to provide light in
the event of the cessation of the normal electric supply. This provision
shall apply both to new construction and existing buildings.
D. Unsafe conditions. In cases of emergency, where necessary for safety to
person or property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with
the work of the fire division, the electrical subcode official shall have
the power to disconnect or order the disconnection immediately of any
electrical service.
E. Inspection required. No person shall put into operation any electrical
wiring or fixed appliance unless it has first been inspected and a
certificate of approval issued.
F. Inspection not required. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
apply to installation made by or for electrical and communication
utilities to installations and maintenance made in commercial or
industrial establishments by their own maintenance employees, when
periodic inspection is made thereof by established inspection agencies.
Nor will any of the provisions herein contained be deemed to apply to
installations which come under the jurisdiction of the factory mutual
inspection department; to installations by or on behalf of the state or
federal government, or to installations of railroad companies which are
certified by the electrical engineer in charge of construction.
G. Removal of unused poles and wiring. It shall be the duty of the
Electrical Subcode Official to have all dead, unused poles, electric
service and apparatus on the inside and outside of a building, in streets
or alleys to be removed at the expense of the owner or owners, or their
agent, after 10 days of written notice to such owners to remove same.
29
§ 42-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-11
38:215
§ 42-11. Hearing fees.30
The hearing fee for appeals to the Construction Board of Appeals shall be
$250.
§ 42-12. Permit fees.
A. Construction fees.
(1) Fees for new construction and additions shall be based upon the
volume of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No.
09-0331; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-4332]
(a) For new construction for Use Groups B, E, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4,
I-1, I-2, I-3, M, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, T and U, the fee shall be
$0.054 per cubic foot of volume; and
(b) For new construction for Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1,
F-2, S-1 and S-2, the fee shall be $0.030 per cubic foot of
volume.
(2) Other work.
(a) For all other work, fees shall be as based on estimated cost as
follows: [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03;
10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
$50,000 or less $40 per $1,000
$50,001 to $100,000 $37 per $1,000
$100,001 and above $30 per $1,000
(b) For the purpose of determining estimated cost of the work, the
applicant shall submit such cost data as may be available as
produced by the architect or engineer of record, by a
recognized estimating firm or by the contract. The
Construction Official shall make the final decision regarding
estimated cost.
29.Editor's Note: Original Section 10-11, Plumbing Subcode, which immediately followed this
section, and dealt with the licensing of plumbers, was reepealed 2-5-2004 by Ord. No.
04-6.
30.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 09-03, adopted 2-5-2009, provided that all fees contained in
Ch. 42 are hereby increased by 75%, rounded to the next highest dollar, and further
provided that the increase shall not apply to the fees pertaining to elevators in § 42-12G.
31.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all fees contained in Ch. 42 are hereby
increased by 75%, rounded to the next highest dollar, and further provided that the
increase shall not apply to the fees pertaining to elevators in § 42-12G.
32.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that a twenty-five-percent plan review fee,
computed as a percentage of the estimated fee for a construction permit, shall be paid at
the time of submission of an application for a permit (See N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)1 and
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(b)1.); that there shall be an additional fee of $60 per hour for review of
any amendment or change to a plan that has already been released (See N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(b)4 and N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(b)5.); and that such increases shall not apply to the
fees listed in § 42-12G pertaining to elevators.
§ 42-11 TRENTON CODE § 42-12
38:216
(c) The minimum fee for a permit for alteration, renovation and
minor work shall be $35. [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No.
09-03]
(3) For additions, the fee shall be computed on the same basis as for
new construction for the added portion.
(4) For a combination of renovations and additions, the fee shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately.
(5) For modular homes, the fee shall be a flat rate of $503 plus $0.054
per cubic foot for foundations and attached garages. [Amended
2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
B. Plumbing fixtures and equipment. [Amended 9-5-2002 by Ord. No.
02-67; 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No.
13-43]
(1) For all fixtures and appliances, except as listed below, the fee shall
be $53 for the first three fixtures. Thereafter, each additional
fixture shall be $25 for residential uses and $35 for commercial
uses, except for water heaters, which shall be $80 for residential
uses and $100 for commercial uses ($25 for new homes).
(2) For active solar systems, backflow preventers, gas piping, grease
traps, hot water boilers (excluding those for domestic water
heating), interceptors and fuel oil piping, oil separators,
refrigeration units, sewer pumps, steam boilers, utility service
connections, LP gas tanks and water-cooled air-conditioning units,
the fee shall be $114 per special device. There shall be no
inspection fee for gas service entrances.
C. Electrical fixtures and devices.
(1) For one to 20 receptacles or fixtures, the fee shall be $63, and $10
for each additional 20 receptacles or fixtures. For the purpose of
computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall include lighting
outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience
receptacles or similar fixtures and motors or devices of one
horsepower or one kilowatt or less. [Amended 9-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-67; 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 10-17-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-43]
(2) For each motor or electrical device: [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-03; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
(a) Greater than one horsepower and less than or equal to 10
horsepower, and for transformers and generators greater than
one kilowatt and less than or equal to 10 kilowatts: $25.
(b) Greater than 10 horsepower and less than or equal to 50
horsepower, for each service panel, service entrance or
subpanel less than or equal to 200 amperes, and for all
§ 42-12 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-12
38:217
transformers and generators greater than 10 kilowatts and
less than or equal to 45 kilowatts: $90.
(c) Greater than 50 horsepower and less than or equal to 100
horsepower, for each service panel, service entrance or
subpanel greater than 200 amperes and less than or equal to
1,000 amperes, and for each transformer or generator greater
than 45 kilowatts and less than or equal to 112.5 kilowatts:
$175.
(d) Greater than 100 horsepower, for each service panel, service
entrance or subpanel greater than 1,000 amperes, and for each
transformer or generator greater than 112.5 kilowatts: $820.
(3) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors, except those in
plug-in appliances, shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
D. Fire protection and hazardous equipment.
(1) Detectors.
(a) For detectors (smoke, heat and sprinkler heads), the fees shall
be as follows: [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03;
10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
Heads or Detectors Fee
20 or fewer $120
21 to 100 $250
101 to 200 $450
201 to 400 $1,100
401 to 999 $1,550
1,000 to 1,999 $2,625
2,000 to 2,999 $4,375
3,000 or greater $5,250
(b) In computing these fees, the number of each shall be counted
separately, and two separate fees shall be charged.
(2) For each standpipe: $401. [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No.
09-03]
(3) For each independent pre-engineered system: $161. [Amended
2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
(4) For each gas or oil fired appliance that is not connected to the
plumbing system: $81. [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
§ 42-12 TRENTON CODE § 42-12
38:218
(5) For each kitchen exhaust system: $81. [Amended 2-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-03]
(6) For incinerator: $365.
(7) For each crematorium: $365.
(8) For fire pump installation, the fee shall be as set forth in Subsection
A(2)(a) of this § 42-12.
E. Other permits.
(1) For a demolition permit for Use Group R-3: [Amended 2-5-2009
by Ord. No. 09-03; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
(a) For a structure of less than 5,000 square feet and less than 30
feet in height for one- or two-family residences: $132.
(b) For all other use groups: $242.
(2) For a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot
to another or to a new location on the same lot, the fee shall be $24
per $1,000 of estimated cost of the work. For new foundation
placement in a completed condition in the new location, the fee
shall be based on the cubic content.
(3) For a permit to construct a sign, the fee shall be $2.42 per square
foot of surface area of the sign, computed on one side only for
double-faced signs. [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03;
10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
(4) The minimum fee shall be: $81. [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No.
09-03]
F. Certificates and other fees.
(1) For certificate of occupancy.
(a) For all use groups, except those listed below, the fee shall be
10% of the new construction permit fee that would be charged
pursuant to these regulations. The minimum fee shall be $120.
For Use Group R-2 there will be an additional charge of $25
per unit.
(b) For Use Group R-3 of less than 5,000 square feet in area and
less than 30 feet in height, the fee shall be 10% of the new
construction permit fee that would be charged pursuant to
these regulations. The minimum fee shall be $65.
(c) For a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change of
use group, the fee shall be $174. For Use Group R-2, there will
be an additional charge of $25 per unit.
§ 42-12 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-12
38:219
(2) For certificate of continued occupancy, the fee shall be $120. For
Use Group R-2, there will be an additional charge of $25 per unit.
(3) The fee for the renewal of a temporary certificate of occupancy
shall be $30 each time that it is renewed. There shall be no fee for
the initial issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 9-5-2002 by Ord. No. 02-67]
(4) For plan review of a building for compliance under the alternate
systems and nondepletable energy source provisions of the energy
subcode, for one- and two-family homes (Use Group R-3), and for
light commercial structures which have the indoor temperature
controlled from a single point, the fee shall be $274. For all other
structures, the fee shall be $1,369.
(5) For application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.10, the fee shall be:
(a) Class I structures: $549.
(b) Class II and III structures: $120.
(6) For resubmission of an application for a variation:
(a) Class I structures: $229.
(b) Class II and III structures: $65.
(7) For cross connections and backflow preventers subject to testing
and which require reinspection every 12 months, the fees shall be:
(a) For each device when tested annually: $46.
(b) For each device when broken down tested annually: $20.
(8) For asbestos hazard abatement projects and the certificate of
occupancy, the fee shall be a flat fee schedule: [Amended
2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
(a) An administrative fee for each construction permit issued for
an asbestos hazard abatement project: $100.
(b) An administrative fee for each certificate of occupancy issued
following the successful completion of an asbestos hazard
abatement project: $20.
G. Elevators.
(1) For witnessing acceptance tests and performing inspections, the
fees shall be:
(a) For elevator devices in structures not in Use Groups R-3 or R-4
or in an exempted Use Group R-2 structure, the fee shall be as
follows:
§ 42-12 TRENTON CODE § 42-12
38:220
Structure Fee
Traction and winding drum elevators
One to 10 floors $243.00
Over 10 floors $405.00
Hydraulic elevators $216.00
Roped hydraulic elevators $243.00
Escalators, moving walks $216.00
Dumbwaiters $54.00
Stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical
wheelchair lifts and manlifts
$54.00
(b) For devices equipped with the following features, the
additional fees shall be as follows:
Feature Fee
Oil buffers, charge per oil buffer $43.00
Counterweight governor and safeties $108.00
Auxiliary power generator $81.00
(c) For elevator devices in structures in Use Group R-3 or Use
Group R-4: $162.
(d) For witnessing acceptance tests of, and performing inspection
of, alterations: $54.
(2) For routine and periodic tests and inspections for elevator devices
in structures not in Use Groups R-3 or R-4 or otherwise exempt
devices in Use Group R-2 structures, the fees shall be as follows:
(a) For the six-month routine inspection of elevator devices the fee
shall be:
Device Fee
Traction and winding drum elevators
1 to 10 floors $151.00
Over 10 floors $194.00
Hydraulic elevators $106.00
Roped hydraulic elevators $151.00
Escalators, moving walks $151.00
(b) For the one-year periodic inspection and witnessing of tests of
elevator devices, which shall include a six-month routine
inspection, the fee shall be:
§ 42-12 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-12
38:221
Device Fee
Traction and winding drum elevators
1 to 10 floors $216.00
Over 10 floors $259.00
Hydraulic elevators $162.00
Escalators, moving walks $320.00
Dumbwaiters $86.00
Manlifts, stairway chairlifts, inclined and
vertical wheelchair lifts
$130.00
(c) For the yearly periodic inspection of elevator devices equipped
with the following features, the additional fees shall be:
Device Fee
Oil buffers, charge per oil buffer $43.00
Counterweight governor and safeties $86.00
Auxiliary power generator $54.00
(d) For the three-year or five-year inspection of elevator devices
the fee shall be as follows:
[1] Traction and winding drum elevators, five-year inspection:
[a] One to 10 floors: $367.
[b] Over 10 floors: $410.
[2] Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators:
[a] Three-year inspection: $270.
[b] Five-year inspection: $162.
(3) The fee for inspection of elevators used for construction shall be as
follows:
(a) Witnessing acceptance and test:
[1] Traction elevator:
[a] One to 10 floors: $367.
[b] Over 10 floors: $410.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $216.
(b) Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[1] Oil buffers, charge per oil buffer: $43.
§ 42-12 TRENTON CODE § 42-12
38:222
(c) The fee for the ninety-day inspection shall be as follows:
[1] Traction elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $151.
[b] Over 10 floors: $194.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $108.
(d) The fee for one-year periodic inspection and witnessing of test
shall be as follows:
[1] Traction elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $216.
[b] Over 10 floors: $259.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $162.
(e) The fee for the inspection and witnessing of the five-year test
shall be as follows:
[1] Traction elevators:
[a] One to 10 floors: $367.
[b] Over 10 floors: $410.
[2] Hydraulic elevators: $162.
(f) Additional charges for elevators equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[1] Oil buffers, charge per oil buffer: $43.
H. Miscellaneous permit fees. [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03;
10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
(1) Registration of contractors. The annual fee for registration of
contractors shall be $200.
(2) Fence construction. The fee for a permit to construct a fence shall
be $35 per $1,000 of estimated cost of the work. A plot plan, survey
and/or other documentation detailing the location of the fence shall
accompany all applications.
I. Surcharge to state. In order to provide for the training, certification and
technical support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code
Act and the applicable regulations, the City shall collect, in addition to
the fees specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.00334 per cubic foot of
volume of new construction and $0.00170 times the estimated cost of
construction for alterations. Such surcharge fee shall be remitted to the
Bureau of Construction Code Enforcement, New Jersey Department of
§ 42-12 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 42-12
38:223
Chapter 46
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 42.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 97, § 97-9F.
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 46-1. Numbering system established.
There shall be a system of numbering of dwellings and lots situated and
fronting upon any of the streets in the City now erected and which may
hereafter be erected as set forth in this chapter, and under the jurisdiction
of the Chief Engineer.
§ 46-2. Baseline for directional designations.
In every case where a street does or shall intersect either of the baselines as
herein established, the parts of the street situated on opposite sides of the
baseline so intersected shall be designated by the terms north, south, east
or west, as the case may be. The baseline or line of division for designation
of streets or parts of streets as east and west shall be a line following
the middle of State Street from the eastern to the western boundaries of
the City. The baseline or line of division for designation of streets or parts
of streets as north and south shall be a line commencing in the northern
boundary of the City, at its intersection with Princeton Avenue, running
thence through the center of Princeton Avenue to its junction with Warren
Street, thence through the center of Warren Street to the middle of the
Assunpink Creek, thence along the middle of the creek to the wharf line of
the Delaware River, and thence along the wharf line of the Delaware River
to the southern boundary of the City.
§ 46-3. Allocation of numbers.
When any street does or shall run in a direction more nearly eastward and
westward than northward and southward, the buildings on the north side
thereof shall be numbered with even numbers, and those on the south side
thereof with odd numbers. When any street does or shall run in a direction
more nearly northward and southward than eastward and westward, the
buildings on the east side thereof shall be numbered with even numbers,
and those on the west side thereof with odd numbers. Even numbers shall
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter ending
September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and not later than
one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due.
[Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
§ 42-12 TRENTON CODE § 46-3
46:224
begin with "2" and odd numbers with "1", up to the multiples required to
cover all of the buildings or lots on such streets.
§ 46-4. Starting points for numbering of buildings and lots.
Numbering of buildings and lots shall begin on the basis of the direction of
the streets on which they are situated and the location of their terminating
points in relation to the baseline, as follows:
§ 46-5. Reservation of numbers for vacant lots.
In all cases where vacant lots do or shall intervene between buildings, one
number shall be allowed for every 15 feet, or fraction thereof being 10 feet
or more.
A. Streets intersecting or terminating at either baseline. The buildings
situated or fronting on any street which does or shall intersect either of
the baselines shall be numbered in each direction from the baseline as a
starting point, the first building on either side of the line being
numbered "1" or "2," as the case may be. The buildings situated or
fronting on any street which does or shall terminate at either of the
baselines shall be numbered in the same manner from the last named
baseline as a starting point.
B. Streets not intersecting or terminating at baselines. In the case of any
street which does not or shall not intersect or terminate at either of the
baselines, if its direction is more nearly eastward and westward than
northward and southward, the buildings thereon shall be numbered
from its eastward terminus if the terminus is west of the north and
south baseline, and from its westward terminus if the last named
terminus is east of the north and south baseline. If the direction of the
street is more nearly northward and southward than eastward and
westward, then the buildings thereon shall be numbered from its
northward terminus if the terminus is south of the east and west
baseline, and from its southward terminus if the last named terminus is
north of the east and west baseline.
C. Streets intersecting or terminating at both baselines. In case of any
street which does or shall intersect both of the baselines, or terminate
at each, or intersect the one and terminate at the other, the buildings
thereon shall be numbered from the east and west baseline in the
manner hereinbefore stated.
D. Streets forming an immediate junction. In all cases in which streets do
or shall form an immediate junction with each other, so that the one is
but a continuation of the other under a different name, the buildings
thereon shall be numbered continuously from the proper baselines.
§ 46-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 46-6
46:225
§ 46-6. Numbering of apartment buildings.
Where any building is or shall be so constructed that different apartments
on the ground floor thereof shall front on any street, and be so arranged as
to show an intention that the same shall be occupied by different families,
or used in carrying on different trades, each apartment shall be considered
as a building, which shall be designated by a separate number; and the term
"street," as used in this chapter relating to the numbering of buildings, shall
be understood to include all private streets and all private and public alleys.
§ 46-7. Official notice of improper numbering.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Engineer, from time to time, whenever (s)he
shall discover that any building in the City is not numbered according to the
plan hereinbefore set forth, to serve upon the owner thereof a written or
printed notice of the proper number of such building, which notice may be
delivered personally or left at the building with any person there residing
or employed over the age of 14 years. The owner of such building, within
one month from the date of such service, shall cause the number contained
in the notice to be affixed to or upon the building in a durable manner,
in some conspicuous place, provided that no number upon any building
shall be required to be changed merely to give effect to the next preceding
section until, by the erection of a building or buildings upon any vacant lots,
a change shall be necessary to prevent the duplication of numbers. The City
Engineer shall be allowed the sum of $1 for each building for which (s)he
shall designate a number, including the service of the notice and the making
of the record aforesaid.
§ 46-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 53
CITY HALL
§ 53-1. Public forum.
The City Hall Atrium and its adjoining plaza shall be open to the public
for expressive activity, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this
chapter. The intent of this chapter is to authorize the use of the Atrium
by members of the public for expressive activities, while recognizing and
declaring that its primary purpose is to serve as a lobby for people seeking
to do business with the City and by the employees of the City. Nothing in
this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the use of the City Hall Atrium by
the City government for official press conferences and other government
functions.
§ 46-6 TRENTON CODE § 53-2
53:226
§ 53-2. Permit required.
No persons or organizations shall use of the City Hall Atrium or its adjoining
plaza for expressive activity unless they obtain a permit for such use from
the Department of Public Works.
§ 53-3. Application for permit.
Persons or organizations desiring to obtain a permit for use of the City
Hall Atrium or its adjoining plaza for expressive activity shall submit an
application for such permit to the Director of the Department of Public
Works. Such application should be submitted not less than five business
days prior to the date and time of the proposed activity.
§ 53-4. Day and time of activity.
Permits may be issued for use of the City Hall Atrium or its adjoining plaza
only when City Hall is scheduled to be open for City business, and only
between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 53-5. Denial of access based on content of proposed speech.
No person or organization shall be denied access to the City Hall Atrium or
its adjoining plaza based upon the content of the proposed speech.
§ 53-6. Issuance of permit.
The Director of Public Works shall issue the permit for such use prior to the
date and time set forth in the application unless the facility has previously
been reserved or because the Director reasonably determines that conduct
of the activity on the date and time specified would interfere with previously
scheduled City business.
§ 53-7. Conditions of permit.
The Director of Public Works is authorized to include reasonable conditions
in the permit which are necessary to ensure the safety of the persons using
City Hall and the safety of the property of the City, and to ensure that the
activity does not interfere with the conduct of normal City operations. The
Director may require applicants to pay for incidental costs unrelated to the
content of the applicant's speech. Such incidental costs shall not include
costs for security or public safety, but may include costs for such services
as sound amplification and temporary janitorial services. Nothing in the
grant of a permit shall be deemed a waiver of the City's right to bring an
action for contribution and/or indemnification for claims which result for the
negligence or other wrongful conduct of any person, including the person to
whom a permit is issued. The Director may require the applicant to advise
the City concerning whether the applicant believes that any additional
security is necessary, but may not charge the applicant for such additional
security.
§ 53-2 CITY HALL § 53-8
53:227
§ 53-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 54
CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
§ 53-8 TRENTON CODE § 53-8
53:228
ARTICLE I
Leasing or Granting Rights of Use and Occupancy Privileges
[Adopted 6-7-2012 by Ord. No. 12-17]
§ 54-1. Duty of Business Administrator to report.
Within a period of 60 days from the effective date of this article, the
Business Administrator shall compile and submit to the City Council a
report of all City-owned property, lands and structures alike which are
currently being occupied in whole or in part by individuals or organizations
other than City of Trenton employees under the terms of a lease, use and
occupancy contract, or other form of agreement or grant of permission,
whether formally documented or not. The report shall identify the property,
the occupant(s), reasonably describe the use, activities or services
performed or engaged in; the essential terms of the rental or use agreement
(inception, duration, expiration date, rental amount) and the total cost, if
any, to the City of Trenton to operate and maintain the property, net of any
income derived from a grant of funding from any source and/or derived from
rental from the occupant(s). The report may be provided in installments
such that the City Council is provided with such information as is most
readily available at the earliest time, consistent with the purpose of this
article.
§ 54-2. Effect on leases and contracts with fixed expiration dates.
This article is not intended to affect the terms and conditions of a formal
lease or other contract having fixed expiration dates and other terms
limiting the rights of occupancy of the occupant, provided that, with respect
to any such lease containing a termination clause of 90 days or less, any
exercise of such termination clause shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 54-3.
§ 54-3. Notice of termination requirements.
Pending the initial review by the City Council of a report on such properties,
no individual or organization occupying a City-owned property under an
agreement entered into in good faith with an authorized representative of
the City of Trenton for any activity which serves the public health, safety
and welfare as described above shall be issued a notice of termination or
eviction unless and until the circumstances giving rise to any such action
is presented in a report to the City Council, the occupant is given an
opportunity to appear before the City Council and to be heard in opposition
thereto, and the action is approved by a majority vote of the members
present. Any such notice issued prior to the adoption of this article and not
yet complied with shall be suspended by the issuing agent or agency on
notice to the occupant.
§ 54-1 CITY HALL § 54-4
53:229
§ 54-4. Reported property provisions.
With respect to each occupied property reported on under § 54-1, the
Business Administrator shall:
§ 54-5. Written notice and Council approval required to curtail
occupancy.
No action shall be taken to curtail any existing occupancy by the exercise
of an option to limit the duration of the lease or contract or by denying a
nondocumented occupant the benefits of a formal lease or contract until the
City Council and the occupant is provided with written notice of the intent
of the Administration, pursuant to § 54-3, and the City Council approves
the action after providing the occupant an opportunity to be heard in
opposition.
§ 54-6. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final adoption and
publication, an emergency having been declared as to its effective date.
A. Render an opinion assessing the overall value to the public or to City
governmental operations of the services and activities of the current
occupants;
B. Report and advise on any requests received by occupants to modify the
terms of a lease or contract in order to encourage or facilitate the
occupant's opportunity to invest resources for improvements to the
property and to insure the continuation of the services found to be
beneficial to the community, all in accordance with the Local Lands and
Buildings Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:121 et seq.);
C. Advise on the intention of the Administration to exercise a reserved
right to extend or to terminate a lease or other contract form, and the
reasons therefor; and
D. Advise on the intention of the Administration to evict or relocate an
occupant whose activities or services are being conducted without
benefit of a written lease or other authority to occupy the City-owned
property.
§ 54-4 TRENTON CODE § 54-6
53:230
ARTICLE II
Smoking in Parks, Recreation Facilities and Other Public Property
[Adopted 7-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
§ 54-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENCLOSED AREA — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — All structures owned, leased, rented, and/or
operated by the City of Trenton, and/or occupied by City employees and
used for official business of the City of Trenton.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — All public parks, playgrounds,
and ball fields publicly owned or leased by the City of Trenton and all
property owned or leased by the City of Trenton upon which the public is
invited or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather
for recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities,
including but not limited to any parking area, driveway, or drive aisle.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
§ 54-8. Smoking in public places prohibited.
§ 54-9. Signage required.
A sign shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at every
property where smoking is prohibited by this article. The sign(s) shall
state "Smoke-Free Zone" or "This Public Property is 100% Smoke Free"
or substantially similar language and may contain the international nosmoking
sign or symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross
section). All signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain
letters or a symbol which contrasts in color with the sign, indicating that
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities
owned or leased by the City of Trenton and all property owned or leased
by the City of Trenton upon which the public is invited or upon which
the public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational
activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including but
not limited to any parking area, driveway, or drive aisle, which have
been designated with no-smoking signs.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered to the City of
Trenton.
§ 54-7 CITY HALL § 54-9
53:231
smoking is prohibited at the designated area. The sign shall also indicate
that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 54-10. Enforcement.
The enforcement authority of this article shall be the Health Department of
the City of Trenton.
§ 54-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 to $100 for the first offense, $100 to $200 for
the second offense and $200 to $500 for each subsequent offense. Any
municipal employee found in violation of this article may also be subject to
discipline in accordance with the provisions of the City of Trenton's policies
and procedures.
§ 54-9 TRENTON CODE § 54-11
53:232
Chapter 56
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 113.
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
Solid waste — See Ch. 248.
§ 56-1. Findings; declaration of policy.
§ 56-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safely, morals and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of nonresidential premises; establish
minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical
components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for
human habitation, occupancy and use; fix certain responsibilities and duties
upon owners and operators, and distinct and separate responsibilities and
duties upon occupants; authorize and establish procedures for the
inspection of premises; and provide for the repair, demolition or vacation
of premises unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use. This chapter
is declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest and it is
A. It is found and declared that there exists in the City of Trenton
structures used for nonresidential purposes which are, or may become
in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment and
maintenance; further that such conditions, including, but not limited to,
structural deterioration, lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or
refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential
utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions
for light and air, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a
menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of
the citizens and inhabitants of the City.
B. It is further found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance
and progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect
of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if they are
not curtailed and removed, such conditions will grow and spread and
will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public
funds to correct and eliminate the same, and that by reason of timely
regulations and restrictions as contained in this chapter, the growth of
slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property
values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential
and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the public
health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 54-11 CITY HALL § 56-2
53:233
intended that it be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated
herein.
§ 56-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the
same premises.
AFFECTING INDUSTRY OR COMMERCE — Those structures or buildings
upon which the prevalent land use or business conducted therein is
industry, commerce, office or trade and not the provision or retail goods and
services.
BUILDING — A structure adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy
or use for public, institutional, business, industrial or storage purposes.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
FIRE HAZARD —
GARBAGE — All kitchen refuse of residences, hotels, restaurants or other
places where food is prepared for human consumption, and all offal from
fish, meat and vegetable markets, and all vegetable or organic substances
unfit for food that are subject to immediate decay.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitute a health hazard.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a premises or
a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the
owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which is so situated as
to endanger either persons or property.
A.
The creation, maintenance or continuance of any physical condition
by reason of which there exists a use, accumulation or storage of
combustible or explosive material sufficient in amount or so located or
in such a manner as to put either persons or property in jeopardy in
event of ignition.
B.
The obstruction to or of fire escapes, ladders which may be used as
escapes, stairways, aisles, exits, doors, windows, passageways or halls,
which are likely in the event of fire to interfere with the operations of
the Fire Department or of the safety and ready egress of occupants.
C.
§ 56-2 TRENTON CODE § 56-3
53:234
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control as owner or
agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix,
trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession
regardless of how such possession was obtained.
PLUMBING — All gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, vents and
any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gaslines, and water pipes and lines utilized in conjunction with airconditioning
equipment.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building or
structures thereon.
REST ROOMS — An enclosed space containing one or more toilets and one
or more lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and shall include, but not be limited to, the residue from the
burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, plastic or other synthetic
materials, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass crockery, abandoned automobiles and dust.
STRUCTURES — Any combination of materials, whether fixed or portable,
forming a construction, including buildings.
TRADE — The purchase and sale of goods or the provision of services
between businesses, municipalities, states and nations.
VENTILATION — The supply and removal of air to and from any space by
natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by an opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors or stacks, with or without wind-driven devices.
WEATHERING — Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the
elements.
§ 56-4. Applicability.
Every building and the premises on which it is situated shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such building has been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after February 19, 1970, and
irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the
use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair
of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities
prior to February 19, 1970.
§ 56-3 CITY HALL § 56-5
53:235
§ 56-5. Minimum standards.
This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial continued
occupancy and use of all buildings and does not replace or modify standards
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the
building, equipment or facilities contained therein.
§ 56-6. Higher standard to prevail.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than that set forth in any other ordinance or law, then the standards as
set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this chapter impose a
lower standard than any other ordinance or law, then the higher standard
contained in such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 56-7. Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances.
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter
shall constitute a defense to any violation of any other ordinance of the
City applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein
relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other
provision, nor any official of the City from enforcing such other provision.
§ 56-8. Responsibilities of owner, operator and occupant.
§ 56-9. Duties and responsibilities of owner and operator.
The following duties and responsibilities are imposed on every owner and
operator of any building covered by the provisions of this chapter:
A. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in § 56-9 and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto,
and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty and
responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation
thereto by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible
therefor and in violation thereof.
B. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
§ 56-10 and all the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and the
occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor
be entitled to defend against any charge of violation therefor by reason
of the fact that the owner or operator is also responsible therefor and in
violation thereof.
C. Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand,
and the occupant on the other, shall not be altered or affected by any
agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between
them and other parties.
A. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept
free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants,
§ 56-5 TRENTON CODE § 56-9
53:236
pedestrians and persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary
conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and
abated by the owner or operator. The items prohibited shall include, but
not be limited to, brush, weeds, broken glass, stump roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse, debris, dead and dying trees
and limbs or other natural growth, loose and overhanging objects, and
ground surface hazards.
B. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and
damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
C. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained
structurally sound, free from defects and maintained at all times so as
to capably perform the functions for which they were designed.
Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing equipment; shall
provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected
equipment shall be structurally safe, durable, smoketight and capable
of withstanding the action of flue gases.
D. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling, and they shall be kept structurally
sound, in good repair and free from defects.
E. The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all
buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with
standards of the neighborhood.
F. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and bushes shall
be kept trimmed.
G. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by
reason of other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in good repair.
Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or those on which
the paint has been excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith or put in a good state of
repair by the owner of the sign.
H. All display windows or storefronts constructed of plate glass shall be
kept clean and free of cracks, and no storage shall be permitted therein
unless shielded from public view.
I. All storefronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required, and
shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event repairs to
a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the
same, similar or comparable materials used in the construction of the
storefront in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area
or areas. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept painted
where required, and in good repair.
§ 56-9 CITY HALL § 56-9
53:237
J. Except for "For Rent" and "For Sale" signs, any temporary sign or other
paper advertising material glued or otherwise attached to a window, or
otherwise exposed to public view, shall be removed at the expiration of
the event or sale for which it was erected, or within 60 days after
erection, whichever shall occur first.
K. Any awnings or marquees and their accompanying structural members
which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises
shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or
a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not
properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall,
together with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the
event awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or similar
materials, where exposed to public view the cloth or plastic shall be
maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive
weathering, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing herein shall be
construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other
parts of the public domain.
L. The exterior of any structure or accessory structure shall be kept in
good repair and painted where necessary for the purposes of
preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive
peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance.
M. Rest rooms shall be surfaced with waterproof floors and shall be kept
dry, clean and sanitary at all times. Sufficient rest rooms shall be
installed and maintained for each sex commensurate with the use of the
premises. Every rest room shall be provided with a permanently
installed artificial lighting fixture and a wall switch therefor which is
free from danger of short circuiting.
N. All premises shall be properly connected to and provided with electric
power as requested for the operation of the structure. All such
connections and electrical equipment shall be installed and maintained
in conformity with the provisions of the Electrical Code and other
applicable ordinances.33
O. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted
conspicuously, and no fuse shall be installed in a fuse box in excess of
the stated maximum, except that owners and operators shall not be
responsible for violations in fuse installations without their knowledge
where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within
any part of the premises which is in exclusive possession of the
occupant who shall be responsible for such violations.
P. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a commercial establishment
to supply suitable trash containers of a minimum size of 30 gallons at
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction.
§ 56-9 TRENTON CODE § 56-9
53:238
§ 56-10. Duties of occupant.
The following duties and responsibilities are imposed on every occupant of
any building covered by the provisions of this chapter:
§ 56-11. Licensing.
each entrance/exit to the establishment as a convenient means for
customers to dispose of discarded products that were purchased within
and to prevent the accumulation of trash and debris in front and around
said commercial property. [Added 6-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-53]
A. Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition on the premises which
constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter, (s)he shall first
report it to the owner or operator, and upon failure of the owner or
operator to act in five days, then the occupant shall immediately report
the same to the Housing Inspector.
B. All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the accumulation of
garbage or refuse.
D. Every occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in
and on the premises subject to his/her control.
E. No occupant shall install electrical fuses in a fuse box in excess of the
posted limit.
A. Required.
(1) The owner of any commercial structure which is let or rented to
another for the purpose of conducting business therein shall apply
for a license for such structure on an application to be provided by
the Division of Housing Inspections and shall pay an annual
nonrefundable license fee of $120 per structure, plus $25 for each
individual business conducted within the structure. The owner
shall include in the application his/her home and business
addresses, day and evening telephone numbers, social security
number and date of birth. [Amended 10-17-2013 by Ord. No.
13-47]
(2) In the event the owner of the commercial structure designates an
agent to act on his/her behalf and/or in his/her stead, including, but
not limited to, accepting service of process and acting as the
attorney-in-fact in any hearing, the application shall also include
the agent's name, home and business addresses, day and evening
telephone numbers, social security number and date of birth. The
day telephone number where the owner or agent can be reached
during regular business hours shall be equipped with an answering
service or device.
§ 56-9 CITY HALL § 56-11
53:239
(3) In the event the owner of the commercial structure is a corporation
or entity other than an individual, the application shall include the
names, home and business addresses, day and evening telephone
numbers, social security numbers and dates of birth for all officers
of the corporation or other entity and shall further include the
foregoing information of the registered agent. The owner shall
comply with the licensing provisions by March 1 of each calendar
year. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject the owner
to the penalties prescribed in § 132-88, in accordance with the
provisions of Article IV of Chapter 132, Housing Standards.
B. Display of decal.
(1) Upon a determination by the Division of Housing Inspections that
the owner and rental property are in compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, Subsections
A, C and E, a licensing decal will be issued for the commercial
structure. This decal shall be prominently displayed within the
commercial structure, and the license number shall be easily
visible. Failure to display this decal shall be deemed by an officer or
other employee of the City that the property is not licensed and the
owner shall therefor be subject to the appropriate penalties as
prescribed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of
the City of Trenton, and in accordance with the provisions of Article
IV of Chapter 132, Housing Standards.
(2) In the event of loss or destruction of the decal, the commercial
owner shall request a replacement decal from the Division of
Housing Inspections. The first replacement decal in any calendar
year shall be reissued at no cost. Subsequent replacement decals
for commercial structures in the same calendar year shall be
reissued at a cost of $20.
C. Required inspections. All commercial structures shall be inspected
once every five years to ensure compliance with the Commercial
Structure Code. Food-handling establishments, which must be
inspected once each year, are expressly exempt from the requirements
of this provision. In addition, all vacant commercial structures shall be
inspected prior to occupancy. Those persons who fail to comply with
this requirement shall be subject to the appropriate penalties as
prescribed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty of the Code of the
City of Trenton, and in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, of
Chapter 132, Housing Standards.
D. Failure to complete licensing process on due date. A late penalty of 1 1/
2 times the cost of the license as set forth in Subsection A shall be
imposed upon the owner for failure to complete the licensing process by
March 1 of each calendar year. An additional penalty of 1 1/2 times the
licensing fee shall be imposed on the first day of each month the
licensing process remains incomplete.
§ 56-11 TRENTON CODE § 56-11
53:240
§ 56-12. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 57
CONTRACTS, PUBLIC
E. Taxes and other municipal charges. All completed applications for
licenses under this chapter shall have attached thereto a sworn affidavit
that property taxes have been paid through the preceding quarter and
that all water, sewer and any other municipal fees are current and up to
date.
F. License revocation or suspension. Following a hearing in accordance
with the provisions of Article IV of Chapter 132, Housing Standards, an
owner who is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to revocation or suspension of the license by
the Division of Housing Inspections and the imposition of the penalties
prescribed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the
City of Trenton.
G. Nontransferable license. No license issued under this chapter shall be
transferred by the owner. Upon the sale, conveyance or other transfer
of title and/or possession of the commercial structure, the new owner
shall apply for a new license not later than 30 days after the closing
date of the sale or other transfer. The fee required for obtaining the new
license shall be waived for the remainder of the licensing year.
Thereafter, the new property owner shall adhere to the licensing and
fee requirement of Subsection A of this chapter.
H. Security measures. The Police Director and the Director of Inspections
shall have the discretion to require the owner of any commercial
structure to implement particular security measures where they have
received reports during the licensing year which indicate that without
such measures the property poses a risk to the safety and welfare of its
occupants and the surrounding community.
I. Exceptions. The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not apply
to the operation of any business affecting industry or commerce as that
term is defined in § 56-3 and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:52-1(m).
§ 56-11 CITY HALL § 56-12
53:241

ARTICLE I
Political Contributions and Award of Contracts in Excess of $17,500
[Adopted 2-2-2006 by Ord. No. 06-014; amended 11-7-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-11034]
§ 57-1. Fair and open process.
Subject to the exception set forth below, all contracts to be awarded by
the City which would otherwise be exempt from the public bidding laws
and which have a value in excess of $17,500, as determined in advance
and certified in writing by the Purchasing Agent or the department head
seeking the procurement, shall only be awarded pursuant to a "fair and
open" process.
§ 57-2. Prequalification; procedure for awarding contract.
A. "Fair and open" shall mean either:
(1) The contract shall be publicly advertised on the City Internet Web
site in sufficient time to give notice in advance of the contract
solicitation and awarded pursuant to a process that provides for
public solicitation of proposals or qualifications and awarded based
upon criteria established in writing by the City prior to the
solicitation of proposals or qualifications and that the proposals be
publicly opened at the designated time and place and that
evaluation of the proposals be conducted consistent with this
article;
(2) The contract is awarded pursuant to the competitive contracting
provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.1 et
seq.; or
(3) The contract is awarded pursuant to public solicitation of bids.
B. Further consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.7, the
City's determination of what constitutes a fair and open process shall be
final.
C. Fair and open may necessarily be implemented differently for different
categories of procurement depending on the subject matter of the
procurement and the nature and nuances of the industry providing the
services or the product, but in every instance, the principles of fair and
open shall be maintained.
A. The process may include the prequalification of potential proposers and
shall include the solicitation of proposals on forms to be developed by
the Purchasing Agent and the department head to whose department
the services will be provided or for whose department the product shall
be procured, or their designees. The award of a contract shall be based
34.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was adopted by referendum vote of the voters of the City of
Trenton at the general election held on 11-7-2006.
§ 57-1 CITY HALL § 57-2
53:243
§ 57-3. Alternative.
In the alternative to proceeding with a fair-and-open process described
herein, the City may award a contract to a business entity for an amount
in excess of $17,500, pursuant to procedures prescribed by the New Jersey
Local Public Contracts Law and without competitive bidding or competitive
contracting; however, such award may be made only if the recipient of the
contract provides a written certification that it has not made, or will not
make, a political contribution which would bar the award of the contract.
§ 57-4. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
on evaluation of the proposals, based on criteria which may include
but are not necessarily limited to the following: accessibility;
understanding of the assignment; price; methodology/plan for
accomplishing the assignment; general experience; experience specific
to the assignment; sufficiency of resources to perform the task;
performance of the services within the United States of America.
B. The proposals shall be evaluated by a committee consisting of the
Business Administrator or his or her designee; the Purchasing Agent or
his or her designee, and the department head to whose department the
services will be provided or for whose department the product shall be
procured or his or her designee.
C. The proposals shall be publicly opened and a list created of all
proposals submitted.
D. The award to the successful proposer shall be made by resolution
adopted by the City Council.
A. A disqualifying contribution in the context of this provision shall be one
that is reportable by the recipient pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.,
and made within the time frame provided in that statute. If so awarded,
the vendor receiving the contract shall not thereafter make such a
reportable contribution during the term of that contract.
B. If a business entity makes a contribution that would cause it to be
ineligible to receive such a public contract or, in the case of a
contribution made during the term of the public contract, that would
constitute a violation of N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4 et .seq., the business entity
may request, in writing, within 60 days of the date on which the
contribution was made, that the recipient thereof repay the
contribution. If repayment is received within 60 days, the business
entity will again be eligible to receive a contract or would no longer be
in violation, as the case may be.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the City
of Trenton and any of its departments, instrumentalities or purchasing
agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise contract to
§ 57-2 TRENTON CODE § 57-4
53:244
procure professional services, as such term is used at N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or banking, insurance or other consulting service
(hereinafter "professional services") from any professional business
entity if such professional business entity has solicited or made any
contribution, as such term is defined at N.J.A.C. 19:25.1.7, which
definition includes loans, pledges and in-kind contributions (hereinafter
"contribution"), to i) a candidate or joint candidates committee of any
candidate for elective municipal office in Trenton or a holder of public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or
ii) any Trenton or Mercer County political party committee, or iii)
any political action committee that regularly engages in the support
of Trenton municipal or Mercer County elections and/or Trenton
municipal or Mercer County political parties or Trenton municipal or
Mercer County political party committees (hereinafter "PAC") in excess
of the thresholds specified in Subsection D within one calendar year
immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
B. No professional business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into
negotiations for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the City of
Trenton, or any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the
rendition of professional services shall knowingly solicit or make any
contribution, to: i) a candidate or joint candidates committee of any
candidate for elective municipal office in Trenton or holder of public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or ii) to
any Trenton or Mercer County political party committee, or iii) to any
political action committee ("PAC") that regularly engages in the support
of Trenton municipal or Mercer County elections and/or Trenton
municipal or Mercer County political parties or Trenton municipal or
Mercer County political party committees, between the time of first
communication between that professional business entity and the
municipality regarding a specific agreement for professional services
and the later of the termination of negotiations or rejection of any
proposal, or the completion of the performance of that contract or
agreement.
C. For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" whose
contributions are regulated by Subsections A and B hereof means: i) an
individual, including the individual's spouse and any child/children
living at home; ii) a firm, corporation, professional corporation,
partnership, limited liability company, organization, association, and
any other manner and kind of business entity; iii) any person who owns
10% or more of the equity or ownership or income interests in a person
or entity as defined in i) and ii) above and their spouses and child/
children living at home; iv) all partners or officers of such entity, in the
aggregate, and their spouses and child/children living at home; and v)
all persons who are an "affiliate" of a person as defined in i) and ii)
above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C. § 101(2).
D. The monetary thresholds of this article are: i) a maximum of $300 each
for any purpose to any candidate for Mayor or governing body, or $300
§ 57-4 CITY HALL § 57-4
53:245
§ 57-5. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of §§ 57-4 through 57-9 shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of
§§ 57-4 through 57-9 of this article.
§ 57-6. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
§ 57-7. Return of excess contributions.
A recipient of a contract for professional services may cure a violation of
§ 57-4 of this article, if, within 30 days after the general election which
follows the date of the contribution, the contract recipient notifies the
municipality in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of the
contribution from the recipient of such excess contribution.
to a political party committee of the City of Trenton; ii) $500 to a
Mercer County political party committee or to any PAC. However, any
group of persons meeting the definition provided in Subsection C above
of "professional business entity" may not annually contribute for any
purpose in excess of $2,500 to all City of Trenton candidates and
officeholders with ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract
and all City of Trenton or Mercer County political party committees and
PACs combined, without violating Subsection A of this section.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The City of Trenton Mayor or governing body, if the contract
requires approval of appropriation from the Mayor or governing
body.
(2) The Mayor of the City of Trenton, if the contract requires approval
of the Mayor or if a public officer who is responsible for the award
of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services from any professional business entity, the City of Trenton or its
purchasing agents and departments, as the case may be, shall receive a
sworn statement from the intended recipient of said contract that he/
she/it has not made a contribution in violation of § 57-4 of this article.
B. The recipient of said contract shall have a continuing duty to report any
violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation, proposal
process or duration of a contract's performance. The certification
required under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the
contract or agreement with the City of Trenton, or prior to the provision
of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall be in addition to any
other certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
§ 57-4 TRENTON CODE § 57-8
53:246
§ 57-8. Exemptions.
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in § 57-4A do
not apply to contracts which i) are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the meaning
of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4, or ii) are awarded in the case of an emergency under
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to
a "fair and open process" under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq.
§ 57-9. Penalty.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a City of Trenton agreement
or contract for professional services when a recipient of such
agreement or contract has: i) made or solicited a contribution in
violation of this article; ii) knowingly concealed or misrepresented a
contribution given or received; iii) made or solicited contributions
through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution; iv) made or solicited
any contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be
recontributed to a candidate or joint candidates committee of any
candidate for elective municipal office in Trenton or any Trenton or
Mercer County political part committee, or any PAC; v) engaged or
employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent of understanding that
such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit any contribution,
which if made or solicited by the professional business entity itself
would subject that entity to the restrictions of this article; vi) funded
contributions made by third parties, including consultants, attorneys,
family members, and employees; vii) engaged in any exchange or
contributions to circumvent the intent of this article; or viii) directly or
indirectly, through or by any other person or means, done any act which
if done directly would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
article.
B. Furthermore, any professional business entity that violates Subsection
A shall be disqualified from eligibility for future City of Trenton
contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the
violation.
§ 57-8 CITY HALL § 57-9
53:247

ARTICLE II
Resident Employment Policy
[Adopted 9-4-2014 by Ord. No. 14-43]
§ 57-10. Declaration of public policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City of Trenton that the
hiring of Trenton residents to the greatest extent possible by developers,
construction contractors and any other entities or individuals which have
been contracted to conduct business with the City of Trenton shall be
applied to any and all federally or state-assisted, City-sponsored or privately
funded developments within the City limits, with bona fide Trenton
residents being afforded a minimum of 25% of the total employee worker
hours in each construction trade and/or company position. The term
"employees" shall apply to persons filling apprenticeship and on-the-jobtraining
positions, and said developers, contractors and employers may
rely upon the traditional referral methods in the hiring of employees,
journeymen, apprentices, trainees and helpers. By way of example: for a
construction contract, the categories shall include, but not be limited to,
carpenters, drywall (sheetrock) installers, electricians, framers, glazers,
hazardous materials removers, heavy-equipment operators, laborers,
landscapers, masons, painters, pipe fitters, plumbers, roofers and window
installers.
A. The City of Trenton requires, as part of its bid specifications and
contract stipulations, that all/any prospective contractors bidding for a
municipal contract take affirmative steps to the greatest extent feasible
to employ qualified Trenton residents for 25% of the duration of the
contract. In order to comply with this section, contractors or other
persons doing business with the City shall demonstrate good-faith
efforts to ensure that 25% of the total employee worker hours shall be
reserved for Trenton residents.
B. Contractors awarded City contracts in compliance with Subsection A
above are required to submit semiannual progress reports to the
Trenton Employment Commission containing an accurate record of the
number of Trenton residents hired as well as the number of Trenton
residents currently employed on the project; the number of training
positions, if any, and the amount of positions that will be filled by
Trenton residents; and the necessary level of job skills required of
Trenton residents to plan and implement the work to be done on the
job. In the semiannual reports the contractors should document all
"good faith" efforts in their actions to hire Trenton residents. For
example, such documentation should consist of the following:
(1) Copies of all advertisement for training and employment.
(2) A list of Trenton residents who applied or otherwise expressed
interest in training positions or employment.
§ 57-10 CITY HALL § 57-10
53:249
§ 57-11. Contractors' best efforts.
(3) Letters to community organizations informing them of employment
opportunities.
C. All advertisements made by or on behalf of the City or any of its
departments for bids, requests for proposals or other specifications in
pursuance of any law requiring the advertisements for bids shall
include specific reference to Subsections A and B of this section.
A. In order to validate a good-faith effort with qualified Trenton residents,
contractors shall comply with the stipulations of this article and shall
require themselves and each subcontractor to designate an individual
to serve as a compliance officer for the purpose of pursuing the Trenton
Resident Employment Policy.
B. Prior to the start of construction, the contractor, and each
subcontractor then selected, shall meet with appropriate
representatives of the construction trade unions, when necessary,
representatives from the Trenton Department of Housing and Economic
Development, and the awarding or contracting authority for the
purpose of reviewing the standards and the estimated employment
requirements for construction activity over the construction period of
the project.
C. Whenever any person involved in the construction of a project makes a
request to a union hiring hall, business agent or contractors'
association of qualified workers, the requestor shall ask that those
qualified applicants referred for construction positions be referred in
the proportions specified in the Trenton Resident Employment Policy
standards and shall further contain a recitation of such standards.
However, if the requesting party's workforce composition at any time
falls short of any one or more of the proportions specified in the
standards, the requesting party shall adjust his or her request so as to
seek to more fully achieve the proportions as specified in which a
request for qualified employees has been made fails to fully comply with
the request, the requesting party's compliance officer shall seek written
confirmation that there are insufficient employees in the categories
specified in the request and that such insufficiency is documented on
the unemployment list maintained by the hall, agent or association.
Copies of any confirmation so obtained shall be forwarded to the
Commission. Copies of any requests for qualified employees made at
the time that the requesting party's workforce composition falls short of
any one or more such standards shall be forwarded contemporaneously
to the Commission.
D. All persons applying directly to the contractor or any subcontractor for
employment in construction of a project who are not employed by the
party to whom application is made shall be referred by said party to the
Commission, and a written record of such a referral shall be made by
said party, a copy of which shall be sent to the Commission.
§ 57-10 TRENTON CODE § 57-11
53:250
§ 57-12. Developers' best efforts.
E. Contractors shall maintain a file of the names, addresses, and telephone
numbers of each Trenton resident who has sought employment with
respect to a project or who was referred to the contractor by the
Trenton Employment Commission but was not hired. The contractor
shall maintain a record of the reason any such person was not hired. If
the construction of a project is subject to any union collective
bargaining agreements, it shall be required that the employee complies
with any lawful union security clauses contained in such agreement.
F. The contractor shall in a timely manner complete and submit to the
Commission a projection of the workforce needs over the course of
construction of the project. Such a submission shall reflect the needs by
trade for each month of the construction phase.
G. The contractor shall obtain from each worker employed in the
construction of the project, a sworn statement containing the worker's
name and place of residence.
H. One week following the commencement of construction of the project,
and each week thereafter until such work is completed, the contractor
shall complete and submit to the Trenton Employment Commission for
the week just ended a report which reflects, for each employee, the
employee's name, place of residence, race, gender, trade and total
number of worker hours he or she worked, and the total worker hours
of its total workforce.
I. The contractor and each subcontractor shall maintain records
reasonably necessary to ascertain compliance with the steps detailed in
Subsections A through H hereof for at least one year after the
beginning of the construction of the project. In its review of records of a
construction project submitted to demonstrate compliance with these
steps, the Commission shall take into consideration any affirmative
action outreach programs and affirmative action job training programs
of the particular trades participating in the project.
A. In order to validate a good-faith effort to hire qualified Trenton
residents, any developer engaged in a project with the City that is
funded, in whole or in part, by the City and in excess of $2,500,000 shall
comply with the stipulations of this article and shall incorporate in
every general construction contract or construction management
agreement an enumeration of the standards and shall impose a
responsibility upon such general contractor or construction
management to take all steps enumerated in § 57-11A through I and
incorporate such standards in all subcontracts and impose upon all
subcontracts the obligation to take such steps.
B. The developer shall meet with the contractor no less frequently than
weekly throughout the period of construction of the project to review
the contractor's compliance with such standards and steps. The
§ 57-11 CITY HALL § 57-12
53:251
§ 57-13. Procedures and guidelines.
The following procedures and guidelines must be followed by all
subcontractors performing work on the project. This project is subject to
the Trenton Resident Employment Policy and will be monitored by the
Commission to ensure that twenty-five-percent employment of Trenton
residents is achieved and maintained.
developer shall maintain minutes of such meetings and shall forward a
copy of such minutes to the Trenton Employment Commission within 10
days of such meeting.
A. Submit a letter to the union explaining that this project is subject to the
Trenton Resident Employment Policy, which requires that twenty-fivepercent
employment of Trenton residents should be achieved on a
weekly basis until completion of your contract with this company.
B. As your company gets ready to hire workers from the local union, keep
in mind that all requests made by your job representative in your office
must be done in writing. All requests must include the name of the
representative making such request, the names of persons she/he
contacted at the union hall, date of contract and action taken by union
representative.
C. A meeting is to take place with union business agents before your
company starts any type of work on this project.
D. Your office must keep records for all walk-in applicants. Records should
include the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the
position for which the applicant applied, whether the applicant is a
resident, and action taken by your office.
E. A meeting shall be called by the general contractor and the Commission
to discuss what other steps will be taken to help your office comply with
these requirements.
F. Developers shall make any and all efforts to contract with local
contractors and suppliers whenever possible.
§ 57-12 TRENTON CODE § 57-13
53:252
Chapter 58
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 123.
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 180.
§ 58-1. Findings and purpose.
A. The City Council of the City of Trenton hereby finds there has been a
significant breakdown in the supervision normally provided by certain
parents and guardians for juveniles under 18 years of age resulting in
juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior
including vandalism, noise and rowdy behavior, breaking and entering,
public drinking and littering and harassment of residents.
B. The New Jersey Legislature recently enacted P.L. 1992, Chapter 132,
which authorizes municipalities to adopt ordinances regulating the
presence of minors in public places between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. The Mayor and City Council concur with the sentiments
of the New Jersey Legislature that regulation of a minor's access to
public places during those stated hours is in the mutual best interests of
the minor and society at large.
C. The City Council further finds that the offensive activities of the
juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances
because the activities are easily concealed whenever police officers are
present and that the establishment of reasonable curfew regulations
will enable the community to better control the free and unobstructed
access to the streets and public places by the majority of residents and
will enable the police to act reasonably and fairly to prevent the
violation of laws and ordinances by juveniles.
D. The City Council further finds and has determined that a curfew meets
a very real local need and that curfew ordinances in other communities
have been a significant factor in minimizing juvenile delinquency. A
curfew in Trenton is particularly appropriate in view of the basic
residential nature of the community and the sense of the community
that there is a proper time for the cessation of outdoor activities of
juveniles. That sense of the community is reflected in the curfew hours
declared by this chapter, which takes into consideration also the danger
hours for nocturnal crime and for accumulations of juveniles with
potential risks incident to immaturity.
E. The City Council further finds that the community is not overcrowded
and that there has been a decrease in the school population over the
past years. Commercial recreational facilities are limited and there is
§ 57-13 CURFEW § 58-1
58:253
§ 58-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
AGE — Years of age continues from one birthday to, but not including the
day of, the next, such that a person who has not completed 18 years of life
is deemed to be 17 years of age.
GUARDIAN — A person other than a parent to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order, who is acting in the place of the
parent or who is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — Any person under the age of 18 years old.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley,
plaza, park, recreation, athletic or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
public building, structure or area.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups, or of interacting minors
totaling four or more persons in which any juvenile involved would not be
using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage
or going home. To implement that thought with additional precision and
precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined in this chapter so
that this is not a mere prohibitory or presence-type curfew. More and more
exceptions become available with increasing years and advancing maturity
as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulation.
STREET — A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case
little or nothing for juveniles to do outdoors but roam the streets after
the curfew hours which this chapter establishes.
F. Trenton is basically a family community. Parent responsibilities for the
whereabouts of children is the accepted norm by a substantial majority
of the community. Legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have
had a demonstrated effectiveness in many communities over the years.
The City Council has determined that as parental control increases
there is a likelihood that juvenile delinquency decreases, that there is a
need for a nocturnal curfew for juveniles in Trenton and that the
establishment of a curfew applicable to juveniles will reinforce the
primary authority and responsibility of parents and guardians over
juveniles in their care and custody.
A. A natural or adoptive parent.
B. A legal guardian.
C. A person who stands in loco parentis.
§ 58-1 TRENTON CODE § 58-2
58:254
of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the
legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway or traffic lanes,
the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots
for other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term
"street" shall also include shopping areas, parking lots, public buildings and
similar areas that are open to the use of the public.
TIME — Time of night referred to herein is based upon the prevailing
standard of time, whether Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving
time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the City, prima facie
the time then observed in the City administrative offices and police station.
§ 58-3. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for juveniles to be in any public place between the hours
of 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from July 1 through August 31, and between the
hours of 9:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from September 1 through June 30 unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
§ 58-4. Exemption to curfew restrictions.
The curfew established in § 58-3 above does not apply if the juvenile is:
§ 58-5. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a juvenile knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile to be or remain
upon any public place under circumstances not constituting an exception
to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this chapter. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
A. Engaged in, or traveling to and from, a business or occupation which
the laws of the State of New Jersey authorizes a juvenile to perform;
B. Engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency;
C. Attending religious services, approved school activities, activities
sponsored by a religious or community based organization or other
cultural, education or social events or in direct transit to or from such
events; or
D. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly. The juvenile shall evidence the bona
fides of such exercise by first delivering to the person designated by the
Police Director to receive such information at the Police Division
Headquarters, North Clinton Avenue, a written communication, signed
by the juvenile with his/her home address and telephone number,
specifying when, where and in what manner the juvenile will be on the
streets at night, during hours when the curfew restrictions are
otherwise applicable to the minor, in the exercise of the First
Amendment right describe in such communication.
§ 58-2 CURFEW § 58-5
58:255
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's legal custody.
It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that the parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
juvenile.
§ 58-6. Enforcement procedures.
A. Review. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of
experience and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a
parent or guardian thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances,
for example, a juvenile of tender age near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or are known.
B. Reports. A police officer discharging an enforcement obligation under
this chapter shall file a written report with the Police Director or shall
participate to the extent of the information for which (s)he is
responsible in the preparation of a report on the curfew violation. It is
not the intention of this subsection to require extensive reports that will
prevent police officers from performing their primary police duties. The
reports shall be as simple as is reasonably possible and may be
completed by Police Departmental personnel other than sworn police
officers.
C. Released juveniles. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has
come to take charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information
has been recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such
parent. If the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the
juvenile, then the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities,
except to the extent that in accordance with police regulation, approved
in advance by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be
entrusted to an adult relative, neighbor or other person who will, in
behalf of a parent or guardian, assume the responsibility of caring for
the juvenile pending the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
D. Notification of parent; questioning of juvenile. If a police officer
reasonably believes that a juvenile is on the streets in violation of this
chapter, the officer shall notify the juvenile that (s)he is in violation of
this chapter and shall require the juvenile to provide his/her name,
address and telephone number and how to contact his/her parent or
guardian. In determining the age of the juvenile and, in the absence of
convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer on the
street shall, in the first instance, use his/her best judgment in
determining age. The normal procedure shall then be to take the
juvenile to the police station where a parent or guardian shall
immediately be notified to come for the juvenile whereupon they shall
be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment under
constitutional safeguards of relevant facts, and to centralize
responsibility in the person designated there and then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and
§ 58-5 TRENTON CODE § 58-6
58:256
§ 58-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 58-8. Notice of existence of curfew.
Notice of the existence of this chapter and of the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted in, on or about such public or quasi-public
places as may be determined by the Director of Public Safety in order that
the public may be constantly informed of the existence of this chapter and
its regulations.
§ 58-9. Continuing evaluation.
recording, thus making available experienced personnel and access to
information and records.
E. Notice of violation. In the case of a first violation by a juvenile, the
Police Director shall, by certified mail, send to the parent or guardian of
the minor written notice of the violation with a warning that any
subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the Curfew
Ordinance (this Chapter 58), including enforcement of parental
responsibility and of applicable penalties.
A. Any person. Any person found guilty of having violated § 58-3 or 58-5
shall perform community service and may be subject to a fine of an
amount as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, and if
parents or guardians are found guilty of having violated § 58-3 or 58-5,
the parents or guardians shall perform community service together
with the juvenile. The period of community service shall not exceed that
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
B. Juveniles with more than three violations. Any juvenile who shall violate
any of the provisions of chapter more than three times shall be reported
by the Police Director to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile in need of
supervision, and the Police Director may proceed to file such charges
with the Mercer County Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court as (s)he
may deem appropriate.
A. Review by Division of Public Safety. The Division of Public Safety shall
be responsible for making period reviews of the practical aspects of
enforcement and interpretation of this chapter and shall report to the
City Council on all matters affecting the fair, uniform and lawful
application and enforcement of this chapter including the need for
clarification or relaxation of any term or provision contained herein, as
well as the need for continued or discontinued curfew regulations.
Whenever, in the opinion of the City Attorney or of any court, the
application of this chapter to a particular act or activity of a minor is
unclear or ambiguous, the less restrictive interpretation shall be
deemed to be the intent of this chapter.
B. Review by City Council. The City Council will continue its evaluation
and updating of this chapter.
§ 58-6 CURFEW § 58-9
58:257
Chapter 62
DEEDS, RECORDING OF
§ 62-1. Presentation to Engineer for recording.
The owner or owners of any lot in this City, within 30 days after becoming
such owner, shall present to the City Engineer the deed or other evidence of
title for such lot to the end that the transfer and ownership of such lot may
be duly recorded in the official records of the City. The fee for the plotting
and recording are as set forth in Chapter 77, Fees, of the Code of the City
of Trenton.
§ 62-2. Precise identification of property.
All deeds or other documents presented to the City Engineer for recording
or plotting, as hereinbefore and herein required, shall contain a definite
identification of the location of the lot or property being conveyed by the
insertion therein of either a definite beginning point, the street and house
number, the lot and page number of the City atlas or a reference to the
original plot plan and lot number.
§ 62-3. Insufficient identification.
The City Engineer may refuse to accept any deed or other instrument herein
mentioned for such plotting and recording if sufficient identification of the
lot or property hereinabove provided is not set forth therein.
§ 62-4. Powers of Engineer.
The City Engineer, in his/her sole judgment and discretion, may require that
any such deed or other instrument presented to him/her for such plotting or
recording, as hereby provided, shall be left at this office for such period of
time as (s)he may deem reasonable and necessary for that purpose.
§ 62-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or owners of any lot or property who shall refuse or neglect to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall in any manner
C. Reports to City Council. There shall be compiled and informally
reported to the City Council through effective channels, such as the
normal memos distribution by the Director of Public safety, to the
Mayor and to each Council member of noteworthy material, an account
of all enforcement activity engaged in hereunder and as to all
exceptional cases hereunder of reasonable necessity, the notices of
school and other activities, the special permits and the regulations
hereinbefore authorized, and the advisory opinions, for consideration
by the City Council in further updating and continuing evaluation of this
chapter.
§ 58-9 TRENTON CODE § 62-5
62:258
violate the same, on conviction thereof, shall forfeit and pay a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, and each violation of
the provisions of the same shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense.
Chapter 68
DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES
§ 62-5 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 62-5
68:259

ARTICLE I
Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishments
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-9 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 68-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of coin-operated
dry-cleaning establishments, and authorizing inspection of and operations
connected therewith is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.35
§ 68-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1962)."
§ 68-3. Filing of copies.
Three copies of the Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1962) have been placed on file in the office of the City Clerk and will
remain on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 68-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
35.Editor's Note: A copy of the code is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 68-1 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 68-4
68:261

ARTICLE II
Self-Service Laundries
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-10 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 68-5. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — Any place of business operated for the
purpose of washing or drying clothes or other washable materials where
the work is done by the customers themselves in machines located on
the premises, whether coin-operated or otherwise. It shall include such
establishments as "launderettes," "laundromats," "washomats," and others
with a similar name.
§ 68-6. Regulations.
In addition to conforming to all health ordinances and regulations of general
application, all self-service laundries shall be operated in accordance with
the following regulations:
A. The entire premises devoted to the operation of the laundry, including
all machines used in connection with it, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times. The walls and floor shall be covered with
some easily cleaned, impervious material and shall be kept clean and
dry. The premises shall be adequately lighted and ventilated.
B. No machinery used in connection with a self-service laundry shall be
operated in such a manner as to cause any unreasonable noise or
vibrations.
C. No equipment using exhaust or other circulation systems shall have
vents or openings constructed or located so as to permit heat, lint, gas,
fumes or other material to be directed upon neighboring properties.
D. All parts of the premises to which the public has access shall be clearly
visible from the street.
E. The owner or operator of the premises shall be responsible for
maintaining good order among the patrons, and shall be responsible for
any disorder which may result from the lack of a supervising attendant
upon the premises during hours of operation.
F. All articles of clothing containing bodily excrement or discharges shall
be as quickly as possible placed in machines designated for that
purpose. These machines shall be conspicuously marked and shall not
be used for any other purpose.
G. All premises shall be constructed with gutters in front or behind the
machines leading to drain takes of sufficient size to contain the flow of
water in the event of connection breaks or machine breakdown.
§ 68-5 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 68-6
68:263
§ 68-7. Nuisance declared.
The operation of any self-service laundry in violation of this article is
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 68-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
H. No self-service laundry shall be open for business between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., but machines started before 11:00 p.m. need
not be stopped until the operation is completed.
I. Where an attendant is not on continuous duty, there shall be
conspicuously posted a telephone number where notice may be given in
the event of machine breakdown or some other emergency.
J. Machines which break down shall be either repaired or removed from
the premises as quickly as possible.
K. These regulations shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises of each laundry.
§ 68-6 TRENTON CODE § 68-8
68:264
Chapter 69
EMPLOYMENT COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 2. Resident employment policy — See Ch. 57,
Art. II.
§ 69-1. Establishment.
The Commission to be known as the "Trenton Employment Commission" is
hereby established.
§ 69-2. Purpose.
The Commission, which shall meet monthly, shall be responsible for the
implementation, enforcement and monitoring of the Trenton Resident
Employment Policy in a manner that is consistent and fair to all parties.
§ 69-3. Membership.
The Commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council subject to the
exceptions set forth below:
§ 69-4. Compensation.
The Commission members shall serve without compensation, with the
original appointees serving in the following manner: four for a term of one
year; three for a term of two years. Each succeeding appointment shall be
a term of three years, and all appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the
unexpired term.
§ 69-5. Board Secretary.
The Commission shall be assisted by a Secretary, who shall serve without
compensation, to assist the Commission, developers, and contractors with
A. The Commission shall include at least one person for each of the
following categories:
(1) The Mayor or his/her designee, who shall not require advice and
consent;
(2) A representative from the City Council who shall only require a
resolution of appointment by the City Council;
(3) A representative from a labor union; and
(4) Four residents of the City of Trenton.
§ 68-8 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 69-5
68:265
all elements of compliance with this chapter. The Secretary shall be
designated by the Director of Housing and Economic Development.
§ 69-6. Duties.
The Commission shall be responsible for the monitoring of all compliance of
the Trenton Resident Employment Policy, Trenton Municipal Code § 57-10,36
as well as Section 3 compliance for the City as mandated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Chapter 70
ETHICS, BOARD OF
§ 70-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Trenton Ethics Board.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, fun,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Trenton; Mercer
County, New Jersey.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization or any interest whatsoever which
yields directly or indirectly to the local government officer or employee or
member of his/her immediate family a monetary or other material benefit
but shall not include the control of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor
union.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY — The City of Trenton, and any such
agency, board, or commission or other instrumentality thereof, and any
independent local authority, including any entity created by more than one
county or municipality, which performs functions other than of a purely
advisory nature, but shall not include a school board.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated
or not, whether part time or full time, employed by or serving a local
government agency, who is not a local government officer, but shall not
mean any employee or a school district.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER — Any person, whether compensated or
not, whether part time or full time:
A. Elected to any office of the City of Trenton;
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Art. II, Resident Employment Policy.
§ 69-5 TRENTON CODE § 70-1
68:266
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse, domestic partner,
partner in civil union, blood or adopted relative of a local government officer
or employee residing in the same household.
§ 70-2. Membership; terms.
§ 70-3. Code of Ethics established.
Serving on a local governmental agency which has the authority to
enact ordinances, approve development applications or grant zoning
variances;
B.
Who is a member of an independent municipal, county or regional
authority;
C.
Who is a managerial executive or confidential employee of a local
government agency, as defined in Section 3 of the New Jersey
Employer-Employee Relations Act, P.L. 1941, c. 100 (N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3),
and members of various boards, committees, authorities and
commissions as set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Municipal
Ethics Board, but shall not mean any employees of a school district or
member of a school board.
D.
A. The Trenton Ethics Board shall consist of six members who are:
(1) Appointed by the governing body of the municipality;
(2) Chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for
integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs; and
(3) Residents of the municipality.
B. No more than three members of the ethics board shall be of the same
political party, at least two of whom shall be public members.
C. The members of the Trenton Ethics Board shall annually elect a
chairman from among the membership.
D. The members shall serve for a term of five years, except that of the
members initially appointed, two of the public members shall be
appointed to serve for a term of five years, one member shall be
appointed to serve for a term of four years, and the remaining members
shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years. Each member shall
serve until his successor has been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy
occurring in the membership of the Ethics Board shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term.
E. Members of the Trenton Ethics Board shall serve without compensation
but shall be reimbursed by the municipality for necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties under this chapter.
§ 70-1 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 70-3
68:267
§ 70-4. Powers of Board.
The Trenton Ethics Board shall have the following powers:
A. Within 90 days after the establishment of a municipal ethics board, the
Trenton Ethics Board shall promulgate, by resolution, a municipal Code
of Ethics:
(1) For all local government officers and employees serving the
municipality. Local government officers and employees serving a
municipal independent authority shall be deemed to be serving the
municipality for purposes of this chapter; and
(2) That shall be either identical to the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.1 or more restrictive, but shall not be less restrictive; and
(3) That shall be published, along with a notice of the date of the public
hearing to be held thereon, in at least one newspaper circulating
within Trenton and shall be distributed to the City Clerk and to the
heads of the local government agencies serving Trenton for
circulation among the local government officers and employees
serving Trenton within 15 days following the promulgation thereof.
B. The Trenton Ethics Board shall hold a public hearing on the municipal
Code of Ethics not less than 30 days following its promulgation, at
which any local government officer or employee serving the
municipality and any other person wishing to be heard shall be
permitted to testify. As a result of the hearing, the Ethics Board may
amend or supplement the municipal Code of Ethics as it deems
necessary.
C. If the municipal Code of Ethics is not identical to the provisions set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1, the Trenton Ethics Board shall thereafter
submit the municipal Code of Ethics to the Local Finance Board for
approval.
D. The municipal ethics codes shall not be in effect until 60 days after it is
approved by the Local Finance Board by affirmative action or failure to
act pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.21.
E. A municipal Code of Ethics identical to the provisions set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 shall take effect 10 days after the public hearing
held thereon.
F. The Trenton Ethics Board shall forward a copy of the municipal Code of
Ethics to the City Clerk and shall make copies of the municipal Code of
Ethics available to local government officers and employees serving the
City of Trenton.
A. To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings with
regard to possible violations of the City of Trenton Code of Ethics or
§ 70-3 TRENTON CODE § 70-4
68:268
§ 70-5. Advisory opinions.
financial disclosure requirements by local government officers or
employees serving the City of Trenton;
B. To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the attendance
of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any complaint or to the
holding of a hearing;
C. To forward to the Mercer County prosecutor or the Attorney General or
other governmental body any information concerning violations of the
City of Trenton municipal Code of Ethics or financial disclosure
requirements by local government officers or employees serving the
City of Trenton which may become the subject of criminal prosecution
or which may warrant the institution of other legal proceedings by the
Attorney General;
D. To render advisory opinions to local government officers or employees
serving the City of Trenton as to whether a given set of facts and
circumstances would constitute a violation of any provision of the
municipal code of ethics or financial disclosure requirements;
E. To enforce the provisions of the municipal Code of Ethics and financial
disclosure requirements with regard to local government officers or
employees serving the City and to impose penalties for the violation
thereof as are authorized by this act; and
F. To adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are necessary
to implement the purposes of this chapter.
A. A local government officer or employee serving the City of Trenton may
request and obtain from the Trenton Ethics Board an advisory opinion
as to whether any proposed activity or conduct would in its opinion
constitute a violation of the municipal Code of Ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements. Advisory opinions of the Trenton Ethics Board
shall not be made public, except when the Ethics Board by the vote of 2/
3 of all of its members directs that the opinion be made public. Public
advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the local government
officer or employee unless the Ethics Board, in directing that the
opinion be made public so determines.
B. The Trenton Ethics Board, upon receipt of a signed written complaint
by any person alleging that the conduct of any local government officer
or employee serving the City of Trenton is in conflict with the municipal
Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements, shall acknowledge
receipt of the complaint within 30 days of receipt and initiate an
investigation concerning the facts and circumstances set forth in the
complaint. The Trenton Ethics Board shall make a determination as to
whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without
any reasonable factual basis. If the Ethics Board shall conclude that the
complaint is outside its jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, it
§ 70-4 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 70-5
68:269
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties.
shall reduce that conclusion to writing and shall transmit a copy thereof
to the complainant and to the local government officer or employee
against whom the complaint was filed. Otherwise, the Ethics Board
shall notify the local government officer or employee against whom
the complaint was filed of the nature of the complaint and the facts
and circumstances set forth therein. The officer or employee shall
have the opportunity to present the Ethics Board with any statement
or information concerning the complaint which he wishes. Thereafter,
if the Ethics Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to
whether the local government officer or employee is in conflict with
the municipal Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements,
it shall conduct a hearing in the manner prescribed by § 70-4 of this
chapter, concerning the possible violation and any other facts and
circumstances which may have come to its attention with respect to
the conduct of the local government officer or employee. The Trenton
Ethics Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of the
officer or employee is in conflict with the municipal Code of Ethics or
any financial disclosure requirements. This decision shall be made by
no less than 2/3 of all members of the Ethics Board.
C. If the Ethics Board determines that the officer or employee is in conflict
with the Code or any financial disclosure requirements, it may impose
any penalties which it believes appropriate within the limitations of this
chapter. A final decision of the Ethics Board may be appealed to the
Local Finance Board within 30 days of the decision.
D. All statements, complaints, requests or other written materials filed
pursuant to this chapter, and any rulings, opinions, judgments,
transcripts or other official papers prepared pursuant to this chapter,
shall be preserved for a period of at least five years from the date of
filing or preparation, as the case may be.
A. An appointed local government officer or employee found guilty by the
Trenton Ethics Board of the violation of any provision of this chapter or
of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500, which penalty may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the penalty enforcement law (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.). The Trenton Ethics Board shall report its findings to
the office or agency having the power of removal or discipline of the
appointed local government officer or employee and may recommend
that further disciplinary action be taken.
B. An elected local government officer or employee found guilty by the
Trenton Ethics Board of the violation of any provision of this chapter or
of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500, which penalty may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the penalty enforcement law (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.).
§ 70-5 TRENTON CODE § 70-7
68:270
§ 70-7. Disciplinary actions.
The finding by the Local Finance Board or Trenton Ethics Board that an
appointed local government officer or employee is guilty of the violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to
this chapter, shall be sufficient cause for his removal, suspension, demotion
or other disciplinary action by the officer or agency having the power
of removal or discipline. When a person who is in the career service is
charged with violating the provisions of this chapter, or of any Code of
Ethics in effect pursuant to this chapter, the procedure lending to removal,
suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action shall be governed by any
applicable procedures of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes and the rules
promulgated pursuant thereto.
§ 70-8. Hearings.
All hearings required pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in
conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a state agency in contested cases under
the Administrative Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410 (N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et
seq.).
§ 70-9. Board offices, expenses and employees.
Chapter 77
FEES
§ 77-1. Applicability.
The fees to be charged for certain services extended and material
distributed by various departments of the City shall be as set forth in this
chapter.
§ 77-2. Vital statistics. [Amended 8-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-58;
4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14; 10-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-47]
A. The governing body of the municipality shall provide the Trenton Ethics
Board with offices for the conduct of its business and the preservation
of its records, and shall supply equipment and supplies as may be
necessary.
B. All necessary expenses incurred by the Board and its members shall be
paid, upon certification of the chairman, by the municipal treasurer
within the limits of funds appropriated by the municipal governing body
by annual or emergency appropriations for those purposes.
C. The Board may appoint employees, including independent counsel and
clerical staff, as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter
within the limits of funds appropriated by the municipal governing body
for those purposes.
§ 70-7 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 77-2
68:271
§ 77-3. Recording of property deeds.37 [Added 11-7-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-51]
The fee for plotting and recording deeds shall be $25 for the first parcel and
$5 for each additional parcel included in each deed.
§ 77-4. Listing of property owners for zoning variances.38 [Amended
4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14]
The Tax Assessor shall charge a fee of $35 for a listing of immediate
property owners for purposes of zoning variance requests.
A. The Bureau of Vital Statistics in the Division of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, is authorized and directed to issue, upon
request of any person interested and authorized by law, certified copies
of vital records. The vital records shall include copies of births,
marriages, civil unions, domestic partnerships, and deaths on file in the
office of the Division of Health. The fee for the search of the vital
records, when the correct year only is supplied by the applicant and a
copy is made, shall be $20. There shall be an additional fee of $5 for
each additional copy ordered at the same time and an additional fee of
$1 for each additional year searched. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 37:1-12 and
37:1-12.1, marriage and civil union applications and affidavits of
domestic partnerships shall be set at $28. The City will retain $3 and
shall submit to the State Department of Human Services the remaining
$25 collected for each application.
B. As set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:8-63, there shall be no fee charged for
transcripts and permits issued to agencies of government or in
connection with any claim for public pension, for military or naval
enlistment, for veteran’s burial benefits or as otherwise provided
therein.
C. Other fees shall be charged as follows:
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:6-17, burial, removal or transmit permit
fees shall be $5.
(2) A fee of $40 will be charged to amend any birth, marriage, civil
union, domestic partnership, or death record.
(3) The fee for a legal name change will be $2, pursuant N.J.S.A.
2A:52-4.
D. Personal checks prohibited. All fees payable pursuant to this section
shall be paid in advance by cash, money order, certified or bank check
at the office of Vital Statistics. Personal checks are prohibited.
37.Editor's Note: Former § 77-3, Recording of property deeds, was repealed 4-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-14.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 77-2 TRENTON CODE § 77-5
68:272
§ 77-5. Tax records. [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6; 4-3-2008
by Ord. No. 08-14]
§ 77-6. Police records. [Amended 1-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-08;
4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14]
A. The Tax Collector of the City of Trenton shall charge a fee of $7 per
copy for duplicate tax bills, real and personal.
B. The Tax Collector of the City of Trenton shall charge a fee of $25 for the
preparation of each tax lien installment payment schedule.
C. The Tax Collector of the City of Trenton shall charge a fee of $35 for the
preparation of a discharge of a lost tax sale certificate held by the City
and a fee of $50 for the preparation of a discharge of a lost tax sale
certificate held by a third party.
D. The Tax Collector of the City of Trenton shall charge for tax searches as
follows:
(1) Ten dollars for each certificate issued as set forth in N.J.S.A.
54:5-14.
(2) Two dollars per year for continuation searches as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 54:5-15.
A. Fees are hereby established for services and material distributed by the
Department of Police as follows:
Type of Service Fee
Fingerprinting $25
Photographs (5 x 7) $5
Photographs (8 x 10) $8
Motor vehicle accident reports:
1st page to 10th page (per page) $0.75
11th to 20th page (per page) $0.50
All pages over 20 (per page) $0.25
Additional administrative fee for copies of motor
vehicle accident reports requested other than in
person pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-131:
First three pages $5
All pages over three (per page) $1
B. No fee shall be charged for any requested search, information or report
requested by any federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement
department or agency.
§ 77-5 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 77-6
68:273
§ 77-7. Use of the Trenton boat ramp and boat ramp parking.
[Added 4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-1439]
C. No fee shall be charged for an initial copy of a police report requested
by a person 65 years of age or older where the person is the victim of
the reported incident.
D. The Director of Police is hereby authorized to prescribe rules and
regulations governing the release of certain information contained in
the official files of the Department of Police pursuant to applicable law
and regulations. Unless ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the Director of Police may refuse to release any such information when,
in the Director's judgment, the interests of law enforcement and public
safety so require. The Director may refuse to release any such
information deemed confidential.
A. Permit required. No one shall be authorized to use the boat ramp or
designated trailer-parking-only area without applying for and obtaining
a permit from the Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture. Applicants for a permit must provide proof of a valid
registration for the boat and trailer, if applicable. If a trailer is to be
used, a permit decal shall be assigned and affixed to both the boat and
the trailer. If a trailer will not be used, then the permit decal will be
assigned and affixed only to the boat. The issuance or denial of a permit
shall be at the City's sole discretion.
B. Date and time of permit. Permits shall entitle the holder to use the boat
ramp and designated trailer parking area and shall be issued for the
period of April 1 through November 30. The ramp and parking area
shall be closed to all boats and vehicles between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
C. Fees are hereby established for the use of the boat ramp and designated
trailer parking as follows:
(1) Trenton residents:
(a) Annual permit: $25.
(b) Daily permit: $5.
(2) Other New Jersey residents:
(a) Annual permit: $50.
(b) Daily permit: $10.
(3) Out-of-state residents:
(a) Annual permit: $250.
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 77-7, Locker rental fee.
§ 77-6 TRENTON CODE § 77-7
68:274
§ 77-8. Permits and fees for tennis court use.
§ 77-9. Permits for use of parks and playing fields.
(b) Daily permit: $25.
A. Seasonal or daily permits for the use of the tennis courts located at
Cadwalader Park shall be issued by the Division of Parks and
Recreation for such seasons as shall be prescribed by the Director of
the Department of Health and Human Services. Permit holders may
reserve times for the use of these courts in accordance with procedures
established by the Director of the Department of Health and Human
Services. The following schedule of permit fees shall be in effect, such
permits being nontransferable.
Permit Fee
Resident, individual (adult), seasonal $15
Resident, family, seasonal $25
Resident, individual (adult), daily $3
Resident, under 18 No charge
Nonresident, individual (adult),
seasonal
$30
Nonresident, family, seasonal $50
Nonresident, individual (adult), daily $5
Nonresident, under 18 No charge
B. Season and day permits for the use of the clay tennis courts located at
Cadwalader Park shall be required and issued annually by the Division
of Parks and Recreation for such seasons and days as shall be
prescribed by the Director of the Department of Health and Human
Services in accordance with the following schedule of fees and terms.
Such permits to be nontransferable.
Seasonal Fee
Nonresident, adult $50
Nonresident, under 18 $20
Day Permits Fee
Nonresident, adult $3
Nonresident, under 18 $1
A. Permits for the use of playing fields in City parks shall be required and
issued by the Division of Parks and Recreation. The permit fee for
groups of 20 or more adults over 18 years of age shall be $25.
Otherwise, there shall be no charge.
§ 77-7 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 77-9
68:275
§ 77-10. Fees for athletic leagues.
The Division of Parks and Recreation shall collect from each team entered
in an adult athletic league to be run on a City-owned court or field a sponsor
fee of $200 and a forfeiture fee of $50. The forfeiture fee shall be returned
to each team which completes the league schedule having forfeited no more
than one game.
§ 77-11. Rental fees for portable stages, bleachers and floats.
The Division of Parks and Recreation shall collect a rental fee for the
use of City-owned bleachers, floats, stages or the Wenger Unit which is
equivalent to the labor costs necessary for the delivery, set up, supervision
and dismantling of such equipment, as certified by the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 77-12. Fire Department fees. [Amended 4-3-2008 by Ord. No.
08-14]
Fees are hereby established for services and material distributed by the
Department of Fire as follows:
Type of Service Fee
Tarpaulin (per twenty-four-hour period) $5
Public records and reports:
1st page to 10th page (per page) $0.75
11th to 20th page (per page) $0.50
All pages over 20 (per page) $0.25
§ 77-13. Disposition of fees.
All fees received in connection with the services or material provided as
authorized in this chapter shall be forwarded daily to the Department of
Finance, Division of Treasury. A receipt shall be prepared in triplicate for
all such money received, the original to be given to the person requesting
the service, a duplicate to be forwarded with the money received to the
B. Permits for the use of City parks for picnics, weddings, social events,
concerts, religious services, parties, reunions or other events shall be
required and issued by the Division of Parks and Recreation. The permit
fee shall be determined by the number of adults in the group, as
follows:
Number of Adults Fee
Less than 20 No charge
20 to 49 $20
50 to 99 $30
100 or more $40
§ 77-9 TRENTON CODE § 77-13
68:276
Department of Finance, Division of Treasury, and the triplicate copy to be
retained by the department issuing the receipt.
§ 77-14. Municipal Court fees.40 [Amended 4-3-2008 by Ord. No.
08-14]
§ 77-15. Issuance of flood zone letter.41 [Added 11-7-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-51]
The Office of Engineering shall charge a fee of $10 for the issuance of
a letter denoting whether or not a property is within the flood zone as
delineated by the federal government.
§ 77-16. Office of City Clerk.
A. Fees are hereby established for services and material distributed by the
Municipal Court as follows:
Type of Service Fee
Court records:
1st page to 10th page (per page) $0.75
11th to 20th page (per page) $0.50
All pages over 20 (per page) $0.25
Certified copies without seal
(additional fee)
$5
Exemplified copies with seal
(additional fee)
$10
B. No fee shall be charged to an attorney or litigant (in that case) for the
first certified or exemplified copy pursuant to N.J.S.A. 22A:2-19.
C. Fee for Municipal Public Defender. Any person applying for
representation by a Municipal Public Defender shall be required to pay
an application fee of $200; provided, however, that the Municipal Court
may waive the payment of all or a part of such fee if the court
determines, in its discretion, that the payment of such fee will impose
an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation by the
Municipal Public Defender.
A. Alcoholic beverage applications. The office of the City Clerk distributes
alcoholic beverage applications to holders of licenses in the City of
Trenton for which the charge will be $3 per application.
B. Meeting schedule. In compliance with the Open Public Meetings Act,
N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq., any person may request that a public body mail
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Administration, Art. XIV, § 2-65, Municipal Court.
41.Editor's Note: Former § 77-15, Issuance of flood zone letter, was repealed 4-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-14.
§ 77-13 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 77-16
68:277
§ 77-17. Traffic maintenance supplies and equipment.42 [Amended
11-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-51]
to him/her copies of any regular meeting schedule or revision described
in N.J.S.A. 10:4-8d of any regular, special or rescheduled meeting of
such body, and upon prepayment by such person of the sum of $35
to cover the costs of providing such notice, the public body shall mail
to that person written advance notice of all of its meetings within the
time prescribed by N.J.S.A. 10:4-8d, subject only to the exceptions set
forth in N.J.S.A. 10:4-9. Notices sent to the news media shall be mailed
free of charge. All requests for notices made under this section shall
terminate at midnight on December 31 of each year, but shall be subject
to renewal upon a new request to the public body.
C. Copies of documents. In compliance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2, Public
Records, copies of records shall be made available upon the payment of
such price as shall be established by law. The custodian of such records
shall make and supply copies of such records upon the payment of the
following fees which shall be based upon the total number of pages or
parts thereof to be purchased without regard to the number of records
being copied:
1st to 10th page, per page
11th to 20th page, per page
All pages over 20, per page
$0.75
$0.50
$0.25
A. Fees and deposits.
(1) The following fees are hereby established for the use of supplies
and equipment distributed by the Division of Traffic and
Transportation:
Item Fee Deposit
Emergency No-Parking sign, each
Nonprofit organization $2 $5
Maximum fee $15
Other $1 $5
Type I barricade, each
Nonprofit organization $10 $40
Maximum fee $160
Other $5 $40
(2) The deposits shall be refunded if the item is returned in good
condition within 10 days. The Division of Traffic and Transportation
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 14, Traffic.
§ 77-16 TRENTON CODE § 77-17
68:278
§ 77-18. Documents from City Clerk's office. [Amended 2-5-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-6]
§ 77-19. (Reserved)43
shall have the sole judgment to determine whether a returned item
is in good condition.
B. The Division of Traffic and Transportation shall collect from the
individuals, organizations or businesses who request and receive
benefit from the establishment of loading zones or installation of special
traffic signs the following fees:
Type Fee
Loading zone (new) $200
Loading zone (annual renewal) $50
Installation of signs for taxi stands or
limited time parking
$200
A. The City Clerk shall collect fees for provision of various documents in
accordance with the following schedule:
Item
Charge
(Each)
Codified ordinances (complete) $250
Supplements, each $50
Codified ordinances, individual
chapters
Police regulations $10
Alcoholic beverage control $5
Taxi $10
Housing $15
Zoning $25
Administrative Code $10
Taxi rates of fare $3
Duplicate taxi books $2
Duplicate taxi identifications $2
Maps $2
B. The City Clerk shall collect from the owners of limousines who file with
the City, per limousine: $10.
43.Editor's Note: Former § 77-19, Office of Emergency Management file search, was repealed
4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14.
§ 77-17 DRY-CLEANING AND LAUNDRY FACILITIES § 77-20
68:279
§ 77-20. Division of Health fees.
The following fees shall apply in the Division of Health when no other fee
has been established by this chapter:
Day-care boarding home $2
Plus for each child allowed by the license $1
Cattle killing $25
Sale and slaughter of domestic fowl $150
Sale of domestic fowl $10
Market refuse collection (offal) $10
Commercial refuse collectors license, per
truck
$20
Milk permits and ice permits No fee
§ 77-21. Performance of weddings and civil union ceremonies.
[Added 9-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-18]
Chapter 81
FIBER OPTIC CABLE INSTALLATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 257, Art. II.
§ 81-1. Findings; purpose.
The City Council finds and determines as follows:
A. The City of Trenton will fix the fee for performance by the Mayor of a
wedding or civil union ceremony at $35 for residents and $45 for
nonresidents.
B. All fees collected by a Mayor or designee, as authorized by statute, for
the performance of a marriage or civil union ceremony must be
deposited into the municipal current fund.
A. The City of Trenton frequently receives requests from various business
entities engaged in the fiber optic cable communications industry
seeking the City's approval for the use of the City rights-of-way, City
streets, other municipally owned property and, in some instances,
existing easements which previously have been granted by the City to
public utilities for the purpose of installing overhead and/or
underground cables, conduits, wires and similar equipment.
§ 77-20 TRENTON CODE § 81-1
81:280
§ 81-2. Applicability of application and permit process.
In order to implement the purposes of this chapter, the application process
and license or permit fee schedule provided hereafter shall apply.
§ 81-3. Term of license.
Any license or permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a period not to
exceed 30 years.
§ 81-4. Application.
B. These requests appear to be a part of the beginning stages of the
information superhighway network for our country.
C. Requests of the kind described involve substantial review by the
Engineering and Law Departments before approvals can be granted,
often involve the excavation of City streets, the provision of additional
police services during installation with the concomitant disruption of
traffic and public inconvenience and also involve additional time and
expense for inspection and expense arising out of potential liability.
D. The City desires to be supportive of the emerging innovative technology
that fiber optic cable offers to its users, but not at the expense of
burdening City taxpayers.
E. The imposition of a reasonable fee for approvals, licenses, permit or
subeasements which are approved and granted will balance the needs
of the businesses and of the City and its taxpayers and promote the
public safety and welfare, and ongoing maintenance of the City
infrastructure.
A. All license or permit requests relating to activities covered by this
chapter shall be submitted to and coordinated by the office of the
Business Administrator, with a copy to the office of the City Engineer.
B. Every applicant for the installation of fiber optic cable shall submit to
the City Engineer:
(1) A plat showing the proposed location of the fiber optic cable
installation.
(2) A depiction indicating whether the proposed installation is
overhead or underground.
(3) Copies of all easements proposed to be used which have previously
been granted.
(4) All consents for the use of any such easements.
(5) Any requests for new easements.
§ 81-1 FIBER OPTIC CABLE INSTALLATION § 81-5
81:281
§ 81-5. Conditions.
Every application recommended for approval by the City Engineer, if
approved by Council, will require as a condition thereof, the following:
§ 81-6. Fees.
§ 81-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 85
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
A. A certificate of insurance naming the City as an additional insured for
general liability coverage in the amount of at least $2,000,000.
B. An indemnification agreement, properly executed by the applicant,
which shall hold the City, its officers, agents and employees harmless
from any loss, claim or damage arising out of the installation,
maintenance or use of the fiber optic cable installed by the applicant,
the form of this agreement to be approved by the City Attorney.
C. An agreement that the easement holder will permit the City to use the
holder's easement without consideration for the installation of fiber
optic cable for icy operations, provided that such installation will not
interfere with any fiber optic cable the easement holders may have
previously installed in the easement area.
A. The payment of a license or permit fee in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1) Aboveground installation, per linear foot: $10.
(2) Underground installation, per linear foot: $25.
B. The City, at its sole discretion, may accept annual payments in lieu of
the above one-time payment so long as the total of the annual
payments, when subjected to a time/value of money analysis, equals the
amount of the one-time payment set forth above.
C. The City may accept in-kind services or products in lieu of the above
fees if the City determines the that value of such products or services
meets or exceeds the total fee imposed by this section, as adjusted by
any time/value of money calculation appropriate and necessary to the
nature and timing of the in-kind contribution, as evidenced by a
certification to that effect submitted to the Mayor and Council by the
City Attorney.
§ 81-5 TRENTON CODE § 81-7
85:282
ARTICLE I
Discharge of Firearms
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-20 of the Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 85-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
FIREARM — As defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1f.
§ 85-2. Discharge of firearms restricted.
The discharge of any firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, air gun,
gas gun or any other device which impels a projectile is prohibited in the
City of Trenton.
§ 85-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 85-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Any duly appointed law officer in the course of his or her official duty.
B. The use of firearms when necessary for the preservation of human life.
C. The use of firearms when hunting in conformity with the applicable
laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
D. Use of a firearm on a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range and under
the supervision of the Police Department.
§ 85-1 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 85-4
85:283

ARTICLE II
Sale of Knives to Minors
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-34 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 85-5. Sale to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, deliver, offer, distribute or offer
for sale any hunting, fishing, switchblade knife or any knife which can
be concealed as a pen to a person under the age of 18 years old. The
establishment by a preponderance of the evidence of all the following facts
by a person making the sale shall constitute an affirmative defense to
any violation therefor: that the purchaser falsely represented his/her age
by producing a driver's license bearing a photograph of the licensee, a
photographic identification card or a similar card purporting to be a valid
identification card indicating the (s)he was 18 years of age or older, and that
the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary prudent person
would believe him/her to be 18 years of age or older, and that the sale was
made in good faith.
§ 85-6. Photographic identification required.
All licensees and employees or agents of a licensee shall require the
purchaser to produce a driver's license bearing a photograph or a
photographic identification card which demonstrates that the purchaser is
18 years of age or older.
§ 85-7. Violations and penalties.
Persons found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the general penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty.
§ 85-5 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 85-7
85:285
Chapter 89
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 97.
§ 85-7 TRENTON CODE § 85-7
89:286
ARTICLE I
Obstruction
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-9 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 89-1. Parking of vehicles restricted.44
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with the directions of a traffic or police officer or traffic sign or signal, no
operator of a vehicle shall stand or park the vehicle within 10 feet of a fire
hydrant.
§ 89-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
44.Editor's Note: Original Section 3-9.1, Use, which immediately preceded this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 89-1 FIRE HYDRANTS § 89-2
89:287

ARTICLE II
Sprinkler Permits
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 18-7 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 89-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a fire hydrant sprinkler permit
program which will allow for the issuance of sprinklers to be installed
on City fire hydrants, while avoiding vehicular and pedestrian accidents,
avoiding damage to private and public properties, avoiding confusion to
motorists by providing alternate routes, reducing visibility restrictions and
minimizing problems of access to private property.
§ 89-4. Authority of Director of Department of Recreation, Natural
Resources and Culture.
The Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations governing
the use of such sprinklers on City fire hydrants, on forms to be prescribed
by the Director.
§ 89-5. Rules and regulations.
The Director is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations governing
the use of such sprinklers and precautions concerning vehicular traffic. In
promulgating those rules and regulations, the Director shall consider the
purposes of this article, as set forth in § 89-3, and may require the holder of
any permit to install ropes and/or signs for the protection of the public. The
Director may require an applicant for a permit to make a deposit for any
City property issued in connection with the permit.
§ 89-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 89-3 FIRE HYDRANTS § 89-6
89:289
Chapter 93
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 97.
§ 93-1. Payment of claims.45
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
state shall pay any claim in excess of $2,500 on any real property located
in the City, unless or until the insured submits an official certificate of
search for municipal liens, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12, certifying that
demolition is not required or that costs of demolition, taxes, assessments or
other municipal liens or charges levied and assessed and due and payable
against such property have been paid, or until the City submits to the
insurance company a certified copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
Chapter 97
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 42.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 89.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 93.
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 89-6 TRENTON CODE § 93-1
93:290
ARTICLE I
Uniform Fire Code
[Adopted 12-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14246]
§ 97-1. Findings.
§ 97-2. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 52:27D-202 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983
c. 383), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.) shall be
locally enforced in the City of Trenton.
§ 97-3. Agency designation. [Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-48;
3-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Department of Inspections.
§ 97-4. Organization.
A. An article providing for local enforcement of the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code.
B. Whereas, the Uniform Fire Safety Act, (P.L. 1983, c. 383) was enacted
for the purpose of establishing a system for the enforcement of
minimum fire safety standards throughout the State of New Jersey; and
whereas, the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs has
promulgated minimum fire safety standards, which have been made
part of the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70.1 et seq.).
C. Whereas, the Uniform Fire Safety Act authorizes municipalities to
provide for local enforcement of these standards and to establish local
enforcement agencies for that purpose; and whereas, it is in the best
interest of the City of Trenton to have the Uniform Fire Code enforced
locally; and whereas, the local fire service has agreed to the plan, which
is set forth herein, for the administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Fire Code.
D. Now, therefore, be it ordained by the governing body of the City of
Trenton in the County of Mercer and the State of New Jersey, as follows:
A. Chain of command. The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 97-3
of this article shall be under the direct supervision and control of the
Fire Official, who shall report to the Director of the Department of
Inspections. [Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-48; 3-19-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-10]
B. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have at least one paid inspector.
C. Appointments, qualifications, removal.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Uniform Fire Safety Code,
adopted 9-7-1967 as § 13-1 of the Revised General Ordinances.
§ 97-1 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-4
93:291
§ 97-5. Duties.
§ 97-6. Life-hazard and non-life-hazard uses; fees.
(1) Appointments and qualifications of the Fire Official. The Fire
Official shall be certified by the state and appointed by the
governing body upon recommendation by the Director of the
Department of Inspections, pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service.
[Amended 3-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10]
(2) Appointments and qualifications of inspectors and other
employees. Inspectors and other employees shall be appointed by
the governing body upon recommendation of the Fire Official. All
life-hazard use inspectors shall be certified by the state.
(3) Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other
employees of the agency shall be subject to removal by the
governing body for just cause. Before removal from office, all
persons shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the
governing body or a hearing officer designated by the same.
A. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established borders of the
City of Trenton other than the one- and two-unit owner-occupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and buildings,
structures and premises owned and operated by the federal
government, interstate agencies or the state.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
A. Life-hazard uses. The Department of Inspections shall carry out
periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Safety Code in the City of Trenton. [Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-48; 3-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10]
B. Non-life-hazard uses.
(1) In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code,
the following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the Bureau of
Fire Prevention. These uses shall be inspected once per year and
pay an annual fee.
(a) Assembly.
[1] A-1, Eating establishment under 50 (No alcoholic
beverages consumed): $45.
[2] A-2, Take-out food service (no seating): $45.
[3] A-3, Church or synagogue: $45.
§ 97-4 TRENTON CODE § 97-6
93:292
[4] A-4, Recreation centers, multipurpose rooms, etc., fewer
than 50: $70.
[5] A-5, Courtrooms, libraries, fraternal organizations,
condominium centers fewer than 100: $70.
[6] "A" exception: Eating establishments where alcohol
beverages are consumed are life-hazard uses.
(b) Business/Professional.
[1] B-1, Professional use, one- to three-story, less than 5,000
square feet per floor: $45.
[2] B-2, one- to three-story, more than 5,000 square feet, less
than 10,000 square feet per floor: $70.
[3] B-3, one- to three-story, more than 10,000 square feet:
$95.
[4] B-4, four- to six-story, less than 5,000 square feet per floor:
$120.
[5] B-5, four- to six-story, more than 5,000 square feet less
than 10,000 square feet per floor: $170.
[6] B-6, four- to six-story over 10,000, square feet per floor:
$220.
[7] "B" exception: Business/Professional seven or more stories
are life-hazard uses.
(c) Retail (mercantile).
[1] M-1, one- and two-story, less than 5,000 square feet per
floor: $145.
[2] M-2, one- and two-story, more than 5,000 square feet, less
than 12,000 square feet per floor: $170.
[3] M-3, three- to five-story, less than 5,000 square feet per
floor: $195.
[4] M-4, three- to five-story, more than 5,000 square feet, less
than 12,000 square feet: $220.
[5] "M" exception: Hardware stores over 3,000 square feet;
retail stores over 12,000 square feet are life-hazard uses.
(d) Manufacturing (factory).
[1] F-1, one- and two-story, less than 5,000 square feet per
floor: $95.
§ 97-6 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-6
93:293
[2] F-2, one- and two-story, more than 5,000 square feet, less
than 12,000 square feet per floor: $120.
[3] F-3, three- to five-story, less than 5,000 square feet per
floor: $170.
[4] F-5, three- to five-story, more than 5,000 square feet, less
than 12,000 square feet: $220.
[5] "F" exception: More than 12,000 square feet are lifehazard
uses.
(e) Storage S-1 (moderate hazard S-1, low hazard S-2).
[1] S-1, one- and two-story, less than 5,000 square feet per
floor: $70.
[2] S-2, one- and two-story, more than 5,000 square feet, less
than 12,000 square feet per floor: $120.
[3] S-3, three- to five-story, less than 5,000 square feet per
floor: $170.
[4] S-4, three- to five-story, more than 5,000 square feet, less
than 12,000 square feet: $195.
[5] "S" exception: More than 12,000 square feet are lifehazard
uses.
(f) Uses not classified above that are subject to the Uniform Fire
Code will be classified as business uses.
(g) Uses required to register with the state as life-hazard uses
shall not be required to register under this section.
(h) In the discretion of the Fire Official, vacant buildings will be
charged and inspected according to the previous use of the
building.
(2) Permits and certificate of fire code status.
(a) The application fees for the permits listed in N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.7(b) shall be as provided by the state regulation and are
currently as follows:
Type Fee
1 $42
2 $166
3 $331
4 $497
(b) The cost for the issuance of a certificate of fire code status
shall be $35.
§ 97-6 TRENTON CODE § 97-7
93:294
§ 97-7. Appeals.
Pursuant to 52:27D-206 to 208 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the City.
§ 97-8. Permits for carnivals and circuses.
Type 2 permits shall be required for all carnivals and circuses, regardless
of size or type of operation.
§ 97-9. Technical amendments.
The Uniform Fire Safety Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.2, shall
be deemed to be modified by the adoption of the following technical
amendments:
A. Salvage burning prohibited. The burning of insulation from wire or
motors for the purpose of salvage is prohibited. The burning of any type
of vehicle for salvage is prohibited.
B. Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a
frame building, nor closer than 10 feet to a pierced masonry wall.
C. Fire debris removal. Fire debris shall be removed from any public way,
including sidewalks, streets, alleys and driveways, within 20 days of the
fire incident.
D. Outside storage. The outside storage of combustible or flammable
materials shall not be more than 20 feet (6,096 mm) in height and shall
be compact and orderly. Such storage shall be located so as not to
constitute a hazard and not less than 15 feet (4,572 mm) from any other
building on the site or from a lot line. Sufficient driveways having a
minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided for use by Fire Department
personnel and equipment. The overnight parking of vehicles in the
driveways which would obstruct Fire Department access is prohibited.
E. Erroneous signs. All signs, which erroneously identify the use or
occupancy of a building or structure, shall be ordered removed by the
Fire Official.
F. Numbering of buildings. All buildings, other than use group R-3 (oneand
two-family dwellings), shall conspicuously display their street
address numbers with a minimum size figure of six inches. The numbers
must be clearly visible at all times from the center of the street.
G. Alarm company notification. Operators of central station alarm systems
and remote station alarm systems shall notify the Fire Official when the
name of the owner or occupant of a protected facility is changed.
H. System recharging. It is the responsibility of the owner of a system and
the agency called to service a system to notify the Fire Official when a
§ 97-7 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-9
93:295
suppression system has been discharged. No suppression system shall
be recharged without an inspection by the Fire Official.
I. Extinguishers. All hand-operated portable fire-extinguishing equipment
shall be selected, distributed, inspected, maintained, tested and
recharged in accordance with NFPA 10, listed in Appendix A of the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code. Exception: Fire extinguishers shall be wallmounted
so the top of the unit is not more than 48 inches above the
finished floor.
J. Extinguishers for other occupancies. The Fire Official shall survey all
other occupancies except dwelling units of multifamily buildings and
dwellings, and shall specify suitable manual fire-extinguishing
equipment to be installed.
K. Discontinued fire appliances. Soda, acid, foam, loaded stream,
antifreeze and water portable fire extinguishers of the inverting type or
nonapproved vaporizing liquid extinguishers or devices of any type
shall not be recharged or placed in service for fire protection use.
Extinguishers of these types shall not be considered approved devices
for fire protection use under the provisions of this code and shall
immediately be removed from service.
L. Fire escape restraining devices. All fire escapes with a movable lower
section, other than counterbalanced stairs, shall be equipped with a
quick-release device, which will allow the lower section to be released
immediately upon activation. Any rope, wire or chain on an existing
movable section of a fire escape intended to be used to return the
moveable section to the "ready" position shall be removed.
M. Prohibited door hardware. Draw bolts, slide bolts, and barrel bolts,
surface bolts, flush bolts, hooks, hasps and padlocks, and key-operated
deadbolts from the egress side are prohibited on all egress doors. All
such locking devices shall be removed and the egress door hardware
made to conform to approved egress hardware. Exception: Draw bolts,
hooks and key-operated deadbolts are permitted on egress doors of
dwelling units, provided the key cannot be removed when the door is
locked from the side from which egress is to be made.
N. Door obstruction. Egress doors shall not be used for the display of any
advertising signs whatsoever. Egress doors shall not be decorated in
any way that would obscure or confuse the purpose of the door. The
posting of the words: "Entrance," "Exit," "In," "Out," "Push," "Pull" and
the street address as well as business hours are permitted on egress
doors as long as they do not defeat the intent of this section.
O. Door identification. The Fire Official may require the labeling or
identification of any door that leads to a hazardous area, such as boiler
room, furnace room, mechanical room, electrical equipment room, or
flammable liquid storeroom. The Fire Official may also require other
doors to be labeled or identified such as main electrical service, alarm
panel room, gas meter or store room. Sidewalk doors to a below-grade
§ 97-9 TRENTON CODE § 97-9
93:296
§ 97-10. Removal of fire debris.
No individual, association or business entity shall allow, permit or suffer
the deposit of fire debris damage upon any portion of the property visible
from the public roadway or sidewalk of any premises within the City for
a period in excess of 48 hours from the final suppression of the fire, as
determined by the Chief of the Fire Division or his/her designee. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner, occupant or other person charged with the
custody and maintenance of the premises to arrange for the proper removal
and disposal of all such litter, garbage, trash and debris, except such
portions thereof as shall be determined by the Chief of the Fire Division,
or his/her designee, to be left undisturbed for reasons of examination,
investigation or identification.
space which does not have steps shall be labeled with the words
"shaftway" in a minimum of four-inch letters.
P. Combustible fuels. Combustible fuels, such as kerosene and diesel oil,
shall not be dispensed from dispensing units located in the same island
location as flammable fuel dispensing units. Combustible fuel
dispensing units shall be a distinctively different color than flammable
fuel-dispensing units and shall be clearly labeled with the name of the
fuel dispensed.
Q. Tank vehicle placarding. All tank vehicles shall be placarded in
accordance with federal regulations.
R. Tank vehicle inspections. The Fire Official shall periodically inspect all
tank vehicles which deliver flammable or combustible liquids within the
City of Trenton. This inspection shall be made only when the vehicle is
parked, making a delivery or by special arrangement with the owner of
the vehicle.
S. Abandonment of tanks. Permit. A Type 1 permit shall be obtained from
the Bureau of Fire Prevention to remove, abandon or place temporarily
out of service each aboveground or underground flammable or
combustible liquid storage tank.
(1) Tanks "temporarily out of service" shall have the fill line, gauge
opening and pump connection secured against tampering. Vent
lines shall remain open and maintained per NFPA 30. "Temporarily
out of service" shall mean for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(2) Any tank which has been abandoned or has been out of service for
over 90 days shall be removed from the property in a manner
approved by the Fire Official and the site restored in an approved
manner. Removal of a tank shall include all such suction, inlet,
gauge and vent lines.
§ 97-9 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-11
93:297
§ 97-11. Portable heating equipment.
The use of kerosene heaters or portable heating equipment employing flame
and the use of solid liquid or gaseous fuels is prohibited.
§ 97-12. Repealer.
The following sections of the BOCA Fire Prevention Code, which were
modified by the technical amendment of Ordinance No. 85-113, are hereby
repealed: F-305.4, F-409.1 and F-409.67.
§ 97-11 TRENTON CODE § 97-12
93:298
ARTICLE II
Fire Lines
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 13-2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 97-13. Establishment by person in command at fire.
At any fire the Chief of the Fire Department or other person in command
shall establish fire lines which shall be maintained by members of the Police
Department by stretching ropes or as otherwise directed by the Chief or
other person in charge. It shall be the duty of the police to exclude from
the streets and sidewalks within the established fire lines all vehicles and
all persons except City officials or employees occupied in the discharge of
their duties, or such persons as have been authorized to enter the lines by
written permission of the Director of Public Safety or by the Fire Chief or
other person in command.
§ 97-14. Impeding fire protection.
No person shall in any way impede access to any fire or its vicinity, interfere
with the use of any apparatus, hinder any official or employee of the City in
the discharge of his/her duties at any fire, pass through any fire line unless
properly authorized to do so or otherwise impede the work of extinguishing
fires or protecting lives and property.
§ 97-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty,
for each and every offense.
§ 97-13 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-15
93:299

ARTICLE III
Fire and Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detector Devices
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 13-3 of the Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 1-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-8]
§ 97-16. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — An assembly incorporating a sensor,
control components, and an alarm notification appliance in one unit,
operated from a power supply either located in the unit or obtained at the
point of installation, that detects carbon-monoxide gas.
SMOKE DETECTOR — A fire alarm device capable of sensing visible or
invisible particles of combustion and providing suitable alarm audible in all
sleeping areas.
§ 97-17. Where required.
(As per the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code):
A. In Use Groups R-3 and R-4 dwellings subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, smoke detectors shall be installed as follows:
(1) On each level of the premises; and
(2) Outside of each separate sleeping area.
B. The smoke detectors required above shall be located in accordance
with NFPA 74-1984, incorporated herein by reference, and maintained
in working order.
(1) The detectors shall not be required to be interconnected.
C. Smoke detectors may be battery-powered and shall be listed in
accordance with ANSI/UL 217, incorporated herein by reference:
(1) A/C-powered smoke detectors shall be accepted as meeting the
requirements of this section.
D. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in all dwelling units in
buildings in Use Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4, except for units in
buildings that do not contain a fuel-burning device or have an attached
garage, as follows:
(1) Single station carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed and
maintained in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping area(s).
(2) Carbon monoxide alarms may be battery-operated, hard-wired or of
the plug-in type and shall be listed and labeled in accordance with
UL-2034 and shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of this section and NFPA-720.
§ 97-16 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-18
93:301
§ 97-18. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
§ 97-19. Interference with operation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any tenant, occupant, owner, agent or any other
person to tamper with, damage, destroy, steal, paint over or do anything
to cause such smoke/carbon monoxide detector or any of its parts to
malfunction or fail to operate.
§ 97-20. Exceptions.
Any residential premises having in operation a form or system of electronic
or other fire detection system, device or similar system approved by the
Uniform Construction Code as an alternative alarm system shall be exempt
from the equipment requirements of this article as to all areas so protected.
§ 97-21. Effective date.
Compliance with this section shall be mandatory for premises devoted
to single-family residences, including semiattached or rowhouses, on or
after June 1, 1980, and for multifamily residences, including apartment
houses, and other residential housing, including two or more dwelling units,
on or after September 1, 1980; provided, however, that no residential
property shall be sold and no building permit shall be issued for any
structural alteration or repair except upon certification by the applicant
of compliance with the requirements of this article and the regulations
promulgated hereunder at any time on or after June 1, 1980. The effective
date of this article shall be June 1, 1980, with respect to any residential
property which is conveyed or for which a building or plumbing, electrical
or other construction or repair permit is issued on or after such date. The
Construction Official shall issue notices of this requirement in connection
with the issuance of any building permit.
A. The owners or managing agents of all residential buildings shall install
and maintain smoke detectors in full operating condition in the
locations prescribed by the rules and regulations adopted by the State
of New Jersey.
B. It shall be the duty of the tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit, at his/
her own cost and expense, to maintain and replace all batteries of
battery-operated smoke-detector devices installed by the owner in such
dwelling unit. Any tenant who fails to maintain and replace such
batteries shall be guilty of violating this section.
C. The duty of the tenant to maintain the battery shall not relieve the
owner of the duty to maintain the detector unit in proper operating
order other than the battery in the dwelling unit, as well as the duty to
maintain both the battery and the unit installed in the common areas of
the dwelling.
§ 97-18 TRENTON CODE § 97-22
93:302
§ 97-22. Violation; penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 97-23. Enforceability.
The codification of this article within this chapter shall not be considered
to vest exclusive jurisdiction to the Fire Prevention Bureau in the terms of
its enforcement, and violations of this section may be enforced by other
City officials, including the personnel of the Division of Fire, Division of
Inspection (Housing Division), Department of Housing and Economic
Development, and the Division of Police.
§ 97-23.1. Transfer of property.
Before any transfer of ownership takes place on a one- or two-family
dwelling in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3(a) a certificate of smoke
detector/carbon monoxide detector compliance shall be applied for and the
appropriate fees paid before an inspection is conducted. This application is
available at the Department of Inspections' Division of Housing and must
be returned to that Department. Upon completion of the inspection and the
necessary detectors are installed where required, a certificate of inspection
shall be issued. It shall be a violation of this code and the Uniform Fire
Code of the State of New Jersey to change ownership of a one- or two-family
dwelling prior to receipt of the certificate.
§ 97-23.2. Fee for certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide detectors.
The fee will be based on when the application is received and when the
change of occupancy takes place.
A. More than 10 business days prior to change of occupancy: $35.
B. Four to 10 business days prior to change of occupancy: $70.
C. Less than four business days prior to the change of occupancy: $125.
D. Reinspection required due to inoperable, improperly located, or
absence of required detector: $15.
§ 97-22 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-23.2
93:303

ARTICLE IV
Key Boxes
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 13-4 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 97-24. Where required.
§ 97-25. Mechanical parking gates.
Owners or operators of controlled vehicle parking areas which use
mechanical parking gates to control motor vehicle ingress or egress shall
install and maintain an emergency override control device on each gate.
Such device shall be a master-key-operated type switch approved by the
Fire Chief.
§ 97-26. Contents.
A. When a property within the City is protected by an automatic alarm
system, a fire sprinkler system or has windows covered to the extent
that quick access and visibility to the inside of the structure are
blocked, the owners or managing agents shall install a key box
approved by the Chief of the Fire Division and installed on the property
in a location approved by the Chief. Residential properties under six
units or properties protected by guard service on site, 24 hours, seven
day a week shall be exempt from this requirement.
B. Upon examination of the physical condition and characteristics of any
property and upon notice, in writing, to the assessed owner and
principal occupant thereof, the Fire Chief may further require a key box
to be installed in a specified location whenever access to or within a
structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or
where immediate access is necessary for life saving or fire-fighting
purposes.
C. Cabinet style vaults shall be required when deemed necessary by the
Fire Chief at premises containing hazardous materials. These cabinets
shall then contain hazardous material information and MSDS Data
Sheets, site plans, floor plans and other information, as required by the
Fire Chief.
A. Key boxes shall include two separate sets of keys. Each set shall contain
the following, individually labeled keys:
(1) Keys to the locked points of egress, whether on the interior or
exterior of such buildings.
(2) Keys to locked mechanical rooms.
(3) Keys to locked electrical rooms.
(4) Fire alarm control panel.
(5) Keys to other areas, as directed by the Fire Chief.
§ 97-24 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 97-26
93:305
§ 97-27. Notification of change of location.
In the event locks are changed in any of the above-mentioned locations, the
Fire Division shall be notified immediately.
§ 97-28. Enforcement.
This article shall not be deemed to vest exclusive jurisdiction in the Fire
Division in the terms of its enforcement. Violations of this article may be
enforced by other City officials, including the personnel of the Division of
Inspection, Department of Housing and Economic Development and the
uniformed members of the Police Division.
§ 97-29. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision or requirement of the Fire Chief made
pursuant to this article shall be entitled to a hearing before the Director of
Public Safety, who shall thereafter issue a final decision.
§ 97-30. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
B. Pertinent building or emergency notification information may also be
required to be contained in the key box, as determined by the Fire
Chief.
§ 97-26 TRENTON CODE § 97-30
93:306
Chapter 105
FLAG, OFFICIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Hall — See Ch. 53.
§ 105-1. Description.
The field shall be divided into two sections of equal size, one blue abutting
the standards and the other gold abutting the vertical edge or the blue at
the midsection of the field. At the center shall be superimposed on the field
the Seal of the City of Trenton, having gold lettering, a blue shield, brown
nag's head and gold wheat all in accordance with color examples which
shall be on file with the City Clerk. The seal shall be displayed on both faces;
provided, however, that on reproductions of dimensions less than three feet
in length, the Seal may be reproduced on the obverse side by means of
penetrating dye or otherwise to render a reverse image.
§ 105-2. Application for manufacturing.
No person shall manufacture, make, reproduce or otherwise produce for
sale or distribution with or without charge the Official Flag of the City
of Trenton without first submitting to the Mayor an application sufficient
to indicate the design material and form of construction of the proposed
reproduction for approval as to quality and accuracy of reproduction.
§ 105-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of this section
shall be subject to the fines and penalties imposed generally by Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 109
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 42. Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 97-30 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 105-3
105:307

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose; Objectives
§ 109-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Trenton of Mercer
County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 109-2. Findings of fact.
§ 109-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Trenton are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains and electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 109-1 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-3
105:309
§ 109-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 109-3 TRENTON CODE § 109-4
105:310
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 109-5. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one foot and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived
from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one foot and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a onepercent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one
foot to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO,
A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation
represents the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
§ 109-5 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-5
105:311
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the
landward limit of the moderate wave action delineation. Where no V
Zone is mapped, the Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open
coast and the landward limit of the moderate wave action delineation.
Coastal A Zones may be subject to wave effects, velocity flows, erosion,
scour, or a combination of these forces. Construction and development
in Coastal A Zones is to be regulated the same as V Zones/coastal highhazard
areas.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building 1) built, in the case
of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of
the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a Coastal A Zone,
to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel
to the flow of the water; and 2) adequately anchored so as not to
impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to
the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In areas of Coastal A Zones
"elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed
by means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
§ 109-5 TRENTON CODE § 109-5
105:312
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, specialpurpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without accumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
(1)
§ 109-5 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-5
105:313
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — Inland limit of the
area affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base
flood conditions between the V Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to,
but less severe than those in the V Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
[including basement]. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44
CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 109-5 TRENTON CODE § 109-5
105:314
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is: (1) Built on a single
chassis; (2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
longest horizontal projections; (3) Designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (4) Designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of
sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also
means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or more
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market valve of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
Substantial improvement also means "cumulative substantial
§ 109-5 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-5
105:315
improvement." This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed, or
repetitive loss. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as "historic
structure."
(2)
§ 109-5 TRENTON CODE § 109-5
105:316
ARTICLE III
Applicability; Violations and Penalties; Interpretation
§ 109-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Trenton, Mercer County, New Jersey.
§ 109-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 109-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Trenton from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 109-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Trenton, Community
No. 345325, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Mercer
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated July 20, 2016.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Mercer County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel Nos. 34021C0202F,
34021C0206F, 34021C0207F, 34021C0209F, 34021C0217F,
34021C0226F, 34021C0228F and 34021C0236F, whose effective
date is July 20, 2016.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at City Hall, Room 101, 319 East State Street, Trenton, New
Jersey.
§ 109-6 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-10
105:317
§ 109-10. Interpretation of provisions.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 109-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Trenton,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 109-10 TRENTON CODE § 109-11
105:318
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 109-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 109-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, and
drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the
following information is required:
§ 109-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 109-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 109-17B; and
D. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 109-18 are met.
(4) Review all development permits in the Coastal A Zone area of the
area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
§ 109-12 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-14
105:319
development alters the terrain or sand dunes so as to increase
potential flood damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 109-19B(4).
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data: When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 109-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Offical shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 109-17A, Residential construction, and
§ 109-17B, Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 109-12C.
(3) In Coastal A Zone areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
§ 109-19B(1) and (2)(a) and (b) are met.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Dam Safety and Flood Control Section,
and the Land Use Regulation Program, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review:
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
§ 109-14 TRENTON CODE § 109-14
105:320
§ 109-15. Variance procedure.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
(3) Ensure that substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 109-17A, Residential construction, and § 109-17B, Nonresidential
construction.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries: Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 109-15.
A. Appeals Board.
(1) The Board of Appeals as established by City Council shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the (name of appropriate
court), as provided in (statute).
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
§ 109-14 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-15
105:321
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 109-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (k) in § 109-15A(4) have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
§ 109-15 TRENTON CODE § 109-15
105:322
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public as identified in § 109-15A(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 109-15 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-15
105:323

ARTICLE V
Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 109-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 109-16 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-16
105:325
§ 109-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 109-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 109-14B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of each
enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, shall
be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) For Coastal A Zone construction, see § 109-19, Coastal A Zone.
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation plus
§ 109-16 TRENTON CODE § 109-17
105:326
three feet or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever
is more restrictive;
(3) Within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above
the depth number specified in feet plus three feet above the highest
adjacent grade, and adequate drainage paths are required around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone (For Coastal A
Zone construction, see § 109-19, Coastal A Zone.) shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus three feet or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(b) Require, within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM, to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus three feet above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified), and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
(c) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus three
feet or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is
more restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(d) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(e) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 109-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 109-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
§ 109-17 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-17
105:327
§ 109-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 109-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 109-19. Coastal A Zone.
Coastal A Zones are located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 109-7. These areas may be subject to wave effects, velocity
flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces; therefore, the
following provisions shall apply:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus three
feet or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 109-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Flood Hazard Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
§ 109-17 TRENTON CODE § 109-19
105:328
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation plus three feet or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 4-1, whichever is more restrictive; and
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided for in § 109-19B(4).
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values,
each of which shall have a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year
mean recurrence interval).
(c) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within
Coastal A Zones on the community's FIRM.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of § 109-19B(2)(a)
and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation, provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions:
§ 109-19 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-19
105:329
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building
Subcode Official for approval.
C. Sand dunes. Man-made alteration of sand dunes, within Coastal A
Zones on the community's DFIRM, which would increase potential flood
damage is prohibited.
§ 109-19 TRENTON CODE § 109-19
105:330
Chapter 113
FOOD HANDLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 171.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 206.
Slaughterhouses — See Ch. 237.
§ 109-19 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 109-19
105:331

ARTICLE I
Retail Food Establishment Code
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-6 of the Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 113-1. Applicability of state standards.
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq., pertaining to retail food
establishments and food and beverage vending machines shall be enforced
in the City of Trenton.
§ 113-2. Additional provisions.
The following additional provisions apply:
§ 113-3. Operating permit required.
A. These standards shall apply to all sales of ice for human consumption or
intended to be used in refrigerating food or drink for human
consumption.
B. No milk shall be sold which does not meet all applicable state laws and
regulations for pasteurized and certified milk.
C. All milk sold for off-premises consumption shall be in sealed bottles or
containers. Both the bottles or containers and the process by which the
milk is placed in them shall conform to all applicable state laws and
regulations.
D. The requirements of three sinks for washing purposes, as contained in
N.J.A.C. 8:24-5.5(b), shall be enforced only as to facilities constructed or
substantially altered after the effective date of this article.
A. No person or corporation shall operate a retail food establishment, as
defined by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. who does not have a valid operating
permit issued by the City Health Officer, or who does not comply with
any or all of the provisions concerning operations and maintenance of
the same, as contained in the aforementioned standards. No license fee
shall be required of charitable, nonprofit organizations.
B. Application for such permit shall be made on a printed form to be
furnished by the City health office on demand. The applicant, if an
individual, shall therein state his/her full name and residence, and, if a
corporation, shall state the name and address of its registered agent in
this state. Such application shall also state the location of the building
or buildings, or parts thereof, intended to be used as a retail food
establishment.
C. Upon the filing of any such application for an operating permit or for a
renewal thereof, the premises and places specified therein may be
inspected by the Health Officer or his/her agents, who shall keep a
§ 113-1 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 113-3
105:333
§ 113-4. Fees. [Amended 10-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-48]
Fees shall be as follows:
permanent record of such inspection. If such premises and places
are found to be in a sanitary condition and fit for use as a retail
food establishment, a permit to conduct or operate such retail food
establishment at the place designated in the application shall be issued.
D. No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable or entitle or authorize
the holder thereof to conduct the business mentioned in the permit in
any place or places other than that designated in such permit. If any
person or corporation having a permit shall change the location of his/
her or its place of business, the procedures for applying for a permit as
heretofore set forth shall be complied with. Such permit shall be
displayed in the conspicuous place within the establishment and shall
be renewed annually.
E. Any permit granted pursuant to this section may be temporarily
suspended by order of the Health Officer, which shall be issued by him/
her personally or by his/her acting Health Officer during his/her
absence. Such order may be issued without notice or hearing, pursuant
to Chapter 171, Nuisances, for the violation of any of the provisions of
this article or of the N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq., which violation presents a
present health danger to the community either in the form of a foodborne
infection under the terms of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq., or in any
other form reasonably requiring immediate closure of the offending
premises, and may be permanently revoked by the Health Officer after
proper notice and hearing to be held within 15 days of the issuance of
notification of proposed revocation, for any persistent, repeated or
willful violation. The basis for any proposed suspension or revocation
shall be specified in the notice.
F. Any retail food establishment, the operating permit of which has been
suspended, may at any time, make application to the Health Officer for
reinstatement. Upon receipt of such application, the Health Officer or
his/her agents shall make a reinspection as soon as practicable, and
thereafter shall make as many additional inspections as (s)he may deem
necessary to assure himself/herself that the applicant is complying with
all requirements. If the findings indicate compliance, (s)he shall
reinstate the permit.
A. Bakery/pizzeria/takeout: $175 annually.
B. Bar/cocktail lounge/liquor store/social club: $100 annually.
C. Cafeteria/catering kitchen/commissary/hospital: $300 annually.
D. County/state agencies or facilities (only if the inspections are delegated
to the City): $200 annually.
E. Day care: $100 annually.
§ 113-3 TRENTON CODE § 113-4
105:334
§ 113-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
F. Delicatessen: $125 annually.
G. Fast food/fish/meat/poultry/retail frozen dessert/seafood/snack bar:
$150 annually.
H. Grocery store/mobile food/pharmacy/soda fountain: $100 annually.
I. Home for the Aged/Nursing Home: $250 annually.
J. Nonpublic School: $175 annually.
K. Restaurants: $250 annually.
L. Supermarket/Wholesale: $300 annually.
M. Temporary retail food establishment, operating less than two days: $50.
N. Temporary retail food establishment, operating two days to five days:
$100.
O. Plan review: $250.
P. Modification of plan review: $100.
Q. Late fee: $50 per month.
R. Administrative fee for less than a satisfactory rating:
(1) First time: $200.
(2) Second time within two years: $350.
(3) Third time within two years: $500.
§ 113-4 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 113-5
105:335

ARTICLE II
Use of Vehicles
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-7 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 113-6. Vehicles used in transportation of food.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of vehicles for the
transportation or sale of food products:
§ 113-7. Inspection of vehicles.
Before any vehicle is used for the transportation or sale of food or in
connection with any activity for which a license is required from the City,
A. Whenever any food is transported in a vehicle which is wholly or partly
open, it shall be completely screened or covered at all times. The
screening or covering shall consist of material which will effectively
prevent flies or other insects from alighting around or upon any food.
B. All seafood, meat, poultry and dairy products shall be transported only
in refrigerated vehicles and shall remain under refrigeration until the
time of sale or delivery. The refrigerated portion of the vehicle shall be
maintained at a temperature low enough to completely safeguard the
products contained in it to the fullest extent possible.
C. No licensee shall at any time permit any debris, waste material, rotting
or unfit produce or merchandise of any kind to remain in or upon his/
her vehicle, unless the same is contained in a leakproof metal container
having a properly fitted metal cover on the container.
D. No licensee shall permit any waste materials or parts of produce or any
other merchandise to remain on any street, roadway, curb or walk and
shall at all times remove any debris that may have fallen from his/her
vehicle so that the same is immediately placed in metal containers, as
provided in Subsection C.
E. All sales of merchandise shall, at the time of sale, be placed in bags or
other suitable containers.
F. No manufactured foodstuffs, beverages or ice cream and other frozen
products shall be sold on any public street or other public place except
in individual wrappers or containers packed and sealed at the place of
manufacture. All vehicles vending such foodstuffs, beverages or ice
cream shall have a trash receptacle affixed to the vehicle for the use of
its customers. This receptacle shall be of sufficient size and design to
provide a readily distinguishable and accessible depository for all waste
generated by sales from the vehicles. [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-6]
G. All prepared or manufactured foodstuffs shall come from an approved
source. Any products in containers packed and sealed by a reputable
manufacturer shall be considered as coming from an approved source.
§ 113-6 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 113-7
105:337
it shall be inspected by the Health Officer or his/her agents or employees
to ascertain whether the vehicle complies with the provisions of this article
and all other applicable health regulations. The vehicle shall be reinspected
at reasonable intervals and, if used in connection with a licensed activity,
shall in any event be reinspected at the time that the license is renewed.
No vehicle shall be used for any of the purposes specified herein unless
approved by the Health Officer. A written certificate of approval shall be
kept in the vehicle at all times and shall be shown to any person who may
request to see it.
§ 113-8. Sale of products made in vehicle.
When any food products are processed or manufactured in any vehicle
upon a public street or place, the vehicle shall conform to the following
requirements:
§ 113-9. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. The part of the vehicle where the products are made or sold shall be
completely enclosed with some easily cleaned impervious material.
B. The service opening may be screened but all other screening shall be
kept to a minimum.
C. The service opening shall be self-closing.
D. A sink and waste tank and at least 30 gallons of hot water under
pressure shall be available inside the vehicle. The water shall be drawn
from the City of Trenton water supply or some other approved source.
E. The vehicle and the method of selling or serving food from the vehicle
shall conform to all the provisions of standards referred to in Article I of
this chapter, except those that conflict with this article and those which
are inappropriate or impractical. In determining whether compliance
with a particular section of the standards is practical or appropriate,
the primary consideration shall be the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare, but due regard shall be given to peculiar conditions
affecting the sale or service of food from a vehicle, including the limited
nature of the facilities which it is possible to enclose in a vehicle.
§ 113-7 TRENTON CODE § 113-9
105:338
ARTICLE III
Sale of Meat
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-12 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 113-10. Inspection of meat.
No meat shall be sold for human consumption within the City unless it bears
the meat inspection brand or other mark of identification of the United
States Department of Agriculture, or unless it has been marked, inspected
and passed by the Meat Inspector of the City or his/her duly authorized
agent.
§ 113-11. Slaughtering requirements.47
No meat shall be passed for sale unless it has been slaughtered in strict
conformity with all applicable state laws and regulations at a bona fide
slaughterhouse. The sale of meat slaughtered by farmers or other persons
and not at a slaughterhouse is hereby prohibited.
§ 113-12. Prepackaged meats.
§ 113-13. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following term shall have the
meaning indicated:
FOOD DEALER — Any person, or his/her agents, servants or
employees, engaged in the business of selling, offering or exposing for
sale, food at retail for human consumption, either on or off the premises
where sold.
B. Packaging and labeling. It shall be unlawful for any food dealer in the
City to sell or offer or expose for sale, at retail, any sealed,
prepackaged, unprocessed or untreated fresh or frozen cut meat or
fowl unless the package is colorless and transparent on all sides,
exclusive of labeling which shall not exceed five square inches of one
side of the package, of which fresh or frozen cut meat or fowl is layered
or shingled, making the entire contents of the package not wholly
visible. The packaged material shall not be layered, overlapped or
sealed so as to obliterate the clarity of the transparency of the
packaging or to obscure in any manner the visibility or transparency of
the package. The package of fresh or frozen cut meat or fowl shall be
stamped or shall have printed prominently on the face of the label the
date when the contents thereof was originally processed and packaged.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 237, Slaughterhouses.
§ 113-10 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 113-13
105:339

ARTICLE IV
Sale of Milk, Cream and Milk Products
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-13 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 113-14. Permit required.
No person shall transport milk, cream or milk products into the City of
Trenton for the purpose of sale without having first obtained a permit from
the Division of Health.
§ 113-15. Application.
Application for a permit shall be made upon forms supplied by the Division
of Health. The applicant shall indicate the source of supply of the milk and
shall supply such other information as the Division may reasonably require.
§ 113-16. Fee.
The fee for a permit under this article shall be $5 per year for each vehicle
used in the transportation of milk.
§ 113-17. Regulations.
All sales of milk shall conform to the following regulations:
A. All milk and cream, whether sweet or sour, sold to a purchaser, at retail,
within the corporate limits of the City of Trenton, shall be delivered to
such purchaser in bottle form and in the bottle in which it was originally
put up, except in approved dispensers, and not otherwise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to produce, sell, expose or offer for
sale, or have in his/her possession, with intent to sell, any milk, without
first obtaining a permit from the Division of Health, or milk products,
except the following:
(1) "Certified," as defined by an act entitled "An act providing for the
incorporation of medical milk commissions and the certification of
milk products under their supervision and regulating the sale of
milk as certified milk," approved April 21, 1909, as amended.
(2) "Pasteurized," which has been pasteurized in accordance with the
provisions of an act entitled, "An act to regulate the pasteurization
of milk, cream or other milk products, to provide for the licensing of
establishments where milk, cream and other milk products are
pasteurized, and to confer upon the Board of Health of the State of
New Jersey, power to make rules and regulations regarding the
pasteurization of such milk, cream and other milk products,"
approved April 13, 1915, as amended, and the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Board of Health in pursuance
thereof.
§ 113-14 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 113-18
105:341
§ 113-18. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 113-18 TRENTON CODE § 113-18
105:342
ARTICLE V
Reportable Diseases
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-14 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 113-19. Adoption of standards by reference.
In order that appropriate action may be taken to protect the public health,
a code regulating the reporting of certain diseases or outbreaks of disease
is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of
the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 113-20. Title.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "New Jersey Sanitary Code Chapter II Reportable Diseases of
New Jersey (1981)."
§ 113-21. Filing of copies.
Three copies of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code Chapter II Reportable
Diseases of New Jersey (1981) have been placed on file in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain on file there for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 113-22. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 113-19 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 113-22
105:343

ARTICLE VI
Reporting Contaminated Food
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-16 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 113-23. Reporting required.
Any person knowing of anything being offered for sale as food for human
consumption which (s)he has reason to believe is spoiled, contaminated or
otherwise unfit for human consumption, shall immediately report such fact
to the Division of Health or to one of its officers or inspectors.
§ 113-24. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 113-23 FLAG, OFFICIAL § 113-24
105:345
Chapter 118
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 113-24 TRENTON CODE § 113-24
118:346
ARTICLE I
Gambling
§ 118-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GAMBLING — Any activity which is conducted without a state license, such
as dice or card games, which is performed for money or anything of value,
where the outcome of the contest or a future contingent event is not under
the actor's control or influence, and there is an agreement or understanding
that something of value will be received in the event of a certain outcome.
PUBLIC GAMBLING — Gambling which occurs within the City in any public
or quasi-public place, including, but not limited to, any public street, alley,
sidewalk, park, playground, public conveyance, parking facility or in any
municipal building.
§ 118-2. Prohibitions.
No person shall, for money or other valuable thing, play or engage in faro,
roulette, dice, card games or any games of chance, and no person shall
aid, abet, assist or participate in any of the foregoing prohibited activities.
Public gambling, as defined above, is deemed a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 118-3. Exceptions.
This article shall not be construed to apply to the conducting of games of
chance commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto" under a license duly issued
under the provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-31), and to the
conducting of games of chance commonly known as raffles under a license
duly issued under the provisions of the Raffles Licensing Law (N.J.S.A.
5:8-58).
§ 118-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 118-3
118:347

ARTICLE II
Bingo and Raffles
§ 118-4. Raffles.
The holding, conducting and operation of raffles within the City shall be
subject to and in accordance with all the terms and provisions of the Raffles
Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-31), as amended or supplemented, and to all
general rules and regulations promulgated, or to be promulgated, by the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 118-5. Bingo.
The holding, conducting and operation of bingo within the City shall be
subject to and in accordance with all the terms and provisions of the Bingo
Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-58), as amended or supplemented and to all
general rules and regulations promulgated, or to be promulgated, by the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 118-6. Sunday games.
It shall be lawful to conduct, hold and operate games of chance commonly
known as "bingo," "raffles" and "lotto," as provided in N.J.S.A. 5-8.31 and
5-8.58, on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as
Sunday, and in accordance therewith, proper provision therefor shall be
made in the license.
§ 118-7. Administrative authority.
The City Council of the City, being the governing body of the City, shall
constitute the authority for the administration of the issuance of licenses
under §§ 118-4 and 118-5.
§ 118-4 GAMES OF CHANCE § 118-7
118:349
Chapter 123
GRAFFITI
§ 118-7 TRENTON CODE § 118-7
123:350
ARTICLE I
Removal of Graffiti
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 12-21 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 123-1. Removal required.
Within five days after written notice by the City Housing Inspectors, the
owner, operator or agent of any commercial or residential buildings within
the City which have any form of graffiti on any building or accessory
structure shall be required to restore the defaced surface by removing the
graffiti or repainting the defaced surface using the same color paint as
existed previously on the defaced surface or provide the Division of Housing
Inspections with documented arrangement to do same.
§ 123-2. Removal by City; assessment of costs.
If such graffiti condition is not cured or corrected within five days after
written notice by the Housing Inspectors of the City Department of
Inspections, the City shall have the right to issue a summons and to enter
the premises to remove the graffiti and/or repaint the premises as set forth
above, and the cost of the removal of the graffiti and/or repainting shall
be at the sole cost and expense of the owner, operator or agent of such
building or structure or accessory building or structure. The actual cost of
the removal of the graffiti and/or repainting, plus the cost of the inspection
of the graffiti and/or repainting, and other costs incidental to such removal
shall be certified by the Housing Inspectors to the City Council and
thereafter, as certified, become a lien upon the real property upon which
the graffiti was found and shall be collectible pursuant to the procedures
prescribed in Chapter 132, Housing Standards, § 132-121.
§ 123-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 123-1 GRAFFITI § 123-3
123:351

ARTICLE II
Defacing Property
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-32 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 123-4. Defacing public or private property with graffiti.
No person shall deface, destroy or place graffiti in or upon any public or
quasi-public place, including, but not limited to, any public street, alley,
sidewalk, mall, park, playground, public conveyance, parking facility or in
any public building or private property, without the owner's consent.
§ 123-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article with respect to
defacing or placing graffiti on any public property or private property of
another by any means whatsoever shall be subject to the penalties provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 123-6. Reward.
Upon the written recommendation of the Police Director and/or the Director
of Public Works, the Mayor may authorize the payment of a reward of
$100 to any person who provides information or assistance leading to the
apprehension and conviction of any person violating § 123-4. No reward
shall be paid to any public employee whose duty it is to investigate or
enforce this article.
§ 123-4 GRAFFITI § 123-6
123:353

ARTICLE III
Spray Paint and Indelible Markers
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-29 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 123-7. Findings.
§ 123-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt tip marker, china marker or similar device
that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/2
inch or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 123-9. Sales restricted.
A. There is widespread use of spray paint and indelible markers in the
permanent defacement of public and private property.
B. The defacement or marring of public and private property has
contributed to the blight and degradation of neighborhoods and public
places.
C. The easy application and ready accessibility to spray paint and indelible
markers facilitates its use and hinders enforcement agencies from
preventing persons from defacing public and private property or
apprehending those committing the offensive conduct.
D. A substantial portion of the defacement of public and private property
has been caused by minors using spray paint containers and indelible
markers, obtained both legally and illegally.
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer any
spray paint container or indelible marker unless such spray paint
container or indelible marker is held for sale or transfer in an enclosed
device which is constructed to prevent removal of the merchandise,
except by authorized attendants or is stored, out of sight, in such a way
as to prevent free access to the merchandise by the public.
B. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint container or
indelible marker to a minor, unless such minor is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian at the time of purchase or transfer.
C. No minor, at the time of purchase of any spray paint container or
indelible marker, shall furnish fraudulent evidence of majority,
including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a
registration certificate under the Federal Selective Service Act, an
identification card issued to a member of the armed forces, or any
document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government.
§ 123-7 GRAFFITI § 123-9
123:355
§ 123-10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
D. Absent express permission to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any
person to possess a spray paint container or indelible marker in any
public building or upon any public facility or property with intent to use
the same to deface such public building, facility or property.
§ 123-9 TRENTON CODE § 123-10
123:356
Chapter 127
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP
§ 127-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, to supplement the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et seq.
§ 127-2. Purpose.
The Trenton Fire Department has been required to respond to an increasing
number of hazardous materials incidents. These responses can involve
substantial expenditures. The purpose of this chapter is to insure that
the City is financially able to respond to hazardous materials incidents by
requiring the person or entity who causes discharge of hazardous materials
to reimburse the City for the expenditures made in responding to that
incident.
§ 127-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTROL AND CLEANUP COSTS — The cost to the City to extinguish
or prevent any hazardous materials fire or stop, contain or control any
discharge of hazardous materials. Such costs shall include the replacement
cost of any materials used, the wages, regular or overtime, paid to City
employees, agents or servants as a result of a discharge of hazardous
materials, the cost of medical and hospital treatment for injuries incurred
by employees, agents or servants of the City as a result of such discharge,
and the cost for any services rendered by any recovery company, towing
company or any other technical assistance called for by the City to handle
such incident.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of hazardous substances into any waters which flow within the
jurisdiction of the City or upon any land within the jurisdiction of the City.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the NFPA Guide of Hazardous Materials, the Department of
Transportation Guide Book, the list of hazardous substances adopted by
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to Section
311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and
the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the EPA pursuant to
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and any hospital
or medical waste, including, but not limited to, syringes, bandages and
discarded pharmaceutical products.
§ 123-10 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 127-4
127:357
§ 127-4. Liability for costs.
Any person or entity who causes or permits the discharge of hazardous
materials shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to
fault, for all control and cleanup costs incurred by the City.
§ 127-5. Deadline for payment.
Any person or entity liable for control and cleanup costs pursuant to this
chapter shall reimburse the City the entire amount of such costs within 45
days after receipt of the bill.
§ 127-6. Hazardous materials fund.
Any funds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a
hazardous materials fund account, and shall be used to replace all materials
and supplies used by the City in the cleanup, to set off the cost of salaries in
the regular or overtime account, and to pay any and all other costs incurred
as a result of the discharge of hazardous materials.
§ 127-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who fails to reimburse the City the entire amount of
the control and cleanup costs within 45 days after receipt of the bill shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 132
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 42.
Commercial structures — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 97.
Nuisances — See Ch. 171.
Rent control — See Ch. 222.
Garbage collection — See Ch. 248, Art. I.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 292.
§ 127-4 TRENTON CODE § 127-7
127:358
ARTICLE I
Findings; Title
§ 132-1. Findings.
§ 132-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Housing Code of the
City of Trenton, New Jersey."
A. Housing exists within the City of Trenton, which because of faulty
design or construction, or failure to maintain in a proper state of repair,
or lack of proper sanitary facilities, or lack of adequate lighting or
ventilation, or inability to properly heat, or improper management, or
any combination of these factors, has become or is becoming so
dilapidated, so neglected, so overcrowded with occupants, or so
unsanitary as to jeopardize or be detrimental to the health, safety,
morals or welfare of the people of the City.
B. Such substandard housing is a principal cause of deterioration and
blight in residential areas within the City of Trenton; and that
conditions existing in such blighted areas impair the efficient and
economical exercise of governmental functions and necessitate an
excessive and disproportionate expenditure of City funds for health,
welfare, public safety, fire protection and other public services.
C. Persons owning residential property or residing within the City of
Trenton have certain responsibilities to maintain, improve or repair
their dwellings so as to assure that such dwellings are safe, sanitary
and decent and to eliminate and prevent the spread of neighborhood
blight and the resultant problems so created for the City at large.
D. There is hereby adopted for the City of Trenton a Housing Code to
establish minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings
safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation; to establish minimum
standards governing the condition and maintenance of dwellings and
dwelling units; to fix certain responsibilities and duties of owners and
occupants of dwellings; and to provide for administration, enforcement
and penalties for violations.
§ 132-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-2
127:359

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 132-3. Officer in charge.
The administrative officer and enforcing authority for the provisions of this
chapter shall be the Chief Housing Inspector.
§ 132-4. Chapter constitutes standards for determining fitness.
The provisions of this chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the
Housing Inspector in determining the fitness of any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or premises for human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 132-5. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Housing Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate
such written rules and regulations as (s)he may deem necessary for the
proper administration and enforcement of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with any of the
provisions of this chapter, nor in any way alter, amend or supersede any of
the provisions thereof.
§ 132-6. Enforcement officers.
The Director of Housing Inspections/Chief Housing Inspector, Assistant
Chief Housing Inspector and their designated representatives, including
Housing Inspectors and Housing Inspector trainees, shall be charged with
the responsibility for the enforcement of the Housing Code and all other
related ordinances of the City. They shall be responsible for and authorized
to issue and serve citations and summonses for violations of the aforesaid
ordinances, and to take any other enforcement measures within the
jurisdiction of the Municipal Court. They shall be deemed to be law
enforcement officers of the City for the purpose of enforcing the Housing
Code and related ordinances of the City. All such persons shall be required
to take an oath to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of their
offices.
A. The Housing Inspector shall file a certified copy of all rules and
regulations which (s)he may promulgate in his/her office and in the
office of the City Clerk.
B. Such rules and regulations promulgated and filed by the Housing
Inspector pursuant to this section shall have the same force and effect
as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof
shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this
chapter as hereinafter provided.
§ 132-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-6.1
127:361
§ 132-6.1. Enforcement in Landmarks Area.48 [Added 7-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-42]
The title of Urban Renewal Supervisor shall have the following additional
duties and powers:
A. Under direction, performs inspections for the purpose of eliminating
blight and restoring and/or eliminating subnormal housing
accommodations in the designated Landmarks Area.
B. Inspects buildings in the designated Landmarks Area, exterior only, for
health and safety violations and code compliance under the landmark
regulations.
C. Issues Housing Code summonses to property owners in the Landmarks
Area.
D. Reinspects properties after completion of repairs to ensure compliance
with the Housing Code and the landmarks regulations.
E. Coordinates departmental functions with other concerned City
departments.
F. Presents testimony regarding inspection findings in courts of
competent jurisdiction.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, § 2-71, regarding the Landmarks Commission for Historic
Preservation, and Ch. 315, Art. XXIX, regarding historic landmark site regulations.
§ 132-6.1 TRENTON CODE § 132-6.1
127:362
ARTICLE III
Inspection of Dwellings, Dwelling Units, Rooming Units and
Premises
§ 132-7. Hours.
§ 132-8. Access to be given upon presentation of identification.
The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit,
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Housing Inspector upon
presentation of proper identification, free access to such dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit and its premises during such time for the purpose of
inspection, examination and survey.
§ 132-9. Interference with inspection.
Where the Housing Inspector is refused entry or access, or is otherwise
impeded or prevented by the owner or occupant from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this chapter
and subject to the penalties hereunder.
§ 132-10. Search warrant.
In addition to the provisions of § 132-9, the Housing Inspector may, upon
affidavit, apply to the Municipal Judge of the City of Trenton for a search
warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
chapter exists on the premises and if the Judge is satisfied as to the manner
set forth in the affidavit, (s)he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on
which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ 132-11. Public petition.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Housing Inspector by at least five
residents of the City of Trenton charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit
A. The Housing Inspector shall make periodic inspections to determine the
condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises
located within this City, in order that (s)he may perform his/her duty of
safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of
dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making
inspections, the Housing Inspector is hereby authorized to enter,
examine and survey between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the entry of the
Housing Inspector at any time when an actual emergency which tends
to create an immediate danger to public health or safety exists, or at
any time when such an inspection, examination or survey may be
requested by the owner or occupant.
§ 132-7 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-11
127:363
is in violation of this chapter, the Housing Inspector shall forthwith cause
the premises so charged to be inspected in the manner provided in § 132-7
of this chapter.
§ 132-11 TRENTON CODE § 132-11
127:364
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 132-12. Notice of violation.
§ 132-13. Application for appropriate permits.
Whenever repairs, additions, alterations or replacements are required to
the building or facilities, this notice shall direct that the person in violation
shall make application to the Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or
Electrical Inspector for the appropriate permit to cover such requirements.
§ 132-14. Service of notice.
A. Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that there has been a
violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation, of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, (s)he shall serve notice of such
violation, or alleged violation, upon the person or persons responsible
therefor. The notice shall be in writing and shall contain:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
(2) A statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued.
(3) A provision allowing a reasonable time for the performance of any
act it requires.
(4) An explanation of the rights of the person upon whom the notice
has been served to seek modification or withdrawal of the notice by
petition to the Housing Inspector for a hearing.
(5) A statement that any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is
not filed in the office of the Housing Inspector within 10 days after
the notice is served; and that any permit which has been suspended
by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a
petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the Housing
Inspector within 10 days after the notice is served.
B. The form of a petition for a hearing which shall be attached to the
notice and which shall show the place to which the petition must be
sent.
C. The notice may contain an outline of remedial action which if taken will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. Notices issued by the Housing Inspector pursuant to this chapter shall
be served upon the owner and parties in interest, or the operator,
occupant or any person, as the case may require, either personally, or
by leaving a copy thereof at his/her usual place of abode in the presence
§ 132-12 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-14
127:365
§ 132-15. Failure to file hearing petition.
Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an
order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Housing Inspector within 10 days after such notice is served. Any permit
which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically
revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the Housing
Inspector within 10 days after the notice is served.
§ 132-16. Request for hearing.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Housing Inspector, provided that such person shall
file in person or by mail in the office of the Housing Inspector a written
petition requesting a hearing within 10 days after the day the notice was
served. Upon request of such petition the Housing Inspector shall set a
time and place for a hearing within 30 days therefrom and shall give the
petitioner five days written notification thereof.
§ 132-17. Conduct of hearing.
At any hearing held in accordance with this chapter the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice should
be modified or withdrawn. The Housing Inspector shall have the power to
administer oaths and affirmations in connection with the conduct of any
such hearing, and the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be
controlling in any such hearings.
§ 132-18. Decision; modification of notice.49
After a hearing is held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the
Housing Inspector shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending
upon his/her finding as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with.
of a member of the family who shall be informed of the contents thereof,
or if not found, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
to his/her last known address.
B. If the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Housing Inspector, the serving of the notice upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the City
of Trenton. A copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises affected by the notice and a copy of the notice shall be
duly recorded or lodged for record in the office of the Mercer County
Clerk.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-14 TRENTON CODE § 132-18
127:366
The Housing Inspector, with the approval of the Director of the Department
of Inspections, may also modify any notice so as to authorize variation
from the provisions of this chapter when, because of special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship, provided that the spirit of this chapter
will be observed, public health and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done.
§ 132-19. Order for compliance.
If the Housing Inspector sustains or modifies the notice, it shall be deemed
an order, and the owner, operator or occupant, as the case may be, shall
comply with all provisions of the order within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the Housing Inspector and set forth in the order.
§ 132-20. Service of written decision on petition filer.
Within 10 days after any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter a copy of the written decision of the Housing Inspector shall be
served either in person or by registered or certified mail on the person
who filed the petition for the hearing; and the proceedings of the hearing
including the findings and decision of the Housing Inspector, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in
the office of the Housing Inspector.
§ 132-21. Other legal remedies.
No provision or requirement herein contained for a hearing shall in any way
whatsoever affect or impair the right of the Housing Inspector to bring at
any time such legal proceedings, actions, or prosecutions as are otherwise
permitted by law or ordinance.
§ 132-22. Emergencies.
Whenever the Housing Inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare,
(s)he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence
of such an emergency and requiring that such action to be taken as (s)he
deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately.
§ 132-23. Condemnation of building and placarding.
At the expiration of the time set forth in any order, a building may be
condemned and placarded as set forth in Article XII of this chapter without
further notice and the Housing Inspector authorized to take whatever action
necessary to best carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this
chapter.
§ 132-18 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-23
127:367

ARTICLE V
Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities
§ 132-24. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein,
which does not comply with the requirements of this article.
§ 132-25. Food storage space.
Every dwelling unit in which the occupants prepare or are intended or
permitted to prepare food for their own consumption shall contain a suitable
and convenient receptacle containing at least four cubic feet of storage
space maintained in good repair and in a clean state. Some part of the
storage space required by this section shall be capable of sustaining a
temperature low enough to preserve perishable foods for a reasonable
period of time.
§ 132-26. Cooking facilities.
§ 132-27. Kitchen sink.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good order and repair
and properly connected to the City water and sewer system.
§ 132-28. Toilet facilities.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person
within the room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a
lavatory basin in good order and repair and properly connected to the City
water and sewer system.
§ 132-29. Bathrooms.
Every dwelling unit shall contain within a room which affords privacy to a
person within the room, a bathtub or shower in good order and repair and
properly connected to the City water and sewer system. These facilities may
be situated in the same room as those required by § 132-28.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one supplied kitchen gas or
electric stove providing at least two top burners and an oven, not
necessarily in the same unit, in good order and repair and properly
connected to the appropriate utility system.
B. Cooking facilities serving more than one dwelling unit or rooming unit
or combination thereof shall not be permitted; except that nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the operation of hotels,
boardinghouses, nursing homes and such establishments subject to
licensing.
§ 132-24 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-30
127:369
§ 132-30. Water connections.
Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under
the provisions of §§ 132-27, 132-28 and 132-29 shall be properly connected
with both hot and cold waterlines.
§ 132-31. Rubbish containers.
Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a container of metal or other
approved material, the type and location of which is approved by the
Housing Inspector, for the temporary storage and disposal of rubbish.
§ 132-32. Garbage storage.
Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a watertight container, provided
with a tight-fitting cover, of metal or other approved material, the type and
location of which is approved by the Housing Inspector, for the temporary
storage of garbage or other organic waste, except that garbage may be
disposed of in a garbage incinerator located within the dwelling and which
is properly installed and operated in a safe and sanitary manner.
§ 132-33. Heat requirements.
Every dwelling, business and commercial building shall have supplied
heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and
good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating
all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every
dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 70º F., when the
outdoor temperature is at or above 0º F. The temperature shall read at a
height of three feet above floor level at the center of the room.
§ 132-34. Space heaters.
Every supplied space heater shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
A. No space heater burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuels shall be of the
portable type.
B. Every space heater burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuels shall be
properly vented to a chimney or duct leading to outdoor space.
C. Every space heater shall have a fire-resistant panel beneath it.
D. Every space heater located within two feet of a wall shall be equipped
with insulation sufficient to prevent overheating of the wall.
E. Every space heater smoke pipe shall be equipped with guards, properly
constructed of nonflammable material, at the point where the pipe goes
through a wall, ceiling or partition.
F. Every space heater shall comply with all the requirements of the City
Building Code and Fire Prevention Code,50 and the equipment must be
§ 132-30 TRENTON CODE § 132-34
127:370
§ 132-35. Prohibited heating equipment.
Portable heating equipment employing flame and the use of solid, liquid or
gaseous fuels is prohibited.
§ 132-36. Water-heating facilities.
Every dwelling unit shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions
of § 132-30 of this chapter, and are capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water (not less than one
gallon per minute) to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120º F. Such
supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the
requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating
facilities required under provisions of § 132-33 are not in operation.
§ 132-37. Insect control.
From May 1 to October 1 of each year, and when deemed necessary by
the Housing Inspector for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other
insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space
shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device; and every window or
other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used
for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens of not less than No.
16 mesh covering at least 11% of the window area; except that such screens
shall not be required during such period in rooms deemed by the Housing
Inspector to be located high enough in the upper stories of buildings as
to be free from such insects, or where room or central air conditioning is
installed and operating.
§ 132-38. Rodent control.
Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide for
entry of rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or other such device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
§ 132-39. Water service.
Every dwelling unit shall be provided with water service from the municipal
water utility. In the event that a water customer, as defined by Chapter 309,
Water and Sewer, on an account for a residential property which is occupied
by persons whose supply of water is dependent upon the customer's timely
payment of water utility charges fails to pay a water or sewer bill, or
approved by the Electrical Department of the Middle Department
Association of Fire Underwriters.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction, and Ch. 97, Fire Prevention.
§ 132-34 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-39
127:371
otherwise jeopardizes the continuation of the service of water to such
dwelling unit, such person constituting the water customer shall be in
violation of this section and shall be deemed to have failed to provide such
dwelling unit with water, regardless of whether water service is actually
terminated. A customer shall be in violation of this section if notice of
termination of water service is issued to him/her and (s)he fails to cause
such notice to be withdrawn, canceled or extended by making timely
payment or other arrangements within the time period specified in the
termination notice. Violations of this section shall be punishable in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of this Code;
provided, however, that upon the issuance of a citation for a violation of
this section, a separate violation shall be deemed to have occurred for every
twenty-four-hour period subsequent to the issuance of the citation that the
customer shall fail to cause such notice of termination to be withdrawn,
canceled or extended.
§ 132-40. Smoke and carbon monoxide detector devices.51
[Amended 1-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-9]
No person shall occupy or let to another any dwelling or dwelling unit
for the purpose of occupancy therein which does not comply with the
requirements of this section.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTION DEVICE — A device which is
capable of detecting an invisible, odorless, tasteless, gas produced
when fossil fuels do not burn completely or are exposed to heat (usually
fire).
SMOKE DETECTOR — Devices which detect visible and invisible
particles of combustion and meet the listing criteria of UL217.
B. Applicability:
(1) In all dwellings and dwelling units in the City, a smoke detection
device shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
herein. Battery-powered smoke detection devices shall be
acceptable as meeting the minimum requirements of this
subsection. Electric-powered smoke detectors, whether
interconnected or single-station units, shall also meet the
requirements of this subsection.
(2) In all dwelling and dwelling units of the City a carbon monoxide
detection device shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements herein. Battery-powered detection devices shall be
acceptable as meeting the minimum requirements of this
subsection.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 97, Fire Prevention, Art. III.
§ 132-39 TRENTON CODE § 132-40
127:372
C. Where required:
(1) A smoke detection device shall be installed on each level of all oneand
two-family dwellings and dwelling units, Use Group R-3.
(2) The smoke detection device shall be installed as follows:
(a) On the under side of the header at the bottom of the stairs of
the cellar/basement.
(b) On the first floor in the living room or near the stairs to the
second floor.
(c) On the second floor outside of the doors to bedrooms within 10
feet of the sleeping area.
(d) On the third floor, should this room be finished with interior
walls and ceilings and accessible by fixed stairs, regardless of
use.
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed or interpreted to in
any way impair the authority of the Director of Division of Housing
Inspections to require additional smoke detectors as may be
deemed necessary.
(4) Except as provided above, all detectors shall be securely mounted
on the ceiling surface at least six inches from the nearest wall, or in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
D. Responsibility.
(1) The owners or managing agents of any dwelling or dwelling unit
shall install and maintain carbon monoxide detectors in full
operating condition as described herein.
(2) It shall be the duty of the tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit, at
his/her own expense, to maintain and replace all batteries for
battery-operated carbon monoxide detector devices installed by the
owner in such dwelling units. Any tenant or occupant who fails to
so maintain and replace such batteries shall be guilty of violating
this subsection.
E. Interference with operation prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
tenant, occupant, owner, agent or any other person to tamper with,
damage, destroy, steal, paint over or do anything to cause such smoke
detectors or any of its parts to malfunction or fail to operate.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person guilty of violating the provisions of
this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of this Code.
G. Applicability. In all dwellings and dwelling units of the City, a carbon
monoxide detection device shall be installed in accordance with the
§ 132-40 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-40
127:373
requirements herein. Battery-powered detection devices shall be
acceptable as meeting the minimum requirements of this subsection.
H. Where required. A carbon monoxide detection device should be
centrally located outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. If the bedroom hallway is longer
than 40 feet, the installation of a device shall be required at both ends
of the hallway.
(1) In dwellings containing more than one unit of dwelling space there
shall be a detector required for each dwelling unit of the structure.
(2) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed or interpreted to in
any way impair the authority of the Director of the Division of
Housing Inspections to require additional carbon monoxide
detection devices as may be deemed necessary.
I. Responsibility.
(1) The owners or managing agents of any dwelling or dwelling unit
shall install and maintain smoke detectors in full operating
condition as described herein.
(2) It shall be the duty of the tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit, at
his/her own expense, to maintain and replace all batteries for
battery-operated smoke detector devices installed by the owner in
such dwelling units. Any tenant or occupant who fails to so
maintain and replace such batteries shall be guilty of violating this
subsection.
J. Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm compliance
required.
(1) Prior to any change in ownership of any dwelling with three or
more units, inhabited or intended to be inhabited, a certificate of
smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm compliance shall first
have been obtained from the Division of Housing, stating that the
building and premises comply with the section.
(2) Fee. The fee will be based on when the application is received.
(a) More than 10 business days prior to change of occupant: $35.
(b) Four to 10 business days prior to change of occupant: $70.
(c) Less than four business days prior to change of occupant:
$125.
(d) Reinspection required due to inoperable, improperly located or
absence of required detector: $15.
(e) An additional charge of $5 per unit for the initial inspection
and $1 per unit for reinspections for five or more units.
§ 132-40 TRENTON CODE § 132-41
127:374
§ 132-41. Storage of flammable and/or combustible liquids.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS — Any liquids having a flash point at or above
100º F. (38º C.).
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS — Any liquids having a flash point below 100º
F. (38º C.).
B. Prohibited storage. No person shall store any vehicles or mechanical
equipment, gasoline, flammable and/or combustible liquids in any type
of container, within any portion of a dwelling.
C. Permitted storage.
(1) No person shall store more than five gallons of gasoline, flammable
and/or combustible liquids in any accessory structure of any
dwelling.
(2) The storage of kerosene in quantities of more than one gallon is
prohibited in any dwelling.
(3) The storage of gasoline and/or kerosene or other flammable liquids
must be in approved containers.
§ 132-41 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-41
127:375

ARTICLE VI
Minimum Standards for Light, Electrical Facilities and Ventilation
§ 132-42. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the requirements of this article.
§ 132-43. Lighting.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area
of the room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and such light-obstructing structures are
located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level
above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included in
calculating the required minimum total window area. Whenever the
only window in a room is a skylight type in the top of such room, the
total window area of the skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total
floor area of the room.
B. Every habitable room in any dwelling shall contain at least two separate
wall-type electric convenience outlets, each of which shall be a
minimum of a double outlet; or one such double-convenience outlet and
one ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture.
C. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall contain at least
one ceiling or wall-type light fixture.
D. Every portion of each staircase, hall, cellar, basement, landing, furnace
room, utility room and all similar nonhabitable space located in a
dwelling shall have artificial light available at all times, with an
illumination of at least two lumens per square foot (two footcandles) in
the darkest portion.
E. Every portion of any interior or exterior passageway or staircase
common to three or more families in a dwelling shall be illuminated at
all times with light of at least two lumens per square foot (two
footcandles) in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and
passageways. In dwellings comprising two dwelling units, such
illumination shall not be required at all times if separate switches for
the control of such light, convenient and readily accessible to each
dwelling unit, are provided.
F. Every electrical outlet and fixture required by this section shall be
properly installed and maintained in good and safe condition so as not
to cause a fire or electrical shock hazard and shall be properly
connected to the source of electric power. Without restricting the
§ 132-42 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-43
127:377
§ 132-44. Ventilation.
generality of this subsection, no temporary wiring shall be used except
extension cords in good and safe condition which run directly from
portable fixtures or appliances to convenience outlets, and which do not
lie under rugs or other floor coverings, nor extend through doorways,
transoms or other openings through structural elements.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one easily operable window or
skylight or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The
total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least 45% of the minimum window area or minimum skylight-type
window size, as required in § 132-43A, except where there is supplied
some other device affording adequate ventilation providing at least two
air changes per hour and approved by the Housing Inspector.
B. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in Subsection
A, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately
ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a
ventilation system providing at least six air changes per hour which is
operated either continuously or automatically when in use and is
approved by the Housing Inspector.
C. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling and rooming
house shall be adequately ventilated.
D. Utility spaces which contain heat-producing, air-conditioning and other
operating mechanical equipment shall be ventilated to the outer air,
and air from such spaces shall not be recirculated to other parts of the
building.
E. Natural ventilation of spaces such as attics and enclosed basementless
spaces shall be provided by openings of sufficient size to overcome
dampness and minimize the effect of conditions conducive to decay and
deterioration of the structure, and to prevent excessive heat in attics.
§ 132-43 TRENTON CODE § 132-44
127:378
ARTICLE VII
Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements
§ 132-45. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements.
§ 132-46. Floor space.
§ 132-47. Ceiling height.
§ 132-48. Use.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area, exclusive of
stairways.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof.
A. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for
the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof.
B. Every bathroom, toilet compartment, utility room, hall and passageway
shall have a clear ceiling height of at least six feet eight inches.
A. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
B. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The total of the window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required by § 132-43 and is located
entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
(3) The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under § 132-44, except where there is
§ 132-45 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-48
127:379
§ 132-49. Location of sleeping rooms.
No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall
have such rooms so located that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment, intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping
room, can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall
room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
only by going through another sleeping room or bathroom or water closet
compartment.
§ 132-50. Exitways.
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the Housing Inspector.
(4) There are no pipes, ducts or other obstructions less than six feet six
inches above the floor level.
(5) All furnaces or other heating facilities are so located, insulated and
separated from the living area by fireproof partitions or walls
necessary pursuant to regulations of the Fire Chief so that the
same does not constitute an undue hazard to the safety and health
of the occupants.
(6) There is a second means of egress conforming to the requirements
of § 132-50A.
C. An interior room not having its own source of natural light and
ventilation may be used for living purposes, other than sleeping, only
where such room is adjacent to an outside room which has adequate
natural light and ventilation, calculated on the basis of the combined
floor area of the two rooms, and where the separating wall between the
two rooms has a clear horizontal opening, doorway or archway at least
six feet wide.
A. Safe exitway. Every dwelling unit shall have a safe and unobstructed
means of exit leading to a safe and open space at ground level
accessible to a street.
B. Secondary exitway.
(1) Buildings containing two or more dwelling units and three or more
stories in height above grade shall have a suitable and separate
secondary exit.
(2) This secondary exit shall be made accessible by a doorway or
openable window to a protected stairway or fire escape providing a
safe path of escape in case of emergency.
C. Direct access to exitway. Access to any exit required by this section
shall not necessitate passage through any other dwelling unit or part
§ 132-48 TRENTON CODE § 132-50
127:380
thereof, nor shall any exit be subject to locking by any device which
impedes or prohibits ready exit.
D. Window exits. Where the secondary exit is by means of an openable
window, the opening shall be at least five square feet in area, with a
minimum dimension of 20 inches. The bottom of the opening or sill
height shall not be more than three feet six inches above the floor and
shall lead directly to the fire escape. Where storm windows, screens or
burglar guards are used, these shall be readily openable from the
inside.
E. Applicability. This section shall apply to all existing structures deemed
subject to the provisions of this chapter by the Chief Housing Inspector
of the City of Trenton in accordance with § 132-123, Applicability.
F. Exceptions. The issuance of a valid certificate of occupancy or
continued certificate of occupancy by the Construction Official with
regard to buildings deemed subject to the provisions of this section
shall, in fact, satisfy the intent of this section. The Chief Housing
Inspector shall be empowered to grant reasonable waivers in cases
where strict compliance with the requirements hereof would cause a
hardship and where a waiver would not substantially frustrate the
purposes of this section.
§ 132-50 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-50
127:381

ARTICLE VIII
Responsibilities of Owners for Maintenance, Provision of Facilities
and Heating
§ 132-51. Compliance required.
§ 132-52. Weight stress.
Every part of a dwelling shall be maintained in a structurally sound
condition and so as to be capable of sustaining safely its own weight and
any additional weight that may be put on it through normal use.
§ 132-53. Foundation walls.
A foundation wall of a dwelling shall be maintained so as to prevent the
entrance of moisture, insects and rodents. Without restricting the generality
of this section, the maintenance includes shoring of the wall where
necessary, installing subsoil drains at the footing, grouting masonry cracks,
waterproofing the wall and joints and using other suitable means.
§ 132-54. Exterior walls.
An exterior wall of a dwelling and its components shall be maintained so
as to prevent its deterioration due to weather and insects and to preserve
its appearance. Without restricting the generality of this section, the
maintenance includes the painting or whitewashing, restoring or repairing
of the wall, coping or flashing, waterproofing of joints, waterproofing of the
wall itself, installing or repairing of termite shields, treating of the soil with
poison and using other suitable means.
§ 132-55. Roofs.
A roof of a dwelling shall be maintained in a water-tight condition so as
to prevent leakage into the building. Without restricting the generality of
this section, the maintenance includes repairing of the roof and flashing,
applying waterproof coatings, installing or repairing eave troughs and
rainwater piping and using other suitable means. Dangerous accumulations
A. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply
with the requirements of this article.
B. The owners of all property other than property which has been
foreclosed by a public entity for nonpayment of taxes shall be
responsible for complying with those requirements of this article which
relate to the structural and exterior condition of properties regardless
of occupancy, those sections being § 132-52, Weight stress; § 132-53,
Foundation walls; § 132-54, Exterior walls; § 132-55, Roofs; § 132-62,
Yards and accessory buildings; § 132-63, Pest extermination; § 132-64,
Sanitation of yards and public areas.
§ 132-51 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-55
127:383
of snow or ice or both shall be removed from the roof of a dwelling or an
accessory building.
§ 132-56. Windows and entranceways.
Windows, exterior doors and basement or cellar hatchways shall be
maintained so as to prevent the entrance of wind and rain into the dwelling.
Without restricting the generality of this section, the maintenance includes
painting, renewing rotted or damaged doors, door frames, window frames,
sashes and casing, refitting doors and windows, weatherstripping, replacing
defective door and window hardware, reglazing and using other suitable
means.
§ 132-57. Stairs and outside steps.
An outside or inside stair and porch appurtenant to it shall be maintained
so as to be free of holes, cracks and other defects which may constitute
possible accident hazards. Without restricting the generality of this section,
the maintenance includes repairing or replacing treads or risers that show
excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose, and supporting structural
members that are rotted or deteriorated. A handrail and bannister shall be
installed so as to provide reasonable protection against accident or injury
on an open side of a stairway, balcony, landing or stairwell.
§ 132-58. Walls and ceilings.
A. Every wall and ceiling in a dwelling shall be maintained so as to be free
of large holes or cracks and loose plaster or other material, the collapse
of which might cause injury. Without restricting the generality of this
section the maintenance includes repairing or filling holes and cracks
and removing and replacing loose or defective parts. The surface of
every wall and ceiling shall be finished so as to be reasonably smooth,
clean, tight and easily cleaned.
B. If, upon inspection by the Director of the Department of Inspections,
there is found the presence of flaking, peeling, chipped or loose paint,
plaster or structural material in any dwelling, the Director of the
Department of Inspections is hereby empowered to secure specimens of
flaking, peeling, chipped or loose paint, plaster or structural material
and to analyze or cause an analysis to be made determining whether
the materials contain lead or its compounds. As used in this subsection,
"dwelling" means any building or structure or portion thereof which is
occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence or sleeping place of
one or more human beings.
C. The Director of the Department of Inspections shall order the owner or
his/her agent to remove all paint, plaster or structural material
containing lead compounds in a quantity of more than 1% or to cover
such surfaces with such materials and by such methods as the
Department may approve to protect the life and health of the occupants
of such dwelling area. Scraping, then repainting a surface with a paint
§ 132-55 TRENTON CODE § 132-58
127:384
§ 132-59. Floors.
§ 132-60. Chimneys and flues.
containing less than 1% lead shall be deemed to be satisfactory
compliance with this section, if otherwise in compliance with the City
laws.
D. This section shall apply only to dwellings where children have access
and to those dwellings vacated prior to new habitation.
E. Whenever examinations upon blood, urine or any standard diagnostic
method for the detection of lead in humans reveal an excess of the
maximum safety level of lead as determined and promulgated by the
United States Health Public Service, the Health Officer may request the
Director of the Department of Inspections to make an immediate
inspection of the dwelling of such individual examined to determine
whether the paint, plaster or structural material in the dwelling
contains lead or its compounds. This will be done with reasonable
consideration for the appearance of the wall, floor, ceiling, window sills
or any other part of the dwelling required for sampling.
F. Paint used on interior surfaces shall be interior paint. Interior paint
shall contain no more than 1% lead. The use of any other paint is hereby
prohibited.
A. Every floor in a dwelling shall be maintained so as to be free of loose,
warped, protruding, broken or rotted boards that might cause an
accident or that might admit rodents into a room because of holes or
wide cracks. Without restricting the generality of this section, the
maintenance includes the repairing or replacing of floor boards and,
where the floor boards have been covered with linoleum or some other
covering that has become unduly worn or torn so that it retains dirt, the
repairing or replacing of the linoleum or other covering.
B. Every kitchen floor, bathroom floor and toilet floor where the toilet is in
a separate room shall be maintained so as to be reasonably impervious
to water and so as to permit easy cleaning. Without restricting the
generality of this section, the maintenance includes installing,
repairing, refinishing and replacing a floor covering of a kind that will
provide the waterproof and cleaning conditions required.
A. Chimneys, flues, vents and connector pipes shall be inspected, cleaned
and maintained as often as necessary to insure adequate draft,
structural integrity and freedom from combustible deposits and other
obstructions.
B. Storage of combustible materials shall not be permitted within two feet
of any heat-producing appliance, including water heaters.
C. All fuel oil tanks, above or below grade, which are no longer being used
shall be removed in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code F4016.0.
§ 132-58 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-61
127:385
§ 132-61. Fireplaces.
Every fireplace used or intended to be used in a dwelling for burning fuel
in open fires shall be maintained so that adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures. Without
restricting the generality of this section, the maintenance includes securing
connection to a chimney that complies with the provisions of this article,
if necessary, lining, repairing and relining with fire-resistant material and
installing, repairing and replacing the hearth.
§ 132-62. Yards and accessory buildings.
§ 132-63. Pest extermination.
A. A yard shall be kept reasonably clean and free from rubbish or other
debris and from objects or conditions such as holes or excavations that
might create a health, fire or accident hazard.
B. Stormwater shall be drained from the yard so as to prevent recurrent or
excessive ponding or the entrance of water into a basement or cellar.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas of a yard
shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions.
D. An accessory building, including a fence, shall be kept in good repair
and free from health, fire and accident hazards.
E. The exterior of an accessory building shall be made weather resistant
through the use of appropriate weather-resistant materials, including
paint and other preservatives.
F. Where an accessory building is not maintained in accordance with
these standards, it shall be removed from the yard.
G. If hedges extend beyond the established property line or through a
fence, it shall be the property owner's responsibility from which the
hedge originates to trim back all growth extending beyond the
boundaries of the yard and remove the cuttings. This shall be done with
the permission of entry from the adjacent property owner to enter the
yard. [Added 3-2-2006 by Ord. No. 06-020]
H. If there is a tree in a yard and the branches of same extend over the
established property line, and the tree could cause damage to the
adjacent property by falling or scraping the roof covering rendering it
ineffective, such branch or tree shall be ordered removed at the
expense of the property owner on which the tree originates. Should
such tree be located on the established property line, the expense of the
removal and order to do so shall be the responsibility of both property
owners. [Added 3-2-2006 by Ord. No. 06-020]
§ 132-61 TRENTON CODE § 132-63
127:386
§ 132-64. Sanitation of yards and public areas.
§ 132-65. Occupancy conditions.
§ 132-66. Facilities and equipment.
A. Where an accessory building or any condition in a yard may harbour
noxious insects or rodents, all necessary steps shall be taken to
eliminate the insects or rodents and to prevent their reappearance.
B. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents or other pests
on the premises. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
C. When deemed necessary by the Housing Inspector that extermination
needs to be completed, the owner and/or occupant must employ a
licensed professional exterminator to complete extermination and
provide proofs to the Division of Housing Inspections. [Added
3-17-2016 by Ord. No. 16-10]
A. Every owner of a dwelling unit containing two or more dwelling units
shall be responsible for maintaining in a reasonably clean and sanitary
condition all communal, shared, public areas of the dwelling and
premises, including the yard and accessory buildings thereof which are
used or are shared by the occupants of two or more dwelling units.
B. In addition, every owner of property without any structures or
dwellings thereon shall be responsible for maintaining such property in
a clean and sanitary condition free from any nuisances, as defined in
Article XVII.
A. No owner shall occupy or rent to any other person for occupancy or
allow any other person to occupy any vacant dwelling unit unless it is
reasonably clean, sanitary and complies with all the provisions of this
chapter and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. No owner shall occupy or rent to any other persons for occupancy or
allow any other persons to occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit unless
(s)he has informed such persons, in writing, of the maximum number of
occupants that may live in the dwelling or dwelling unit.
C. No owner shall occupy or rent to any other person for occupancy or
allow any other person to occupy a vacant building which, by virtue of a
cited violation, has been determined to require a certification of the
facilities, utilities or structural integrity that may affect the health,
safety and welfare of those persons on or near the premises.
A. It shall be the owner's responsibility to supply, unless otherwise
provided for under lease agreement, all of the equipment and facilities
§ 132-63 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-66
127:387
§ 132-67. Interruption of services.
No owner or operator shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility
which is required to be supplied under the provisions of this chapter to
be removed from, shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling
or dwelling unit let or occupied by him/her, except for such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs, replacements or
alterations are in process of being made.
§ 132-68. Heating standards.
§ 132-69. Elevators.
The owner of every multi-dwelling facility shall maintain in operating order
all elevators providing access to occupied units on the third level or higher.
No owner shall permit such an elevator to remain out of service without
notifying the Building Inspector of the fact and without pursuing a diligent
repair effort.
§ 132-70. Property identification.52
required by this chapter, except that in dwellings containing no more
than three units it shall be the responsibility of the occupant of each
dwelling unit to furnish receptacles required for temporary storage of
rubbish and garbage until removal from the premises.
B. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function properly and shall be maintained by the owner in reasonably
good working condition.
C. The owner is responsible for all repairs and maintenance to supplied
facilities and equipment required by this chapter regardless of any
agreement or lease entered into between owner and occupant.
A. Every owner or operator of any dwelling who rents, leases or lets for
human habitation any dwelling unit contained within such dwelling on
terms, either expressed or implied, to supply or furnish heat to the
occupants thereof, shall supply heat to maintain therein a minimum
inside temperature of 68º F., in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. during the day and 60º F. during the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. during the night throughout the year.
B. Whenever a dwelling is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or other
heating apparatus under the control of the owner or operator of the
dwelling, such owner or operator, in the absence of a written contract
or agreement to the contrary, shall be deemed to have contracted,
undertaken or bound himself/herself to furnish heat in accordance with
the provisions of this section to every dwelling unit which contains
radiators, furnace heat duct outlets or other heating apparatus outlets.
§ 132-66 TRENTON CODE § 132-70
127:388
A. One- and two-family dwellings. The owner of all buildings containing
one- and two-family dwellings shall conspicuously display the street
address number of the property with a minimum size configuration of
three inches in height. These numbers must be clearly visible at all
times from the center of the street. All other buildings, whether
commercial use or multifamily dwellings, shall display the street
address with a minimum size configuration of six inches in height.
B. Apartments. The owner of buildings containing more than one unit shall
identify each entrance door to each unit with a letter or numeral placed
on the entrance door to each unit with a minimum size configuration of
three inches in height.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 46, Buildings, Numbering of; and Ch. 97, Fire Prevention, § 97-9F.
§ 132-70 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-70
127:389

ARTICLE IX
Responsibilities of Occupants for Maintenance of Dwellings and
Dwelling Units
§ 132-71. Cleanliness and sanitation. [Amended 3-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-10]
Every owner and/or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in
a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises, including the yard and accessory buildings thereof, which (s)he
occupies and controls.
§ 132-71.1. Nuisances defined and prohibited. [Added 5-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-17]
The following matters, conditions, acts or circumstances, whether in a
structure, on the property of a structure or upon any unoccupied lot,
including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements or
excavations, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the
health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of this municipality:
§ 132-72. Rubbish and garbage disposal. [Amended 3-17-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-10]
A. The existence or presence of accumulated garbage, rubbish or debris
on or throughout the interior or exterior of a structure or property.
B. Any abandoned ice box, refrigerator, motor vehicle or other item which
may become detrimental or a menace to the health and/or wellbeing of
the inhabitants of this municipality.
C. Overcrowding of a structure.
D. Any structurally unsound fence, wall or bordering structure which
creates an unsafe condition.
E. The existence or presence of any overgrown vegetation, such as high
weeds or high grass, as well as any poisonous condition, such as poison
ivy, oak or sumac.
F. Any condition which may become a fire hazard, such as the use of
interior furniture outside the structure walls, including but not limited
to the porch, steps, etc.
A. Every owner and/or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the
rubbish containers required by § 132-31.
B. Every owner and/or occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing
no more than three dwelling units shall be responsible, unless provided
for otherwise under a lease agreement, for the periodic removal of all
§ 132-71 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-72
127:391
§ 132-73. Screens and storm windows. [Amended 3-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-10]
Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall install screens in all
windows and double or storm windows whenever the same are required
under the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto.
§ 132-74. Pest extermination.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his/her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, whenever infestation is
caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or
reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility
of the owner.
§ 132-75. Facilities and fixtures.
§ 132-76. Occupancy of dwelling units in violation prohibited.
No occupant shall occupy or permit the occupancy of any dwelling or
dwelling unit in violation of the occupancy standards established in this
chapter.
§ 132-77. Access to premises.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof,
or his/her agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or
dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
garbage and rubbish from the premises in accordance with such
regulation of the City for the collection of garbage and rubbish.
A. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all food storage
receptacles, cooking facilities and plumbing fixtures therein in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for the exercise
of reasonable care, proper use and proper operation of supplied heating
facilities.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling unit which is let or rented from another
shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care and the proper
use of the dwelling unit, and its component parts, and supplied
facilities, equipment, fixtures and furnishings.
§ 132-72 TRENTON CODE § 132-77
127:392
with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation
adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 132-78. Security devices.
A. No landlord shall interfere with or prohibit any lessee from making any
modification to the security device or devices securing the doorway
entrances or other accessible openings to any residential dwelling unit.
However, it shall be the obligation of any lessee to make such
modification or addition to existing security devices in a reasonable and
proper manner without damaging or defacing the premises and in strict
conformance with all laws, regulations and ordinances governing
buildings, including the Fire Prevention Code, the Life Safety Code and
the Code of the National Fire Protection Association. Further, the lessee
shall be obligated to provide the landlord, or his/her designee, with the
appropriate key or other aid or instruction necessary to enable the
landlord to gain access to such premises in accordance with his/her
responsibilities and authorities as landlord.
B. As used in this subsection the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ACCESSIBLE OPENINGS — Any doorway, window or other opening
in the premises through which an adult person could reasonably gain
access to the interior of the premises.
LANDLORD — Any individual, group of individuals, corporation or
other business association which owns any real property which is
leased, in whole or in part, to any person for residential or business
purposes, for any term, with or without a formal lease.
SECURITY DEVICE — Any form of lock or locking device which is
operated by key or by lever action or sliding bolt, but excluding
combination locks.
§ 132-77 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-78
127:393

ARTICLE X
Renting of Dwelling Units
§ 132-79. Registration. [Amended 8-16-2007 by Ord. No. 07-60;
5-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-17; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-47;
3-17-2016 by Ord. No. 16-10]
A. Required.
(1) The nonoccupant owner of any structure which is let or rented to
another for the purpose of living therein shall register such
structure on a registration form to be provided by the Department
of Inspections and shall pay an annual nonrefundable registration
fee of $90 per structure plus $25 for each dwelling unit within the
structure. Such a structure is hereinafter referred to as a "rental
structure." The registration fee shall include the annual
registration permit and necessary inspections. The nonoccupant
owner shall also include on the registration form his/her home and
business addresses, day and evening telephone numbers, social
security number and date of birth. In the event the nonoccupant
owner of the rental structure designates an agent to act on his/her
behalf or in his/her stead, including, but not limited to, accepting
service of process and acting as the attorney in fact in any hearing,
the registration form shall also include the agent's name, home and
business addresses, day and evening telephone numbers, social
security number and date of birth. The day telephone number
where the nonoccupant owner or authorized agent can be reached
during regular business hours shall be equipped with an answering
service or device.
(2) In the event the owner of the property is a corporation or entity
other than an individual, the registration form shall include the
names, the home and business addresses, day and evening
telephone numbers, social security numbers and dates of birth for
all officers of the corporation or other entity and shall further
include the foregoing information of the registered agent. The
owner or the authorized agent shall comply with the registration
provisions by March 1 of each calendar year. The annual fee shall
not be prorated for a registration completed for only a portion of
the calendar year. Failure to comply with this provision shall
subject the owner and/or his/her agent to the penalties prescribed
in § 132-88 and in accordance with the provisions of Article IV of
this chapter.
B. (Reserved)
C. Exceptions. Where a rental structure is occupied by a family member of
the owner, the owner shall not be required to register such property.
Family members shall be defined as children, mother or mother-in-law,
father or father-in-law, sister or sister-in-law, brother or brother-in-law,
grandparents or grandchildren of the nonoccupant owner. The owner
§ 132-79 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-79
127:395
§ 132-80. Change of address or telephone number. [Amended
2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
Any change in the address or telephone number of persons cited in § 132-79
shall be reported to the Division of Housing within one business day after
such change.
§ 132-81. Occupancy data. [Amended 7-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-31]
The owner cited in § 132-79 shall be required to indicate the total number
of dwelling units in each property rented, the location of each property, the
names and number of persons living in each dwelling unit, the number of
rooms in each dwelling unit and the square footage of each dwelling unit.
§ 132-82. Change in occupancy or dwelling units.
The owner cited in § 132-79 shall be required to report any change in the
number of occupants and the number of dwelling units to the Division of
Housing within five days after such change.
§ 132-83. Resident manager.
All owners subject to § 132-79 shall be required to have an agent residing
within or within 200 feet of any rental structure with nine or more units and
shall provide the Division of Housing with the name, address and telephone
number of such agent.
§ 132-84. Change in resident manager.
Any change of managers as required by § 132-84 shall be reported to
the Division of Housing within one business day of such change with the
information required by this section.
§ 132-85. Required inspections. [Amended 7-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-31; 11-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-52; 3-17-2016 by Ord. No. 16-10]
shall be required to submit a sworn affidavit by March 1 of each
calendar year to the Division of Housing Inspections, which shall set
forth the name of the individual occupying the property and the
individual's familial relationship to the owner.
D. Interpretation. If any of the provisions of this subsection conflict with
any prior subsections, the language of this subsection shall control.
This amendment is intended to ensure compliance with the recent
decision of the New Jersey Superior Court as set forth in Timber Glen
Phase III, LLC v. Township of Hamilton, 441 N.J. Super. 514 (App. Div.
2015), and this amendment shall be interpreted in accord with same.
A. All non-occupant-owned structures which are let or rented to another
for the purpose of living therein shall be inspected once every five years
to ensure compliance with the Housing Code. In addition, all vacant
§ 132-79 TRENTON CODE § 132-85
127:396
§ 132-86. Ratings of habitability.
Each unit will receive a rating of habitability.
§ 132-87. Conflicts with state laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall impair the right of the State of New Jersey,
Department of Community Affairs, to conduct and investigate complaints or
perform inspections within the City on a building which is inspected under
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:13A-6(e), 55:13A-7 and 55:13A-7.1 regulations
or interfere with its administrative process, nor does this section in any way
imply that the City supersedes the regulations as established by the State
of New Jersey.
dwellings shall be inspected and issued a certificate of approval prior
to occupancy by a new tenant to ensure compliance with the Housing
Code. The Division of Housing Inspections shall inspect the vacant
unit within five days of receipt of notice from the nonoccupant owner.
A determination that a particular unit is not in compliance with the
Housing Code shall not affect the ability of the owner to continue
renting any remaining units within the registered structure. Those
persons who fail to comply with the requirements of this section shall
be subject to the appropriate penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty, and in accordance with the provisions of Article IV.
B. A state-licensed contractor with experience in the field must provide a
certification of the heater and chimney every five years or when
deemed necessary by the Housing Inspector. Said contractor shall not
have any financial or ownership interest in the property that is being
certified.
C. A unit inspection fee of $50 will be assessed if a landlord fails his/her
first reinspection and a second reinspection is required. The first initial
inspection and first reinspection remain free of charge.
A. Unsatisfactory. This rating shall cause the dwelling, dwelling unit or
structure to be vacated immediately and considered unfit for human
habitation.
B. Conditional. This rating shall permit occupancy. However, the violations
as cited would have to be corrected in no longer than a thirty-day period
of time. If violations continue to exist, court action would be instituted
and a fine or penalty as prescribed in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty, would be issued on a daily basis.
C. Satisfactory. This rating shall permit occupancy for a period of one year
or until the next scheduled inspection for habitability or upon receipt of
a complaint.
§ 132-85 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-88
127:397
§ 132-88. Failure to complete registration process on due date.
[Amended 5-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-17; 3-17-2016 by Ord. No.
16-10]
A late penalty of two times the registration fee as set forth in § 132-79A
above shall be imposed upon the owner for failure to submit a completed
registration form by January 1 of each calendar year. The failure to complete
the registration process by March 1 of each calendar year shall subject the
owner to the general penalties set forth in § 1-17 of the Code of the City of
Trenton. Each calendar month thereafter where such failure continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 132-89. Taxes and other municipal charges. [Amended 3-17-2016
by Ord. No. 16-10]
All completed registration forms under this chapter shall have attached
thereto a sworn affidavit that property taxes have been paid through the
preceding quarter and that all water, sewer and any other municipal fees
for the subject property are current and up-to-date. A tax account which is
currently under an installment agreement authorized by the Tax Collector
shall not be deemed delinquent for purposes of this provision. In addition,
a water and sewer account which is currently under a deferred payment
agreement authorized by the Division of Water Billing shall not be deemed
delinquent for purposes of this section.
§ 132-90. through § 132-91. (Reserved)53
§ 132-91.1. Vacant property registration process. [Amended
5-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-17; 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-46;
11-6-2014 by Ord. No. 14-54; 7-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-14]
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms are
defined as set forth herein:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — The Director of the Department of Housing
and Economic Development or such official within that Department as
may be designated by the Director in writing.
OWNER — Includes any private title holder, any agent of a private
title holder having authority to act with respect to a vacant property,
any foreclosing entity that has filed a notice with the Municipal Clerk
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c.127, Sec.
17, as amended by P.L. 200, c.296), or any other entity determined by
the Municipal Officer of the City of Trenton to have authority to act with
respect to the property. This section exempts any municipal, county or
state owner of a vacant building or structure.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building or structure which is not at
present legally occupied or at which all lawful business or construction
53.Editor's Note: Former § 132-90, License revocation or suspension, and § 132-91,
Nontransferable license, were repealed 3-17-2016 by Ord. No. 16-10.
§ 132-88 TRENTON CODE § 132-91.1
127:398
operations or residential or other occupancy have substantially ceased,
and which is in such condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied
without repair or rehabilitation, including but not limited to any
property meeting the definition of "abandoned property" in N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq. However, a building shall not be deemed vacant
property for the purposes of this section if the building is habitable and
in which all building systems are in sound working order, the building
and grounds are maintained in good condition, and which is being
actively marketed by its owner for sale or rental; or the building is
scheduled for demolition within 30 days after the date on which the
initial registration fee or renewal fee is due.
B. Registration required; renewal; waiver of fee.
(1) Effective on January 1, 2015, the owner of any vacant property as
defined herein shall, within 30 days after the building becomes
vacant property or within 30 days after assuming ownership of the
vacant property, whichever is later; or within 10 days of receipt of
notice by the municipality, file a registration statement for such
vacant property with the Municipal Officer, on forms provided for
that purpose by the Municipal Officer, along with any fee required
by this section. Failure to receive notice by the municipality shall
not constitute grounds for failing to register the property.
(2) Each property having a separate tax block and lot number shall be
registered separately.
(3) The registration shall include the information required under
Subsection D of this section and the insurance certificate required
in Subsection G of this section, as well as any additional
information that the Municipal Officer may reasonably require.
(4) The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building or structure remains a vacant
property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed in Subsection E for each vacant property registered.
(5) For purposes of efficient administration, the Municipal Officer may
establish a single date in each year upon which all registrations
shall be renewed, in which case the initial registration fee shall be
pro-rated for any property that has become a vacant property less
than 10 months prior to that date.
(6) Waiver of registration fee.
(a) Any owner of vacant property who submits plans to the
Department of Inspections demonstrating that the building or
structure will be completely rehabilitated and restored to
productive use and occupancy within the twelve-month period
following the date of the initial property registration, or a
notarized letter from a licensed contractor or architect stating
§ 132-91.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-91.1
127:399
that the building or structure is capable of being completely
rehabilitated and restored to productive use and occupancy
within the twelve-month period following the date of the initial
property registration, shall be exempt from payment of the
registration fee. The owner must still comply with all other
provisions of this section. In the event that the building or
structure has not been restored to productive use and
occupancy at the end of the twelve-month period following the
date of the initial property registration, the owner shall be
liable for any fee waived and shall also be required to pay the
renewal fee as identified in Subsection E of this section. The
Municipal Officer may extend the waiver of the registration
fee for not more than one additional year in response to a
written request by the owner where the Municipal Officer finds
that compelling conditions outside the owner's control made
it impossible for the owner to restore the property within the
initial twelve-month period.
(b) Where the owner is an entity experienced in rehabilitation or
redevelopment of vacant properties, and where the property
subject to this section is being held for a project of
rehabilitation or redevelopment consistent with municipal
plans and ordinances, and where by virtue of financing,
marketing or other conditions that project may require more
than one year for realization, the Municipal Officer may extend
the waiver of the registration fee on an annual basis without
limitation, upon written request by the owner, as long as the
Municipal Officer finds that the owner is making reasonable
progress toward completion of the project. The owner shall
provide the Municipal Officer with such documentation, which
may include plans, financing applications, applications for land
use approval or other evidence of progress.
(7) The owner shall notify the Municipal Officer within 30 days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Municipal Officer
for such purpose.
(8) The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the
owner or owners of the building.
(9) The Municipal Officer is authorized to draft and enforce rules and
regulations to effect the provisions and purposes of this section.
Such rules and regulations shall be made available on the City's
website and in the Department of Housing and Economic
Development.
C. At any time after filing a registration statement or a renewal of a
registration statement, the owner of any vacant property shall provide
§ 132-91.1 TRENTON CODE § 132-91.1
127:400
access to the City to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the
building to determine compliance with municipal codes, on reasonable
notice to the property owner or the designated agent.
D. Registration statement information; authorized agent.
(1) The registration statement shall include:
(a) The name, street address, e-mail address and telephone
number of a natural person 21 years of age or older, designated
by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for receiving
notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the
enforcement of any applicable code; and
(b) The name, street address, e-mail address and telephone
number of the firm or individual responsible for maintaining
the property shall be available by telephone or in person on a
twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two
entities may be the same or different persons.
(2) An owner who is a natural person may designate himself or herself
as agent or as the individual responsible for maintaining the
property.
(3) By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this
section, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code
violations concerning the registered vacant property and all
process in any court proceeding and administrative enforcement
proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the
registered building by service of the notice or process on the
authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized
agent under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to
consent to the continuation of the agent's designation for the
purposes of this section until the owner notifies the Municipal
Officer, in writing, of a change of authorized agent or until the
owner files a new annual registration statement.
(4) Any owner who fails to register a vacant property under the
provisions of this section shall further be deemed to consent to
receive, by posting at the building, any and all notices of code
violations and all process in an administrative proceeding brought
to enforce code provisions concerning the building.
E. Fees.
(1) The registration and renewal fee for each building or structure
shall be as follows: [Amended 1-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-3]
§ 132-91.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-91.1
127:401
Type Fee
Initial registration $500
First annual renewal $1,300
Second annual renewal $2,000
All subsequent annual renewals $3,000
(2) All fee income resulting from the application of this section shall be
deposited in a trust fund that shall be used for the sole purpose of
carrying out municipal activities with respect to vacant and
distressed properties, including but not limited to code
enforcement, abatement of nuisance conditions, stabilization,
rehabilitation, and other activities designed to minimize blight and/
or promote further productive reuse of properties.
F. The owner of any structure that has become vacant property, and any
person responsible for maintaining any such building that has become
vacant, shall, within 30 days of the structure becoming vacant or 30
days of the owner taking title to the property:
(1) Enclose and secure the structure as provided in the applicable code
of the City of Trenton or as set forth in rules and regulations
adopted by the Municipal Officer to supplement those codes;
(2) Ensure that the grounds of the structure, including yards, fences,
sidewalks, walks and driveways, are well maintained and kept free
from trash or debris;
(3) Post a sign affixed to the structure with the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and the owner's authorized agent
for the purpose of service of process, and the name, address and
telephone number of the entity responsible for maintenance of the
property, which may be the same as the authorized agent. The sign
shall be at least eight inches by 24 inches in dimension, shall
include the words "To report problems with this building, call....",
and shall be placed in a location where it is clearly legible from the
nearest public street sidewalk; and
(4) Maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition, keep the
grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure that
the sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the building is
complete.
G. Liability insurance.
(1) The owner of any vacant property shall acquire or otherwise
maintain liability insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000
for buildings designed primarily for one- to four-unit residential use
and not less than $1,000,000 for any other building, including, but
not limited to, buildings designed for multifamily, manufacturing,
§ 132-91.1 TRENTON CODE § 132-91.1
127:402
storage or commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or
any property caused by any physical condition of or in the building.
(2) Any insurance policy acquired or renewed after the building has
become vacant shall provide for written notice to the Municipal
Officer within 30 days of any lapse, cancellation or change in
coverage. The owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the
owner's registration statement. Any registration statement
submitted that does not include such evidence shall not be deemed
to be a valid registration.
H. The City of Trenton shall establish an online procedure by which
citizens can provide the Municipal Officer, through electronic means,
with information on unkempt or unregistered properties that may be
subject to this section.
I. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this section or of the rules
and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $250
and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Fines assessed under this section shall be recoverable from the
owner and shall be a lien on the property.
(2) For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 days after a building becomes vacant property or within
30 days after assuming ownership of a vacant property, whichever
is later; or within 10 days of receipt of notice by the municipality,
failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of Subsection F or
G of this section or such other matters as may be established by the
rules and regulations of the Municipal Officer shall be deemed to
be violations of this section.
§ 132-91.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-91.1
127:403

ARTICLE XI
Security Provisions
§ 132-92. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RENTAL DWELLING — See § 132-127.
RENTAL STRUCTURES IN A CONCENTRATED AREA — Twenty or more
rental units owned or operated by the same owner or corporation contained
within a three-square-block area.
RENTAL STRUCTURES, LARGE — Any public or private housing complex,
rental dwelling or rooming house containing 50 or more dwelling units or
lodging rooms. Structures containing less than 50 dwelling units or lodging
rooms, but existing with other buildings which are physically contiguous
and operated as a single housing complex and owned by the same person or
entity, shall be considered large rental structures.
RENTAL STRUCTURES, SMALL — Any public or private housing complex,
rental dwelling or rooming house containing 49 or fewer dwelling units or
lodging rooms.
ROOMING HOUSE — See § 132-127.
§ 132-93. Required security measures. [Amended 3-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-10]
A. Large rental structures and rental structures contained in concentrated
areas. The owner of any large rental structure or any rental structure
contained in a concentrated area and located with the City shall be
required to submit for approval a security plan to the office of the Police
Director and the office of the Director of Inspections by October 1 of
each year. This plan shall set forth in detail the proposed twenty-fourhour-
a-day security measures for each rental structure and, if
approved, shall be implemented by January 1 of each year. Approval of
these plans will be based upon the assessment of the number of reports
received during the previous registration year which indicate whether
the current security plan adequately provides for the safety and wellbeing
of its occupants and the surrounding community. The plans shall
include certain twenty-four-hour-a-day crime-deterrent devices which
may include, but not be limited to, security lighting, security fencing,
doorbells, self-closing devices, signs, managerial staff or security
personnel or any other means which adequately provide security to
these properties. Finally, the security plan should include a list of
occupants that may need assistance during an emergency. The owner
shall retain full responsibility for providing and maintaining the
required security measures for these buildings.
B. Small rental structures. Submission of a security plan shall not be
required for small rental structures. However, the Police Director and
§ 132-92 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-93
127:405
the Director of Inspections have the discretion to require the owner of
a small rental structure to implement security measures based upon
reports received during the registration year which indicate that the
property poses a risk to the safety and welfare of its occupants or the
surrounding community in the absence of such security measures.
§ 132-93 TRENTON CODE § 132-93
127:406
ARTICLE XII
Unfit Dwellings
§ 132-94. Authority.
The Director of the Department of Inspections is hereby designated as the
officer to exercise the powers prescribed hereinafter. The Director shall
serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 132-95. Description of building unfit for human habitation.
For the purposes of this article, a building shall be unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if by reason of structural defect,
deterioration, damage, despoliation, dilapidation, contamination, filth,
infestation or other deleterious condition the building is dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of its occupants, the occupants of
neighboring buildings or other residents of the City.
§ 132-96. Investigation; complaint.54
Whenever it appears to the Director of the Department of Inspections
that any building may be unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use
as herein defined, whenever a petition is filed with the Director of the
Department of Inspections by a public authority or by at least five residents
of the City charging that any building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use as herein defined (s)he shall conduct a preliminary
investigation of the facts presented to him. If the preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for the charges, (s)he shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner of the premises in question or his/her agent or
representative a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Director of the Department of Inspections
or his/her designated agent at a place therein fixed, not less than seven
days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. The power
or party in interest shall be notified of his/her right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise and give testimony at the
place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in
the state courts shall not be controlling in this hearing.
§ 132-97. Findings; order.
If, after the notice and hearing, the Director of the Department of
Inspections determines that the building under consideration is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, (s)he shall state in writing his/her
findings of fact in support of this determination and shall issue and cause to
be served upon the owner thereof or his/her agent or representative, in the
manner prescribed above, an order:
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner or his/her agent or representative within a
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-94 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-97
127:407
§ 132-98. Vacating of premises.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as
unfit for human habitation by the Director of the Department of Inspections
shall be vacated within a reasonable time as required by the Director
of the Department of Inspections. No owner or operator shall let to any
person for human habitation and no person shall occupy any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded by the Director of
the Department of Inspections after the date on which the Director of the
Department of Inspections has required the affected dwelling or dwelling
unit to be vacated. Where premises are ordered vacated, all doors to the
exterior shall be locked and first story and basement windows boarded to
prevent entry.
§ 132-99. Correction of defects; declaration of public nuisance.
reasonable time, which time shall be as set forth in the order, or at the
option of the owner to vacate or have the building vacated and closed
in the manner and within the period prescribed by the order.
B. Requiring the demolition or removal of the building or any portion
thereof in the manner and within the period prescribed by the order, if
the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order.
A. Correction of defects. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been
condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be
used for human habitation until written approval is secured from and
the placard is removed by the Director of the Department of
Inspections. The Director of the Department of Inspections shall
remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
B. Declaration of public nuisance. All dwellings condemned as unfit for
human habitation within the provisions of this article are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated,
demolished or secured within the time and in the manner specified by
the Housing Inspector or the Municipal Court. Dwellings to be secured
under this article must be secured in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) All accessible openings shall be boarded with one-half-inch
plywood set by nails or screws securely against the outside of the
dwelling with the exception of at least one doorway, which shall be
secured by an operable lock door. Accessible openings required to
be boarded shall include all windows, doorways and other breaches
in an exterior wall reasonably capable by nature of its size and
location of being entered by vandals.
§ 132-97 TRENTON CODE § 132-99
127:408
§ 132-100. Removal or defacement of notice.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling unit which
has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such
except as provided in § 132-99.
§ 132-101. Condemnation.
If the owner, or his/her agent or representative, fails to comply with this
order, the Director of the Department of Inspections shall cause the
violation of this article to be prosecuted according to law and cause the
building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated or closed,
in the manner set forth in this article and shall cause to be posted on
the main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use; the
use or occupation of this building after the date of the notice is prohibited
and unlawful." If the owner or his/her agent or representative fails to
comply with an order to remove, repair, alter or demolish the building, the
Director of the Department of Inspections may cause the building to be
removed, repaired, altered or demolished or may contract for the work to
be performed after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor pursuant
to Article XIII.
§ 132-102. Cost of action.
The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witness' fees, search fees and
advertising charges, incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under
this article determined in the favor of the City, and the amount of such cost
of repairs, alterations or improvements, vacating and closing, removal or
demolition, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which
the building is or was located. If the building is removed or demolished by
the Director of the Department of Inspections, (s)he shall sell the materials
of the building and credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the
removal or demolition. Any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Superior Court by the Director of the Department of Inspections, and shall
(2) All inaccessible openings shall be boarded with one-quarter-inch
plywood set against the exterior or interior of the dwelling.
Inaccessible openings required to be boarded shall include all
windows and other breaches in an exterior wall which would make
the building vulnerable to the deteriorating effects of the elements.
(3) Windows and doorways which are found by the Building Inspector
to be adequately protected by existing materials, including glass
and wood or metals, may be exempted in whole or in part upon
review by the Building Inspector. Such exemption shall be
temporary and subject to further review and order of the Building
Inspector.
(4) All plywood used to cover openings pursuant to this article shall be
painted with the color matching the trim or siding of the dwelling.
§ 132-99 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-102
127:409
be secured in such manner as may be directed by that Court, and shall
be disbursed by that Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by
final order or decree of that Court. However, nothing in this section shall
be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City to define
and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise, as provided by any law or ordinance.
§ 132-103. Service of notices.
Notices, complaints or orders issued by the Director of the Department of
Inspections pursuant to this article, shall be served upon persons either
personally or by registered mail, provided that if the identity or location of
such person is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Director of the
Department of Inspections in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the
officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, the service of the complaint or
order upon such persons may be made by publishing it once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the City. A
copy of the complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of the complaint or
order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the county recording
officer of the county in which the building is located.
§ 132-104. Powers of Director.
The Director of the Department of Inspections is hereby authorized and
empowered to exercise such powers as may be necessary to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article, including but not
limited to the following:
A. To investigate the building conditions in the City in order to determine
which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
(s)he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
E. To delegate any of his/her functions and powers under this article to
such officers and agents as (s)he may designate.
F. Upon approval by resolution of the City council, to seek an order of the
Superior Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12h appointing himself/
herself receiver ex officio of the rents and income of the property in
question and to do all things incidental thereto including the
appointment of a custodian as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12a et seq.
§ 132-102 TRENTON CODE § 132-105
127:410
§ 132-105. Other regulations.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the City or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
Charter, or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the City by any other law or
ordinance.
§ 132-105 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-105
127:411

ARTICLE XIII
Repair, Alteration, Improvement, Demolition and Removal of
Dwellings
§ 132-106. Action by Housing Inspector.
In the event that an owner of a dwelling or structure fails to comply with
an order to repair, alter or improve, nor has such dwelling or structure
been demolished and removed, the Housing Inspector may, in addition to
any other penalty recoverable by law, enter upon the premises without the
consent of the owner or occupant and cause the dwelling or structure to be
repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished
and removed, in accordance with whichever of the following procedures
(s)he deems to be most appropriate to the situation:
A. With the approval of the Director of the Department of Housing and
Economic Development and City Council, advertise and receive bids,
and expend municipal funds for such repairs, alterations and
improvements as may be necessary to bring the premises in violation
into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The amount of
the cost of repairs, alterations and improvements, together with
advertising charges, shall be a municipal lien against the real property
upon which the cost was incurred. 55
B. With the approval of the Director of the Department of Housing and
Economic Development and City Council, bring an action in the
Superior Court to be appointed receiver ex officio of the rents and
income of such real property for the purpose of collecting the rents and
income from the property and expend the same for the purpose of its
repair, alteration or improvement.
(1) The rents and income so collected by the Housing Inspector as
receiver shall also be available for payment of such costs and
expenses of the receivership as may be adjudged by the court, and
for the payment to the City of any fines or penalties which may have
been imposed on the owner for violations of this chapter, and which
have not been paid by the person liable therefor. The court may
proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise. The
Housing Inspector acting as receiver shall not be required to give
bond and shall be appointed only for the said purposes.
(2) The Housing Inspector, upon his/her appointment as receiver, in all
cases where the real property in question is encumbered by a first
mortgage, shall appoint such first mortgagee, if the mortgagee is a
proper person and is willing to accept the appointment, as the
receiver's agent to collect the rents and income from the real
property and manage the same. In all other cases the receiver, by
and with the approval of the Director of the Department of Housing
and Economic Development and City Council, may designate the
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 132-106 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-106
127:413
§ 132-107. Recovery of costs; interest.
The amount of costs recoverable by the City under any provisions of this
chapter shall be certified by the Housing Inspector and shall bear interest
on the unpaid part of the principal at the rate of 6% per annum until paid.
person in charge or management of such real property or some
other competent person as the receiver's agent to collect the rents
and income from the real property and manage the same for a
fee approved by City Council. The agent, whether mortgagee or
other person, shall account promptly to the receiver for the rents
and income so collected. If the mortgagee or other person so
designated as agent is derelict in collecting or accounting for such
rents and income or in the management of such real property, the
receiver shall apply to the court for the removal of such designated
mortgagee or other persons. Upon notice in writing to him, the
court upon removing the designated mortgagee, or other person,
in its discretion, may designate another person to collect the rents
and income from such real property and manage the same and
account to the receiver for the rents and income of such real
property as aforesaid.
(3) Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedure in respect to
any such receivership shall be as in the case of receiverships to
secure the payment of delinquent taxes, penalties, interest, costs
and expenses wherein the collector of taxes of the City is the
receiver. In any receivership proceeding under this article, the
Housing Inspector shall follow such orders and directions as the
court may hold necessary to effectuate the purposes if this chapter
and to conserve the real property during the pendency of the
receivership.
C. Certify any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming house which has been
condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation and ordered
vacated to the Building Inspector of the City for removal in accordance
with the procedure provided for demolition by the Building Code for
dangerous and unsafe buildings.56 This certification shall include a
statement by the Housing Inspector of the conditions existing on the
basis of which property has been declared unfit for human habitation.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction.
§ 132-106 TRENTON CODE § 132-107
127:414
ARTICLE XIV
Transfer of Property
[Amended in its entirety 5-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-46]
§ 132-108. Purpose; disclaimer.
The purpose of this article is to ensure compliance with the Housing Code
of the City of Trenton in order to maintain high standards of housing for
homeowners within the City. The City of Trenton, however, by this article
will not guarantee the quality or soundness of any property or structure, nor
will it be liable to any persons for any act or omission in connection with
an inspection or failure to inspect, nor shall the City be considered to be
involved in any manner in the contractual relationship between an owner,
tenant or purchaser.
§ 132-109. Certificate of Housing Code compliance required.
[Amended 7-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-91]
§ 132-110. Exemptions.
The following transfers are hereby exempt from the provisions of this
article.
A. Prior to the change of ownership of any residential property a
certificate of Housing Code compliance shall have first been obtained
from the Department of Inspections, Division of Housing Inspections.
This document, issued by the Director, shall certify that the residential
property conforms to the existing Zoning and Fire Safety Codes of the
City of Trenton, smoke detector and carbon monoxide detector
compliance as set forth in Chapter 132, § 132-40, and substantially
conforms to the minimum standards of habitability as outlined in
Chapter 132, Articles V through VIII, and pertinent electrical and
plumbing codes. Substantial compliance as to the electrical and
plumbing codes shall be defined as the existence of service and fixtures
which are in a safe, sound, and sturdy condition and do not give rise to a
fire, safety or life hazard condition. In lieu of the certificate of Housing
Code compliance, the change of ownership may occur if the prospective
owner files with the Department of Inspections an affidavit indicating
that the property will not be occupied until such time as a certificate of
Housing Code compliance is obtained.
B. In lieu of the certificate of Housing Code compliance for tenantoccupied
property, the change of ownership may occur if the property
owner files a request for an inspection contemporaneously with the
change of ownership. A temporary certificate of Housing Code
compliance will be issued and all required repairs must be completed
within 90 days.
C. A certificate of approval and/or certificate of continued occupancy are
acceptable substitutes for a certificate of Housing Code compliance.
§ 132-108 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-110
127:415
§ 132-111. Temporary certificate of Housing Code compliance.
At the sole discretion of the Director of the Department of Inspections,
a temporary nonrenewable certificate of Housing Code compliance may
be issued in the case of the transfer of a property to be owner-occupied.
The temporary certificate of Housing Code compliance will be issued for a
period not to exceed six months from the date of transfer in order to allow
the owner-occupant to complete the repairs. No temporary certificate of
Housing Code compliance may be issued if the Department of Inspections
determines that a life hazard exists.
§ 132-112. Application.
Applications for a certificate of Housing Code compliance shall be in writing
on a form provided by the Department of Inspections and shall disclose
the identity of the owner and prospective owner or occupant and shall be
accompanied by the fee set forth in the following section.
§ 132-113. Fees.
§ 132-114. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the penalty set forth in Article XV with the stipulation that the
minimum fine for a first offense shall be $100. Any person convicted of a
subsequent violation within a one-year period shall be fined an additional
amount as a repeat offender. The additional fine shall be a minimum of $100
and shall be in addition to the fine for violation of the ordinance.
§ 132-115. (Reserved)
§ 132-116. (Reserved)
§ 132-117. (Reserved)
A. Transfers to immediate family members for owner-occupied properties
only.
B. Transfers pursuant to probate proceedings.
C. Transfers for property intended to be demolished, provided that proper
notice to the Department of Inspections is given and an application is
made for a demolition permit.
A. The fee for an application for certificate of Housing Code compliance
shall be a flat fee of $200. [Amended 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-44]
B. If more than one reinspection is required, a fee of $50 will be charged
for one and two units. For structures with three or more units the fee
will be $25 for each unit.
§ 132-110 TRENTON CODE § 132-118
127:416
§ 132-118. (Reserved)
§ 132-118 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-118
127:417

ARTICLE XV
Enforcement
§ 132-119. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any order of the Housing Inspector based on the
provisions of this chapter or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted
by the Division of Housing for the enforcement or implementation of this
chapter, or violating any provision of this chapter or any provision of such
rule or regulation shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty
prescribed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the City
of Trenton.
§ 132-120. Violation of orders.
After conviction and punishment for violation of an order of the Housing
Inspector based upon the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
rule or regulation adopted by the Division of Housing for the enforcement
or implementation of this chapter, if the person shall continue in violation of
the order, then the person shall be liable for further prosecution, conviction
and punishment upon the same order, without any necessity of the Housing
Inspector issuing a new order, until the order has been complied with.
§ 132-121. Fines collectible as liens.
In the event of the imposition of a fine or penalty by the Municipal Court
or any other court of competent jurisdiction against the owner or operator
of any dwelling for violation of this chapter, the fee or penalty shall be
collectible as a lien against the premises and, in addition thereto, shall be
collectible pursuant to the procedures for the appointment of a receiver
as set forth in Article XIII hereof, in addition to any other remedies now
provided by law.
§ 132-122. Abatement of nuisances.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to in any way
impair or limit the authority of the Housing Inspector to define and declare
nuisances and to cause the removal or abatement of nuisances by
appropriate proceedings provided by law.
§ 132-119 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-122
127:419

ARTICLE XVI
Compliance
§ 132-123. Applicability. [Amended 3-17-2016 by Ord. No. 16-10]
Every residential structure and premises located within the City, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter whether or not the structure shall have been constructed,
altered or repaired before or after November 27, 1963, and irrespective of
the registration status or any permits which shall have been issued for the
occupancy of the structure or premises, for the construction or repair of the
structure or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to
November 27, 1963.
§ 132-124. Minimum standards.
The provisions of this chapter are to establish minimum standards for
the continued occupancy and use of dwellings and dwelling units and
shall not abrogate the responsibility of any person to comply with the
provisions of zoning, building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing or public
health ordinances of the City of Trenton or of any New Jersey licensing
statutes.
§ 132-125. Conformity with Building Code.
All repairs, additions, alterations, or replacements in dwellings, dwelling
units or premises to bring such dwellings, dwelling units or premises into
compliance with this chapter shall conform to all City ordinances governing
the construction, replacement, repair or alteration of such dwellings,
dwelling units, premises, facilities and equipment contained therein.
§ 132-126. Conflicts.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing
or public health ordinance of the City the provision which establishes the
higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail.
§ 132-123 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-126
127:421

ARTICLE XVII
Definitions.
§ 132-127. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building or structure, the use of which is
incidental to the use of a dwelling and which is located in the yard around
the dwelling.
AGENT —
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having 3 1/2 feet or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average
level of the adjacent finished grade.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having less than 3 1/2 feet or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the
average grade level of the adjacent finished grade.
DWELLING — Any house or building or portion thereof which is used or
intended to be used in whole or in part as a home, residence or sleeping
place of one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently; and
shall include any building that could be or would be intended to be used for
such purposes except for its state of disrepair.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, cooking and sanitation.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pestelimination
methods approved by the Housing Inspector.
Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others shall:
By virtue of any agreement, written or oral, with the owner be
held, concurrently with the owner, responsible for the occupancy,
charge, care, maintenance or transfer of title of such property.
(1)
Include but not be limited to attorneys, real estate agents, brokers,
managers or salespersons, rental agents or managers, executors,
administrators, trustees, or heirs, persons acting on behalf of a
decedent or an incompetent or disabled individual, or persons
acting generally on behalf of another with their expressed or
implied permission in regards to the property.
(2)
A.
Any such person thus representing the owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if (s)he were the owner.
B.
§ 132-127 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-127
127:423
FAMILY — An individual or married couple and children thereof with not
more than two other persons related directly to the individual or married
couple by blood or marriage or a group of not more than five unrelated
persons, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HOUSING INSPECTOR — The Housing Inspector of the Department of
Inspections of the City of Trenton or his/her authorized representative.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
Any public nuisance known at public law or in equity jurisprudence, or
as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or the ordinances
of the City of Trenton.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building,
or upon an unoccupied lot, including, but not limited to, abandoned
wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned ice boxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or
structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris and vegetation such as poison
ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
B.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
C.
D. Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of this chapter.
E. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
this chapter.
F.
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous
to health in violation of this chapter.
G.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
H.
I. Fire hazards.
§ 132-127 TRENTON CODE § 132-127
127:424
OWNER —
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interest of record in a dwelling and who are in actual possession
of the dwelling.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING — All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
PREMISES — A lot, piece or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
REPAIR — To restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation,
serviceability or appearance. Repairs shall be expected to last
approximately as long as would the replacement by new items.
REPLACE — To remove an existing item or portion of a system, and to
construct or install a new item of similar or improved quality as the existing
item when new. Replacement will ordinarily take place where the item is
incapable of repair or where repair would be more costly.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any lodging house, boardinghouse or nursing home,
including hotels, tourist homes, fraternity and sorority houses, or any
dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing three or more rooming
units each of which is rented by one or more persons not related to the
owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have:
Legal equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof.
(1)
Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner
or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner.
(2)
A.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and of rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if (s)he were the owner.
B.
§ 132-127 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 132-127
127:425
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of, the
owner or operator.
TENEMENT HOUSE — As defined by state statute, any house or building
or portion thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied
or is occupied as the home or residence of three families or more living
independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises.
This definition shall not apply to a detached dwelling house of not more
than three stories and having central heating, and which is occupied for
occupancy by three families living independently where the space provided
for at least one of such families is not equipped with full cooking facilities;
provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to any such dwelling
house constructed or converted on or after September 1, 1959.
YARD — The land, other than publicly owned land, around and appurtenant
to the whole or any part of a dwelling and used or capable of being used
in connection with the dwelling, whether or not the land is owned by the
owner of the building.
§ 132-128. Meanings of certain words.
Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming unit," and
"premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 132-127 TRENTON CODE § 132-128
127:426
Chapter 137
JUNKYARD AND SCRAP METAL SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 167.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 197.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 292.
§ 132-128 JUNKYARD AND SCRAP METAL SALES § 132-128
137:427

ARTICLE I
Sale of Scrap Metals
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.10 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 137-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
SCRAP METALS — All forms of metals, new and used, except gold, silver,
platinum, palladium and alloys thereof.
§ 137-2. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of the purchasing of scrap metals
without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk.
§ 137-3. Application; approval; appeal.
§ 137-4. Fees.
The fee for an initial application shall be $200, nonrefundable. Each annual
renewal fee shall be $25. If on January 27, 1990, a person has been in
business within the City pursuant to § 137-2 for a period of not less than
five years, the fee for an initial application shall be $25, and investigation
pursuant to § 137-3 may be waived by the City Clerk.
A. Application; investigation. Upon receipt of an application completed
pursuant to this section, the City Clerk shall refer such application to
the Police Director, who shall institute such investigation of the
applicant's moral character and business responsibility as (s)he deems
necessary for the protection of the public welfare.
B. Recommendation of Police Director. Upon completion of the
investigation, which shall take no more than 30 days, the Police
Director shall return the application, or a copy thereof, to the City Clerk
accompanied by his/her recommendations as to whether the license
should be issued or denied. If the recommendation of the Police
Director is to deny the license, the grounds for such recommendation
shall be stated. Grounds for recommending denial of a license may
include information regarding the applicant's moral character,
demonstrated business responsibility or conviction of a crime involving
dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation. If a denial is based upon
the conviction of a crime, an additional determination shall be made by
the Police Director as provided for in N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-1 et seq., the
Rehabilitated Offenders Act. Upon receipt of the recommendation of
the Police Director, the City Clerk shall issue or deny the license
accordingly.
C. Appeal. The decision of the Police Director as to the acceptance or
denial of the application shall be a final administrative determination
and appealable to the Superior Court of New Jersey.
§ 137-1 JUNKYARD AND SCRAP METAL SALES § 137-5
137:429
§ 137-5. Buyer on basis of bulk value.
A. Duties. Any person in the business of purchasing scrap metals who
buys, attempts to buy or offers to buy scrap metals on the basis of bulk
value shall:
(1) Obtain proof of identity from each person who sells scrap metals to
him/her.
(2) Weigh the materials in plain view of the seller, on scales certified by
a Weights and Measures official with the certificate of inspection
clearly and prominently displayed.
(3) Provide to the seller a weight certificate issued by a person
certified as a weighmaster by the Superintendent of Weights and
Measures under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 51:1-73 to 51:1-80.
(4) Retain any scrap metals in the form in which they were purchased
for a period of not less than two business days and a minimum of 48
hours.
B. Serialized weight certificates.
(1) Each weight certificate shall be issued in duplicate, shall be serially
numbered and shall be used only in consecutive order. One copy of
each weight certificate issued under the provisions of this section,
and all voided weight certificates, shall be kept on file at the place
of business of the buyer for a period of one year from date of
issuance and shall be subject to inspection by any law enforcement
officer or Weights and Measures official.
(2) Each weight certificate issued shall contain the following:
(a) The name and address of the buyer.
(b) Date of the transaction.
(c) Where applicable, the gross weight of the material and the
vehicle in which it is contained.
(d) Where applicable, the tare weight or the weight of the vehicle
without load.
(e) The net weight of the material.
(f) The name of the material purchased.
(g) The price paid for the material at the standard measure of
weight prescribed by the Superintendent of Weights and
Measures.
(h) The name, address and signature of the seller of the material.
(i) The signature and seal of the weighmaster issuing the weight
certificate.
§ 137-5 TRENTON CODE § 137-6
137:430
§ 137-6. Inapplicability to government agencies.
This article is not applicable to government agencies.
§ 137-7. Substitution of weighmaster.
In case of the death, absence or inability to act of a weighmaster, any
person may substitute for such deceased or absent weighmaster, provided
that immediate notice of such substitution is reported by such person to the
Superintendent of Weights and Measures and that any such substitute shall
not be authorized to continue as weigher for a period in excess of five days,
unless with the written consent of the Superintendent.
§ 137-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a
mandatory penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
recoverable by the Superintendent of Weights and Measures pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq., the Penalty Enforcement Law. An action for
the recovery of a civil penalty for violation of this article shall be within
the jurisdiction of, and may be brought before, the Municipal Court of
the City.
B. A summons or warrant against any foreign business entity doing
business in the City shall be processed as provided by law.
C. In addition to any penalties prescribed in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty, of the Code of the City of Trenton, any license issued pursuant
to this article may be suspended or revoked by the City Council for
violation of any of the provisions hereof pursuant to Chapter 146,
Licensing.
§ 137-6 JUNKYARD AND SCRAP METAL SALES § 137-8
137:431

ARTICLE II
Junkyards and Recycling Centers
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.13 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 137-9. License required.
No person or corporation shall operate a junkyard or recycling center in the
City as defined in Chapter 315, Zoning and Land Development, of the Code
of the City of Trenton, without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk
and complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 137-10. Noise standards.57
Noise standards for junkyards and recycling centers shall be established on
the basis of the proximity of the facility to residential and other sensitive
land uses. No person shall operate or cause to be operated within the
boundaries of any junkyard or recycling center any source of sound in such
a manner as to create a sound level in excess of the limits set forth below as
measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving land use. The
owner or operator of any facility may be required by the City to measure
the sound level of or the vibration from any source within the facility in
accordance with the methods and procedures, and at such locations and
times as the authorized City representative may reasonably prescribe and to
provide reports of the results of such measurements to such representative
in a timely fashion. The authorized City representative may require the
measurements to be conducted in the presence of himself/herself or any
other City enforcement official, and may require the measurements to be
done by an independent and professionally qualified firm or individual.
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
Receiving Land Use Time of Day
Sound Level
Limit
(dBA)
Residential or institutional 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 55 decibels
5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 50 decibels
Commercial or public right-ofway
7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 65 decibels
8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 55 decibels
Industrial All times 75 decibels
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Noise.
§ 137-9 JUNKYARD AND SCRAP METAL SALES § 137-11
137:433
§ 137-11. Operation of facility; disposal and storage of materials
and residue.
The operation of all junkyards and recycling centers, and the storage and
disposal of all materials and residues in such centers, shall be governed by
the following standards:
A. Junkyards and recycling centers must be operated and maintained in
sanitary condition, free of litter, debris and rodent infestation. Tracking
of earth, mud and debris on streets, sidewalks or adjacent properties
shall not be permitted and shall be deemed a violation of this article.
B. Junkyards and recycling centers shall institute and maintain an
effective insect- and rodent-control program at the facility, which shall
be under the direction of a qualified applicator of pesticides as set forth
in the New Jersey Pesticide Control Code, N.J.A.C. 7:30. Evidence of
insect and/or rodent infestation at any facility shall be deemed a
violation of this article.
C. The operation of a junkyard or recycling center shall not result in any
continuous, irritating or noxious odor associated with residue being
detectable off-site from the facility in any location or on any property
used for residential, institutional, commercial or other purposes by the
general public, as determined by the City Health Officer.
D. All processed and unprocessed materials and residue shall be stored in
a manner which prevents runoff, leakage or seepage of any waste or
residue into, on or around the soil on which the storage area or
stockpile is located. All residue shall be removed from the site in
accordance with the rules of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection on interdistrict and intradistrict solid waste
flow, N.J.A.C. 7:26A-1.
E. At no time shall any hazardous waste, as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:26, be
received, stored, processed or transferred at any junkyard or recycling
center.
F. At no time shall any capacitors or electronic components which contain
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and which are attached to or
detached from appliance or other scrap metal objects be shredded,
sheared or baled within any facility.
G. The burning of wrecked or discarded vehicles, or any parts thereof, or
any junk or waste materials shall be prohibited unless specifically
approved by such agency authorized to approve such activities.
H. The application for the business license shall specify the materials that
will be received, stored, processed and/or transferred at the facility that
is the subject of the application. No materials other than those specified
in the application and no processing other than that specified in the
application may take place at any junkyard or recycling center without
written notification to the City Clerk.
§ 137-11 TRENTON CODE § 137-12
137:434
§ 137-12. Entrance sign.
A clearly legible sign shall be posted and maintained at the entrance to any
junkyard or recycling center providing the following information:
§ 137-13. Right of entry.
Authorized representatives of the City shall have the right to enter and
inspect any junkyard or recycling center with or without advance notice in
order to determine whether the facility is in compliance with any of the
applicable provisions of this article and any other city ordinance.
§ 137-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. The approved hours of operation of the facility, as specified in the
business license issued for the facility.
B. A list of the approved materials and processes, as specified in the
approved site plan for the facility.
C. A notice that all persons bringing materials to the facility must
complete and certify a materials receipt form.
§ 137-12 JUNKYARD AND SCRAP METAL SALES § 137-14
137:435
Chapter 142
LIBRARY
§ 142-1. Return of borrowed material required.
Any book, magazine or other publication borrowed from the Free Public
Library or any branch library of the City shall be returned by the borrower
within the time prescribed by the rules under which it was taken out.
§ 142-2. Fines, penalties and fees.
If any book, magazine or other publication is not returned to the library
within the time prescribed, the borrower or, if the borrower be a juvenile
reader, then the parent or guarantor shall deliver the book to a messenger
authorized, in writing, by the librarian to receive it, with all fines and
penalties incurred for its detention, together with a fee of $0.50 for special
service; or pay to the messenger the cost of replacing the book new, with all
fines or penalties due, together with a fee of $0.50 for special service.
§ 142-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall forfeit and
pay a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, for each
offense.
Chapter 146
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 10.
Amusements — See Ch. 17.
Auctioneers — See Ch. 25.
Commercial structures — See Ch. 56.
Curfew — See Ch. 58.
Junkyards and scrap metal sales — See Ch.
137.
Meeting halls — See Ch. 158.
Parking lots — See Ch. 184.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 197.
Itinerant vendors — See Ch. 206.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 213.
Distress sales — See Ch. 226, Art. I.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 137-14 TRENTON CODE § 142-3
142:436
ARTICLE I
General Requirements
§ 146-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
executor, administrator, trustee or other legal entity, singular or plural, as
the context requires, or any agent or general manager thereof.
CRIME RISK THRESHOLD or CRT — The statistically determined level of
criminal activity at any business location in the City during the immediately
preceding twelve-month period. A CRT will be established for each of two
categories of criminal activity on the properties of the business surveyed
based on the Part 1 and Part 2 crimes listed in the definition of the term
"criminal activity" below that have occurred on such properties.[Added
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-73]
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY[Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-73] —
INSPECTION — The on-site assessment by any City official and/or officers
of the Police Department of the physical, operational and on-site measures
in effect on the property that might be determined a nuisance and/or affect
the level of criminal activity, to determine the remedial measures deemed
most appropriate to reduce criminal activity at such property.[Added
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-73]
MANAGER — The person appointed or hired by the owner to be responsible
for the daily operations of the business.[Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-73]
MERCHANDISE — Any goods, wares or commodities bought or sold in the
usual course of trade or business.
The commission of one or more of the following crimes listed in the
categories designated as Part 1 and Part 2 crimes by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's Uniform Crime Report ("UCR") that result in
the preparation of an offense report by the Police Department, namely:
Part 1 Crimes: murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary,
theft and auto theft; and
(1)
Part 2 Crimes: other assaults, narcotics offenses (restricted to
those of delivery, possession, or manufacture), arson, vandalism,
weapons offenses, prostitution, gambling and disorderly conduct.
(2)
A.
The following UCR crimes shall not be deemed criminal activity under
this article: suicide, all offenses involving domestic violence, forgery
and counterfeiting, fraud, embezzlement, stolen property (buying,
receiving or possessing), crimes against family and children, driving
while intoxicated, violation of alcoholic beverage laws, and vagrancy.
B.
§ 146-1 LIBRARY § 146-1
142:437
MERCHANT — Any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise
at retail or wholesale.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION — A notice issued by an official of the City of
Trenton advising a business of a violation of this chapter and the penalty
therefor.
NUISANCES (defined and prohibited) — Any matter, thing, condition or act
which is or may become an annoyance, detrimental, a menace or interfere
with the health, comfort, safety or general well-being of the inhabitants of
this municipality.[Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-73]
REMEDIAL MEASURES — Reasonable actions to be taken or implemented
on the property, including but not limited to property improvements
(fencing, lighting, controlled access, etc.); operational practices [presence
of on-site personnel licensed under the Security Officer Registration Act,
P.L. 2004, c. 134, or certified police officer(s)]; and other remedial measures
that have proven effective in reducing criminal activity.[Added 11-21-2017
by Ord. No. 17-73]
RETAIL MERCHANT — Any merchant who sells to the customer or for any
purpose other than resale.
SALE — The transfer of ownership, title or possession, whether conditional
or otherwise, for a consideration.
WHOLESALE MERCHANT — Any merchant who sells to another for the
purpose of resale.
§ 146-2. License required.
A license is required for the privilege of engaging in any business listed in
§ 146-20 within the City. Such license fee shall be applicable to any business
maintaining a permanent business location or branch office within the City.
§ 146-3. Application for license required to engage in business.
Every business engaging in any activity described herein in the City, before
entering in any such business, shall make application for a business license
to the City Clerk, and no business shall engage in any such business until
after having made such application and obtaining the required license from
the City Clerk and paying the amount of the license hereinafter described.
§ 146-4. Liability for fees or penalties.
Evidence of engaging in business: the fact that any business represents
itself as being engaged in any operation for the transaction of which a
license is required, or that such a business exhibited a sign or
advertisement indicating such shall be evidence of strict liability of such
business to pay an license fee and/or penalties as set forth herein.
§ 146-1 TRENTON CODE § 146-5
142:438
§ 146-5. Business registration required.
An application as supplied by the City Clerk must be completed. As a
prerequisite to receiving a license receipt under this article or transferring
a business license, the applicant or new owner must present to the City a
copy of the applicant's or new owner's current business registration, issued
by the Division of Taxation of the New Jersey Department of Treasury.
§ 146-6. Effect on state and county licenses.
All businesses lawfully engaged in any occupation, trade or business listed
in § 146-20 and holding valid state and county licenses shall be subject
to the same regulations by this chapter as are any other persons who
subsequently seek to carry on any occupation, trade or business within the
City.
§ 146-7. Authorization to impose fees.
The City Clerk is authorized to levy and impose license fees, by ordinance,
for the purpose of regulation and revenue, upon all businesses and to create
and fix the amounts to be paid; to provide for the collection of the same
and to provide penalties for failure or refusal to pay such licenses. Business
licenses shall be issued for the periods and be transferable as provided by
ordinance.
§ 146-8. Appointment of business license inspector; duties.
It is hereby made the duty of the City Clerk to appoint a license inspector
of the City. Such license inspector shall have the authority to investigate all
businesses in the City. The inspector shall make such inquiry as necessary
to determine whether or not a license as required under this chapter has
been procured for the business. The inspector shall report to the City Clerk
the names of all entities engaged in business without a license. The license
inspector shall also have the authority to issue a notice of violation for the
violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 146-9. Compliance required. [Amended 11-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-73]
A. No license shall be issued or granted to any applicant to engage in the
business of selling or disposing of merchandise of any kind, at retail or
wholesale, or the practice or pursuit of any profession or occupation in
this City, except upon the terms and conditions and subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Responsibilities of owners and operators.
(1) The owner of any premises within the City which is primarily and
regularly devoted to the uses described in § 146-20 shall be
responsible for any person having dominion or control of the
§ 146-5 LIBRARY § 146-9
142:439
§ 146-10. Payment of taxes and City fees required.
Prior to receiving a license under this article or transferring a business
license, the applicant or new owner must present to the City Clerk proof
of property taxes paid to current status if said applicant is the owner of
said premises where the business is situated. In addition, any licensee
considered delinquent or to have an outstanding fee and/or fine for any
service within the City shall be required to pay all outstanding fees prior to
renewal of license.
§ 146-11. License provisions.
premises in the absence of the owner, to ensure compliance with
the licensing and other provisions of this chapter.
(2) It shall be the further obligation of the owner to have available on
the premises an adult person who shall be the representative of the
licensee and who shall be responsible to correct or abate any and
all violations of this chapter or any breach of the peace in
cooperation with the officers and agents of the City. In the event of
any violation of this chapter, the owner and/or other person having
tenancy, dominion or control over such premises at the time of the
occurrence of the violation shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed herein.
C. Conduct of premises; nuisances. No person, owner, tenant or occupant
shall conduct any licensed premises in such a way as to create a
nuisance, or to allow the existence of a nuisance, to the detriment of the
peace and tranquility of the neighborhood by allowing, permitting or
suffering on or about the premises, including any sidewalk area, and
other portions of the licensed premises immediately adjacent to, and a
part of, the property for which the license has been issued, any loud,
disorderly or unlawful behavior of any invitee or patron or other person
whether or not specifically invited to occupy or visit the premises
licensed. It shall be the responsibility of the person described in
§ 146-9B(2) hereof to take reasonable action to maintain the peace and
tranquility of the neighborhood in which the licensed premises is
situated by actively abating and removing any such conduct. Any and all
complaints of criminal activity, noise or nuisances of any sort registered
by any person with the police or the City Clerk shall be processed and
used to establish a criminal risk threshold (CRT) subjecting the licensee
to inspection for license disciplinary hearings, which could result in the
implementation of remedial measures, suspension or revocation of the
license pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 146, Licensing.
A. Where multiple licenses are issued for the same business location, the
City Clerk shall ascertain which license holder is responsible for
maintaining the business premises in complete compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations, including, but not limited to, the City
property maintenance, health code, fire code, and the state building
§ 146-9 TRENTON CODE § 146-11
142:440
code. The Clerk shall cause such responsible person to be designated
on that person's license as the responsible person for code compliance.
B. On any application for a new license there shall be an application
review fee imposed and collected at the time of the application's
submittal to the City Clerk for review. This fee shall be in the amount of
$15 and shall be separate and apart from any code compliance review
and inspection fees as set forth below.
C. No license required by this article shall be issued for a business location
when the Director of Health, Planning, Zoning, Economic Development
and/or the Chief Building Official has actual knowledge that at the time
of application the location does not comply with the applicable zoning
ordinances of the City and all other applicable codes and regulations,
applicable provisions in the health, electrical, mechanical, plumbing,
and fire safety sections of the applicable New Jersey Building Code, the
City's utilities ordinances, the City's zoning ordinances, or the City's
property maintenance ordinances.
D. Businesses shall be subject to code compliance reviews during the
course of the year to help ensure that they continue to satisfy applicable
provisions in the health, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fire
safety sections of the applicable state building code, the City's utilities
ordinances, the City's zoning ordinances, and the City's property
maintenance ordinances. This code compliance review shall be
mandatorily conducted when a new or transfer license is applied for. A
code compliance review of a business may be ordered by the Director of
Planning, Zoning and Economic Development at any time.
E. There shall be imposed a regulatory fee for each premises that requires
a re-inspection during code compliance review. The fee shall be equal to
the sum of the re-inspection costs for each type of inspection
determined to be necessary; where no other code compliance
inspection fee for such discipline is set, then each individual reinspection
will be charged a rate of $45 per discipline and inspection.
Failure to pay all fees charged shall result in an automatic denial of
renewal upon application.
F. In order to be granted a business license for the operation of any statelicensed
medical marijuana facility within the City of Trenton, the
following conditions must be satisfied: [Added 10-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-48]
(1) Completion of all forms, checklists, and other submissions as may
be required by the City Clerk's office;
(2) Payment of all applicable local fees, including inspection and
licensing fees;
(3) Demonstration that all applicable state licenses have been
obtained;
§ 146-11 LIBRARY § 146-11
142:441
§ 146-12. Expiration date; transfer of license.
§ 146-13. Renewal; property maintenance.
(4) Passage of all applicable state and local inspections required to be
completed prior to the beginning of operations and/or renewal of
any state and/or local license;
(5) Emergency contact information to be utilized by police, fire, and
EMT personnel in the event of an on-site emergency; and
(6) Submission of a full copy of the application for state licensure, via
hard copy or digitally, with pages prominently marked
"CONFIDENTIAL" as appropriate for purposes of compliance with
New Jersey's Open Public Records Act. (Note: Pages not marked as
confidential will be disclosed in response to an applicable OPRA
request.)
A. All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the 31st day of
January of each year. No license shall be issued for more than one year.
Any owner of a license must surrender his or her license to the City
Clerk when he or she ceases to engage in such enterprise within the
City.
B. All licenses may be transferred to a new owner where there is a bona
fide sale of the business upon payment of a transfer fee of equal to 10%
of the annual license. Such fee shall be accompanied by the
presentation of the original license and evidence of the sale.
C. Upon written request and presentation of the original license, any
license may be transferred from one location to another location in the
City upon payment of a transfer fee equal to 10% of the annual license
and the applicable inspection fees.
A. Every business issued a license under this article shall make application
for renewal of such license to the City Clerk for each year, or any
portion thereof, beginning on the first day of December, and shall pay
the amount of the license hereinafter described; provided, however,
that no such business operating in the City that maintains or is
responsible for maintaining the property of such business shall be
eligible for renewal of such license unless the property has been
maintained in a neat manner consistent with applicable commercial
building requirements of the City of Trenton Code Chapter 56. The
property shall be clear of all debris with the proper trash receptacles on
the exterior of the building; signage must be maintained in accordance
with City of Trenton Code Chapter 233 and clearly state the name of the
business. No storefront shall be cluttered as to obscure the signage, to
hinder access to the business or a clear line of site into the premises.
No business shall operate in such a manner to prohibit right of access
on the adjacent sidewalk.
§ 146-11 TRENTON CODE § 146-13
142:442
§ 146-14. Separate licenses required for each business.
An individual license shall be required for each location of a business
operating in the City regardless of affiliation with any other licensee.
§ 146-15. Exhibiting of license required.
Every business having a license shall exhibit same when called upon to
do so by an authorized official of the City, and all licenses must be
conspicuously displayed at all times. Failure to exhibit the license shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
B. Any business that is denied the issuance of a renewal license for failure
to comply with the requirements in Subsection A above shall have a
thirty-day extension period from the date of such denial to replace or
restore the property to an acceptable manner. During the thirty-day
extension period granted to allow compliance with this section, such
business may continue to operate in the City.
C. The business license official or designee shall determine whether or not
any applicant has complied with the requirements of this section. The
determination of the business license official or designee shall be
conclusive and final.
D. The business license official may for good cause shown allow an
applicant two additional thirty-day extension periods on the previously
issued license, in order to comply with the requirements of this section.
E. Each applicant shall pay an additional fee of 1/12 the applicant's annual
license fee for each thirty-day extension period, or any portion thereof,
needed to comply with the provisions of this section.
F. The failure of any applicant to obtain the renewal of such license within
the thirty-day extension period provided after an initial denial thereof
under the provisions of this section, or within such additional thirty-day
extension periods as may be granted by the business license official,
shall require such applicant to immediately cease engaging in or
managing his or her business, profession or occupation in the City until
such time as his or her license is renewed.
§ 146-13 LIBRARY § 146-15
142:443

ARTICLE II
Penalty
§ 146-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-21-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-73]
A. The City Clerk shall provide written notification to the owner or
manager of the business, by regular mail and by either personal
service, certified mail, or other method which provides confirmation of
delivery. The notice shall consist of the following:
(1) The CRT, specifying the types of crimes identified as having
occurred on the property during the period reviewed, including the
incident numbers assigned to such crimes, and the date and time of
each offense to allow the owner to understand the basis of the CRT;
(2) The requirement of a mandatory inspection to be conducted by
designated officials and/or officers of the Police Department;
(3) The opportunity and procedures by which the owner may challenge
the data provided to the owner pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this
section upon which the designation is based; and
(4) That the designated City official(s) will meet with the owner or his
manager prior to the inspection and that a second meeting with the
owner or his manager must occur after the inspection to allow the
designated City official(s) and the owner to review the results of the
inspection and determine a remedial action plan to reduce criminal
activity at the property unless a prior agreement is reached.
B. It shall be unlawful for an owner or manager to:
(1) Fail or refuse to permit the designated City officials and/or police
officials to conduct an inspection of the property after receipt of
notice under § 146-16 of this Code;
(2) Fail or refuse to permit the designated City officials and/or police
officials to conduct the remediation inspection(s) to ensure
conformity to a remedial action plan issued under this article;
(3) Fail or refuse to attend the meeting required by § 146-16A(4) of this
Code.
(4) Fail or refuse to timely implement or maintain a measure specified
in a remedial action plan issued under this article made pursuant to
§ 146-9B of this Code.
C. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation, in addition to any
of the license revocation or review procedures and penalties provided
generally in the penalty for violation of this chapter prescribed in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 146-16 LIBRARY § 146-16
142:445
§ 146-17. Rebate of fees.
No portion of any license assessed in this article shall be rebated, unless
it clearly appears that such license was collected by mistake or error, and
before making such rebate to a license holder all amounts payable under a
proper license shall be paid by such license holder.
§ 146-18. Unlawful usage or procurement prohibited.
§ 146-19. Due date; late fees; violations and penalties. [Amended
2-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-6]
D. The City Council hereby finds and declares that the operation of a
remedial-action-eligible business whose owner has failed or refused to
timely implement one or more remedial measures contained in a
remedial action plan, as set forth in this article, constitutes a nuisance
and is unlawful. After at least 10 days' prior written notice to the owner
of any business, given in the manner provided in § 146-16A of this Code,
notifying the owner that legal action will be taken if the owner fails to
take immediate action to implement a remedial action plan as provided
in this article, the City Attorney is authorized to institute any legal
action to enforce this article, including, but not limited to, the filing of
civil injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction against
the owner, seeking a mandatory injunction to compel the owner of any
such property to implement the remedial measures set forth in a
remedial action plan issued to such owner.
A. It shall be unlawful for any business or individual authorized to act on
the business' behalf to willfully make any false written affidavit and file
such affidavit with the City Clerk or any other City official for the
purpose of procuring a license for a less sum than is lawfully payable by
the applicant, or his or her principal, and any such license so obtained
shall be void.
B. No person shall sell, lease, rent, lend, give or otherwise dispose of any
certificate of license or permit issued by the City, or any badge, insignia,
number or any other article delivered with any certificate of license or
permit. Certificates of license, permits, badges and insignia shall be
used, shown or displayed only by licensees and only in the manner
prescribed by this chapter.
A. License receipts shall be sold beginning December 1 of each year, and
the applicable fee shall be due and payable on or before January 31 of
each year. If January 31 falls on a weekend or holiday, the fee shall be
due and payable on the first working day following January 31. Those
licenses not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject
to a late fee of $50 for each subsequent month of delinquency until paid.
However, the total late fee shall not exceed $150 per business location.
The penalties imposed by this section shall be collected in addition to
the amount of the license, and the payment of such penalty shall not be
§ 146-16 TRENTON CODE § 146-19
142:446
a defense in any proceedings charging the offense of doing business
without a license under this article.
B. Any business operating in the City without first obtaining a license as
required by this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of $1,500 to be
due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. The
penalty under this subsection will apply to businesses not initially
obtaining a license, as opposed to nonrenewal; for nonrenewal,
Subsection A, above, will apply.
C. Any business engaging in any operations covered by this article that
does not pay the required license within 90 days after the initial notice
of fee due and that does not obtain the required license:
(1) Shall be required to immediately cease operation of the business in
the City until such time as the license is renewed.
(2) Shall incur an additional penalty of $250.
(3) Shall be subject to administrative and/or civil action for collection
of the fee, as well as be liable for court costs, reasonable attorneys'
fees, and additional administrative costs incurred by the City as a
result of collection efforts.
§ 146-19 LIBRARY § 146-19
142:447

ARTICLE III
Fees
§ 146-20. License schedule.
A. License receipts shall be issued to cover only one location and only one
of the occupations or business classifications hereinafter set out, unless
stated otherwise.
B. The license fees affixed are for the purpose of regulation and control
and shall be paid annually, in the amount hereinafter set forth, to the
City of Trenton for conducting or engaging in business, at the place
designated in the license certificate issued:
(1) Adult entertainment: $1,000. The location must comply with the
zoning requirements as set forth in § 315-135 of the City of Trenton
Code Book.
(2) Amusement and entertainment facilities and related ancillary uses
and devices for other businesses:
(a) Adolescent recreation center: $300.
(b) Amusement arcades per location (not including machines,
game, etc.): $525.
(c) Fairs and festivals: $100.
(d) Theaters, per location: $300.
(e) Sporting stadium with seating greater than 3,000 (outdoor),
per location: $8,000.
(f) Entertainment arenas with seating greater than 2,000
(concerts, sporting events, entertainment or exhibitions for
which admission is charged or tickets are sold), per location:
$5,000.
(3) Food service, restaurants, bars, nightclubs, restaurant bars, hotel
bars, restaurant entertainment facilities, caterers or confectioners
not in conjunction with a restaurant, carry-out or delivery-only
establishments and public eating places where food is served in
connection with or separate from other business: $300. [Amended
4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 12-06]
(a) If the business is a bar, hotel bar or nightclub, such activity
described shall be typed on the issued license to identify which
type of food services classification is being conducted. If a
restaurant has a restaurant bar or restaurant entertainment
facility, such use shall be typed on the issued license. No
license issued by the City for any one premises shall have more
than one of the following types of activity descriptions typed
§ 146-20 LIBRARY § 146-20
142:449
thereon: bar, nightclub, restaurant bar, restaurant
entertainment facility.
(4) Gasoline service stations, including car wash and retail sales: $300.
(a) Establishments that perform repairs, add an additional $200 to
the license.
(5) Manufacturers, manufacturing, assembly, assembly line, each
location: $500.
(6) Merchants and retail sales: $300.
(a) Temporary license permit [special event vendors, freestanding
(nonrolling stock) per engagement]: $25.
(b) Auctioneers (not to firm or corporation; individuals only): $125.
(c) Seasonal sales (not in connection with other business issued a
license), i.e., ice cream parlor, outdoor stadium vendor: $150.
(d) Distributors, excluding state-licensed medical marijuana
distributors, and including import/export with no retail
establishment: $300. [Amended 10-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-48]
(e) Pawnbrokers (must meet state recordkeeping requirements):
$500. Proof of current registration issued by the New Jersey
Department of Revenue is required before a license is issued.58
(7) Moving and storage companies, plus proof of liability insurance:
$300.
(8) Nonprofit organizations, permanent office: $50. Proof of existence
evidenced by a certificate of status issued by the New Jersey
Department of State is required before a license is issued.
(9) Promoters (for profit and nonancillary with a licensed business):
$1,000.
(a) Temporary promoters for profit and nonancillary with a
licensed business, nonrefundable (limited to 30 days): $150.
(10) Record, compact disc and audio-visual companies, including
recording, reproduction, manufacturing and shipping: $250.
(11) Rentals.
(a) Hotels or motels renting furnished rooms or apartments (does
not permit dining room without restaurant license): $150.
58.Former Subsection B(6)(f), regarding small businesses with gross revenue of $150,000 or
less, added 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 12-06, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-6.
§ 146-20 TRENTON CODE § 146-20
142:450
(b) Self-storage warehouse or storage rooms, including cold
storage for hire or use, not otherwise licensed by occupant:
$150.
(12) Repair and maintenance (nonancillary to a licensed business):
$300.
(a) Automobile, motorcycle and/or motor vehicle (not part of a
dealership or gas service station, including detail carwash), all
types.
(b) Computers, appliances, electronic or office equipment.
(c) Detailing and car wash.
(d) Firearm.
(e) Jewelry and watch repair.
(f) Keys, locks, knives, lawnmowers, sharpening and grinding,
shoe repairs and/or bootblack.
(13) Scrap metal, savage and recycling yards: $300.
(14) Services (non-home-based occupations): $300.
(a) Agency, or agents, where no other applicable classification is
provided.
(b) Answering services.
(c) Burglar alarm companies or agents, monitoring only.
(d) Check cashing.
(e) Collection and claim agencies.
(f) Dry cleaning, linen supply, diaper supply and laundry.
(g) Employment agencies.
(h) Janitorial services, office/house cleaner.
(i) Machine shops, not working on vehicles.
(j) Photographer.
(k) Pressure cleaner.
(l) Printers, directories, lithographing, embossing book
publishing, rubber stamps, engravers, blueprinting, and
typesetting.
(m) Tailors (service only).
(n) Upholsterers, cabinetmakers, refinishers, woodworkers.
§ 146-20 LIBRARY § 146-20
142:451
(o) Weight control clinics/systems, etc.
(p) Window tinting.
(q) Disc jockey or DJ. Renewal: $100. [Added 4-3-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-06]
(15) Service providers.
(a) Barbershops, beauty shops, styling shops, nail establishments,
including cosmetologists, manicurists and bootblack stands:
$300.
(b) Bondsmen, bail bondsmen: $500.
(c) Massage salon: $250.
(d) Tanning and toning or body-wrapping salon: $250.
(16) Television or radio stations, commercial: $300.
(17) Vehicle and marine dealers, including autos, trucks, four-wheeldrive
vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, trailers, mobile
homes, boats, yachts, ships.
(a) Display room or lot for new or used vehicles: $500.
(b) Any person applying for a license must exhibit or prove the
existence of an active state certificate, registration or license
before a license is issued.
(18) Wholesalers, excluding state-licensed medical marijuana
wholesalers, per location: $500. [Amended 10-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-48]
(19) Parking lots. Renewal fee: $10 per parking space. [Added
4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 12-06]
(20) State-licensed medical marijuana cultivation, manufacturing and
processing, wholesale and distribution: [Added 10-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-48]
(a) Cultivation, per location: $10,000.
(b) Manufacturing and processing, per location: $10,000.
(c) Wholesale and distribution, per location: $10,000.
(21) State-licensed medical marijuana dispensary: [Added 10-18-2018
by Ord. No. 18-48]
(a) Dispensaries, per location: $5,000.
(22) Vertically integrated medical facility: $15,000. [Added
10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-48]
§ 146-20 TRENTON CODE § 146-20.1
142:452
§ 146-20.1. Fee reduction for medical marijuana business
operations. [Added 10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-48]
A. For all state-licensed medical marijuana business operations, the
annual licensing fees established within § 146-20 of the City Code shall
be reduced by the following amounts for the applicable year if the
business entity can demonstrate that it falls within one or more of the
following categories:
(1) Any business that can provide a Minority Business Enterprise
Certification from the State of New Jersey shall be entitled to a 25%
reduction of the licensure fee, or remaining fee if a reduction has
already been applied under this section.
(2) Any business that can provide a Women's Business Enterprise
Certification from the State of New Jersey shall be entitled to a 25%
reduction of the licensure fee, or remaining fee if a reduction has
already been applied under this section.
(3) Any business that can provide proof that at least 1/3 of its
employees are residents of the City of Trenton shall be entitled to a
25% reduction of the licensure fee, or remaining fee if a reduction
has already been applied under this section.
(a) In order to receive a reduction under this subsection, the
business entity must provide adequate proof of employment
and residency, in the form of payroll history (amounts
redacted) and proof of residency demonstrating at least nine
months of both residency and active employment.
(b) The City reserves the right to contact any employees
referenced in order to verify employment and residency.
(4) Any business that can provide proof that at least one ancillary
service contract has been awarded to a business located within the
City of Trenton shall be entitled to a 25% reduction of the licensure
fee, or remaining fee if a reduction has already been applied under
this section.
(a) In order to receive a reduction under this subsection, the
business entity must provide proof of an ancillary service
contract valued over $500 for services performed for the
business the previous year, and proof of payment.
(b) The City of Trenton shall confirm that the ancillary service
company is a business entity located within the City of Trenton,
and possesses a valid business license in good standing.
(c) Ancillary services shall include, but shall not be limited to,
mechanical services, auto repair services, custodial services,
office furniture and/or supplies, IT services, and construction
and/or repair services.
§ 146-20.1 LIBRARY § 146-20.1
142:453
B. If any state-licensed medical marijuana business is able to satisfy three
of the above four categories, their annual licensing fee shall be waived
for that year.
§ 146-20.1 TRENTON CODE § 146-20.1
142:454
ARTICLE IV
Business Regulations
§ 146-21. Outdoor display of merchandise.
It shall be permissible for any business operating in the City to place for
sale or sell its merchandise, equipment and materials outside of an enclosed
building for which the occupational license has been obtained where such
merchandise, equipment and material are customarily stored within an
enclosed building. No display of merchandise, equipment or material for
sale or lease shall be permitted as to interfere with the right of access of
pedestrians, vehicular traffic or emergency vehicles.
§ 146-21 LIBRARY § 146-21
142:455

ARTICLE V
Hours of Operation
§ 146-22. Hours established; public access when closed; alcoholic
beverage premises.
§ 146-23. Applicability.
This article applies to merchants who sell to the general public goods,
merchandise, food or material, are specifically exempted from Subsection A
immediately above, are establishments which have been in operation prior
to October 6, 1988, are in the same location in question and are primarily
and substantially operated as:
A. No establishment on a premises whose building or grounds are closer
than 100 feet to the closest point of the building or grounds of a
residential property situated within any residential zone of the City
shall not be open for business or conduct business or invite or permit
access by the general public for any purposes between the hours of
11:00 p.m. of any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, prevailing
time.
B. During the hours of closing prescribed herein the property shall be
securely closed against access by the public to the building and to the
parking areas by the use of appropriately sized and placed fencing,
posts or chains and by posting "No Trespassing" signs.
C. Locations that operate primarily as a licensed alcoholic beverage
premises shall not be open for business or conduct business or allow
the service, consumption, or delivery of any alcoholic beverage directly
or indirectly during the hours as set by § 10-5 of the City of Trenton
Code.
D. At no time shall any business, operation or establishment other than a
licensed alcoholic beverage premises be allowed to operate between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
A. Hotels.
B. Diners.
C. Restaurants.
D. Pharmacies.
E. Licensed alcoholic beverage premises.
F. Gasoline stations.
G. Bakeries in which baking operations are actually conducted on the
premises.
H. Located within the City's established Entertainment District.
§ 146-22 LIBRARY § 146-24
142:457
§ 146-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this article shall be subject to a penalty of $250
and shall be subject to license suspension or revocation in accordance with
the provisions of Article VI of this chapter.
§ 146-25. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to the operation of a retail portion of a business
which is primarily a gasoline filling station in operation as such on or before
December 1, 1988, provided that the proprietor of the business cannot
reasonably operate the gasoline retail portion of the business without
accessing the retail portion.
§ 146-24 TRENTON CODE § 146-25
142:458
ARTICLE VI
Suspension and Revocation
§ 146-26. Causes for suspension.
Any license or permit issued by the City Clerk may be suspended by the City
Clerk for no more than seven days for the following reasons:
§ 146-27. Notice of suspension.
§ 146-28. Causes for revocation.
Any license or permit issued by the City Clerk may be revoked by City
Council for the violation by the licensee, after notice and hearing, and for
any of the following causes:
A. Failure to satisfy any notice of violation within five business days of
issuance and remedying the circumstances that served as the basis for
issuance of the notice of violation.
B. Any violation by the business, its agents, assigns, servants employees or
affiliates of the ordinances of the City or laws of the State of New Jersey
in any way related to the use or operation of the premises or the
operation of the business thereon for which such license was issued.
C. Permitting minors to congregate or remain on the licensed premises or
the premises to which the permit pertains in violation of Chapter 58,
Curfew. It shall be a sufficient defense to a charge brought under this
subsection that the licensee made timely complaint of the apparent
violation in question to the Police Department.
A. Written notice of the suspension shall be served upon the licensee
immediately at the licensed address in accordance with § 146-30. The
notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied
upon for the suspension of the license.
B. The licensee shall have the right to file a written appeal of the
suspension to the City Clerk within 72 hours of the date of notice of the
suspension. The appeal shall be reviewed by the City Clerk at a hearing
as prescribed in § 146-31. The filing of a notice of appeal shall toll any
such suspension during the pendency of the appeals process.
C. The licensee shall have the right to file a written appeal of the City
Clerk's decision to the City Council within 24 hours of written notice of
the Clerk's ruling. The appeal shall be reviewed by the City Council at a
hearing as prescribed in § 146-31.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in any
application for permit or license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the conduct of any
business or activity authorized by such license or permit.
§ 146-26 LIBRARY § 146-28
142:459
§ 146-29. Notice of hearing.
A license issued by the City shall not be revoked until a hearing thereon
shall have been held by the City Council. Written notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days
prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking the license.
§ 146-30. Service of notice.
Notice of hearing as set forth in § 146-29 may be given either by personal
delivery upon the business' agent or representative listed on the license
or may be deposited in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid, addressed to the business to be notified at the address
appearing upon the license.
§ 146-31. Hearing procedure.
At the hearing before the City Clerk or City Council, the business aggrieved
by the proposed suspension or revocation of any license issued by the City
shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon
due consideration and deliberation by the City Clerk or City Council, the
notice of violation may be dismissed, or if the City Clerk or City Council
concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may
suspend or revoke the license held by the licensee, as applicable.
C. Any violation by the business, its agents, assigns, servants, employees
or affiliates of the ordinances of the City or laws of the State of New
Jersey in any way related to the use or operation of the premises or the
operation of the business thereon for which such license was issued.
D. Any violation of this chapter.
E. Conducting the licensed business, trade, calling, profession or
occupation through the licensee himself/herself or any of his/her
agents, assigns, servants, employees or affiliates in any unlawful,
disorderly or improper manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare
of the public.
F. Violating or abusing the purpose for which a license had been issued to
the detriment of the public; or the use of a license for a purpose foreign
to that for which it was issued.
G. Permitting minors to congregate or remain on the licensed premises or
the premises to which the permit pertains in violation of Chapter 58,
Curfew. It shall be a sufficient defense to a charge brought under this
subsection that the licensee made timely complaint of the apparent
violation in question to the Police Department.
§ 146-28 TRENTON CODE § 146-32
142:460
§ 146-32. Reinstatement of revoked licenses.
If any license shall have been revoked, as provided in this article, neither
the holder thereof nor any person acting in his/her behalf, directly or
indirectly, shall be entitled to another license to carry on the same business
within the City unless the application for such license shall be approved by
the City Council.
§ 146-33. Denial of application or renewal.
Any business aggrieved by the denial of any application for permit or
license, or the refusal to renew the same, may appeal to the City Council by
filing with the City Clerk, within 14 days after the applicant or licensee has
been notified of such action, a written statement setting forth the grounds of
the appeal. The City Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the
appeal, and notice shall be given to the appellant in the manner provided in
§ 146-29. The decision and order of the City Council on the appeal shall be
final and conclusive.
§ 146-32 LIBRARY § 146-33
142:461

ARTICLE VII
Unclassified Occupations
§ 146-34. License fee required; display and sale of Christmas trees
and other seasonal items.
§ 146-35. Home occupations.
Home occupations shall be permitted in the City's residential use districts,
subject to the City zoning code regulations contained in Chapter 315,
Zoning and Land Development. If a business or occupation requires a
license as per § 146-21 and is permitted within a home under the abovereferenced
zoning ordinance, registration of the home-based business shall
be without a fee; provided, however, that no application may be made and
no license shall be issued for any business use involving any retail sale,
whether by telephone, mail or otherwise. For purposes of this section, the
term "retail sale" shall have the definition ascribed to it which appears in
Chapter 315, Zoning and Land Development. The licenses are subject to
cancellation by Code Enforcement or City Council in the event the Board
or Council determines that there is a violation of the zoning regulations, in
A. Every business, fixed or temporary, engaged in by any persons for a
period of less than 30 days, whether in a building, tent or upon a street,
vacant lot or anywhere in the open air, within the City, and not
specifically designated in this article, shall pay a license of $50 per
event.
B. The display and sale of Christmas trees and other seasonal items such
as Mother's Day flowers upon vacant property is limited to
nonresidentially zoned property and must be conditionally permitted by
the City Clerk. Such conditional approval shall include, among other
conditions, a cash bond for site cleanup in the minimum amount of
$100, methods and means of securing safe on-site traffic circulation and
ingress/egress from public rights-of-way, limitations on the days and
hours of operation of activities, the provision of security and public
safety (police, fire, and EMS) personnel, and other measures as the City
Clerk deems appropriate given the size, type, location, estimated
attendance, and character of the activity. Such display and sale must be
behind the property setback lines established by the City zoning
regulations, and each applicant shall post with the City a cash bond in
addition to the fifty-dollars license due per event. The cash bond is
required to ensure that the property is fully cleaned and cleared and
returned to its original condition, and failing to be returned to proper
condition as set forth in this subsection, the bond shall be retained by
the City and the City shall use it to defray the cost of having the
property cleaned and cleared and any materials on it removed. The City
shall not be responsible for any property so removed. Further, one
temporary building may be placed upon the property for use during the
sale period which must be inspected for safety by the Building
Department; however, no permit fee shall be required.
§ 146-34 LIBRARY § 146-35
142:463
which event no business activity may be conducted upon the premises. In
addition, the City Clerk is not authorized to issue a license for a residence
where the same owner or applicant had a license canceled as a result of
violation of this code prior to its expiration date.
§ 146-36. Bazaars, festivals or fairs.
It is the stated intent of the City to permit local educational, charitable,
rehabilitative, recreational or religious organizations consisting largely of
resident citizens of the City to be permitted to conduct social or charitable
festivities where any profit realized from such festivities (herein called
bazaars, fairs or festivals) is to be channeled into local religious, charitable,
educational, rehabilitative or recreational usage of direct benefit and
impact to the citizens. Such locally sponsored and operated festivals of an
essentially noncommercial nature shall be permitted to offer entertainment
to their patrons with such rides, games, booths and refreshments as are
permitted by the City after obtaining prior approval of same (and of the
intended beneficiary of the profit realized therefrom if other than a house of
worship, the police athletic league program, or a charitable or educational
or rehabilitative program having a direct substantial impact on the citizens).
No locally sponsored and operated fair, festival, bazaar, etc., will be
permitted without the obtaining of such prior approval from the office of the
City Clerk, who may attach such conditions and safeguards, including dates
and times of operation, as it deems necessary and advisable to the granting
of such approval.
§ 146-37. Dance halls; boxing and wrestling exhibitions.
The City shall have the power to regulate, license, and/or suppress the use,
operation and/or maintenance of any dancing hall, dancing academy and/or
boxing or wrestling exhibitions.
§ 146-35 TRENTON CODE § 146-37
142:464
ARTICLE VIII
Motion Picture and Television Permits
§ 146-38. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 146-39. Application.
Any person desiring to obtain a permit shall apply to the City Clerk for
approval by the Mayor, and the application shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
§ 146-40. Insurance requirements.
The applicant shall, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit, maintain
in force at all times during the permit period a comprehensive general
liability policy with its limits determined upon a review of the motion
picture or television project by the Mayor of the circumstances involved.
The applicant, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit, shall provide
to the Mayor a certificate of insurance evidencing that the insurance is in
existence and certifying that the City is a named insured and that the City
shall be given 30 days' notice prior to the expiration or cancellation of the
policy. The limits of the policy shall range from $300,000 up to $5,000,000
according to the degree of risk evidenced by examination by the Mayor of
the scripted scenes to be filmed.
§ 146-41. Rates and fees for City services.
Should it be determined that the production company will require the direct
participation of one or more City services, the production company will
compensate the department directly for services rendered according to that
department's rate structure. That department may also determine whether
A. No person shall take still or moving pictures that involve the use of
special settings, structures, apparatus, or the performance of a cast of
persons, either amateur or professional, or the posing of professional
models, on property located within the City without first having
obtained a permit from the Mayor.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to nor in any way restrict
the use of cameras by amateur or professional photographers not using
set scenery, casts, or models. This article shall also not apply to bona
fide newspaper, press association, newsreel, or television news media
personnel.
A. Name, address, including local address, and telephone number.
B. Locations, dates of filming, special parking requirements, and scenes to
be filmed, list of City personnel or equipment required.
C. The signature and title of an authorized representative of the company
requesting the permit.
§ 146-38 LIBRARY § 146-41
142:465
the production company will be billed for services rendered or will pay for
services in advance.
§ 146-42. Fee.
The City will charge no fee for a motion picture and television permit.
§ 146-43. Issuance.
Upon presentation of the completed application and proof of insurance, the
Mayor shall cause the permit to be issued.
§ 146-41 TRENTON CODE § 146-43
142:466
Chapter 150
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 38.
Nuisances — See Ch. 171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 248.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 257, Art. V.
§ 150-1. Purposes.
The following regulations are established to prohibit the throwing or
depositing of litter in public places in the City of Trenton; to regulate the
handling, storage, collection and disposal of municipal waste, litter and
other waste materials; to authorize fees for permits issued (s)he reunder;
to control the depositing of litter on private premises; to provide a lien
for City clearance; to prevent the generation of loose trash and debris by
the upsetting and unpackaging of containerized waste set out at the curb
for pickup for excessive periods of time prior to the scheduled pickup; to
prescribe responsibilities for owners and occupants of property within the
City; and to prescribe penalties for violations.
§ 150-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
APPROVED — That which the enforcing officer designates as acceptable
having been, by demonstration and/or test in the City, proven workable and
safe for its intended use.
AUTHORIZED APPROVED CONTAINER — A litter storage and collection
receptacle weighing not more than 50 pounds when filled, constructed of
galvanized metal or plastic of equivalent strength, leakproof, not more than
34 inches in height with handles and having a tight-fitting cover, maintained
in a sanitary condition. Other containers may be approved by the enforcing
officer. The location of approved containers shall be subject to approval of
the enforcing officer or his/her agent or agents.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any building, structure or premises
not a residence, and shall include places of business, institutions, motels,
hotels, motor courts or motor hotels.
COMMERCIAL WASTE — The miscellaneous waste resulting from operation
of business enterprises and institutions, including garbage, rubbish and
ashes from offices and stores or the like, and construction waste, but
excluding trade wastes resulting from industrial operations.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste from building construction, alteration,
demolition or repair and dirt from excavations.
§ 146-43 LIBRARY § 150-2
142:467
DOMESTIC WASTE — Waste material resulting from the usual routine of
housekeeping, and shall include garbage, rubbish and ashes.
DUMPING —
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as such are defined herein, and all
other waste material which, if improperly stored and thrown or deposited
as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare. "Litter" shall also mean and include domestic garbage and trash
placed for curbside or alley pickup in violation of the approved regulations
for such pickup, either as to set-out time or manner, as prescribed in
Chapter 248, Solid Waste, of the Code of the City of Trenton, and all
amendments thereto.
MUNICIPAL WASTES — Certain discarded products incident to household
keeping and commercial enterprises, and further defined as commercial
waste or domestic waste and construction waste.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walks, driveway, garage, porch, steps,
vestibule, mailbox, alleyway or easement belonging or appurtenant to such
dwelling house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public
ways and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals
and solid market and industrial wastes, specifically including abandoned
furniture and household equipment and scrap building materials.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cigars
and tobacco wastes, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
The unauthorized throwing or depositing of litter and/or other waste
material in a public place or upon private premises, where the nature
and/or quantity of the litter and/or waste is such as to require the use
of a mechanical means of transport.
A.
The unauthorized throwing or depositing of commercial waste and/or
construction waste and/or industrial waste and/or solid market waste
in a public place or upon private premises, where the nature and/or
quantity of the litter and/or waste is such as to require the use of
a mechanical means of transport. [Added 10-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-64]
B.
§ 150-2 TRENTON CODE § 150-3
142:468
§ 150-3. Public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place, except in authorized receptacles for collection or in
official municipal disposal areas.
§ 150-4. Occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property,
whether owned by him/her or not, except that the owner or person in
control of private property shall maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will not be carried or deposited by
the elements upon any other public place or private premises.
§ 150-5. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner, agent or occupant of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection,
but shall be construed to prohibit the placing of garbage, litter, rubbish and
refuse out for collection at any times other than those specified in Chapter
248, Solid Waste, of this Code, or any other law or regulation of the City.
§ 150-6. Vacant lots.
§ 150-7. Clearing of litter from open private property by City.
A. Litter on vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open
or vacant private property, whether owned by such person or not, nor in
or upon any publicly owned open vacant property.
B. Grass, weeds and other impediments. It shall be the duty of the owner
or owners of all vacant or unoccupied lands, and of the tenant or
tenants of all occupied lands abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks
and gutters of any of the public streets, avenues or highways of the City,
to remove from the sidewalks and gutters all grass, weeds and other
impediments.59
A. Notice to remove. The enforcing officer, or his/her duly designated
agent or agents, is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of
any open or vacant private property, or the lessee or agent of the owner,
to properly dispose of litter or remove grass, weeds or other
impediments located on the property which is dangerous to public
health, safety and welfare.
B. Service of notice. Notice shall be by registered or certified mail,
addressed to the lessee, owner or his/her agent at his/her last known
address, or served personally upon the lessee, owner or agent.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 38, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
§ 150-3 LIBRARY § 150-7
142:469
§ 150-8. Sweeping litter into gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns, occupies or is
responsible for property shall keep the sidewalk and curb area in front of
his/her premises clean and free of litter and weeds. This is meant to include
the rear of his/her property and adjoining alleyway and/or easement as
well. Nothing contained herein shall require the abatement of natural leaf
C. Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any lessee,
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of any litter, grass, weeds
or other impediments within 10 days after receipt of the written notice
specified in Subsection A of this section; or within 10 days after the date
of the notice in the event it is returned to the City by the Post Office
Department because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided that
the notice was properly addressed to the last known address of the
lessee, owner or agent. Whenever in the opinion of the Health Officer
such nuisance constitutes an actual menace to health, (s)he shall
proceed forthwith to cause the nuisance to be abated.
D. Charges added to tax bill. When the City has effected the removal of
litter and grass, weeds or other impediments, or has paid for its
removal, the actual cost thereof shall, unless paid by the owner prior
thereto, be charged to the owner of the property on the next regular tax
bill forwarded to the owner by the City. The charge shall be due and
payable by the owner at the time set for payment of the tax bill.
E. Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the
City is not paid by the owner within 30 days after the disposal of such
litter or removal of grass, weeds or other impediments as specified in
Subsections A, B and C of this section, then and in that case the
Director of Public Works shall cause to be recorded in the City Clerk's
office a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the
work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on
which the work was done. The recording of this sworn statement shall
constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect
for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any,
for collection, until final payment has been made. The costs and
expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection
of taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at the same rate of
taxes in the event they are not paid in full on or before the date the tax
bill upon which the charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn
statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be
prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with
and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall
be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the
statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property
designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and
collectible as provided by law.
§ 150-7 TRENTON CODE § 150-8
142:470
accumulation in streets, sidewalks or gutters, nor shall any person deposit
leaves in such places to facilitate leaf collection, or other forms of disposal,
within a reasonable time of such deposit.
§ 150-9. Placement in approved containers.
§ 150-10. Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent leakage and any contents from
being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place or
private premises. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck if the
wheels or tires carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or public place,
any mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind. Contractors
A. Prevention of scattering. Litter shall be placed in approved containers
in such a manner as to prevent it from being scattered, carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or private premises.
B. Public receptacles and approved containers.
(1) Litter other than garbage shall be placed in public receptacles or in
approved containers. Commercial or manufacturing establishments
shall flatten all cartons, crates, boxes, etc., and prepare such litter
for convenient loading and removal. Such establishments may use
cardboard boxes to contain litter if collections are made daily, but
the boxes must be of sufficient strength and securely tied so as to
prevent the contents from being scattered, carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or any public place or
private premises.
(2) No person shall drop, throw, place or deposit any collected rubbish,
garbage, household or commercial refuse or other waste products
of any kind in any open mesh litter baskets or in any other
receptacles placed in the streets or upon the sidewalks by the
Department of Public Works. The use of such receptacles shall be
limited as containers for newspapers, paper scraps, candy
wrappers, cigarette packages and containers, fruit skins and other
personal trash items.
C. Prohibitions. No person shall place any trash, refuse or garbage
receptacle on any property adjacent to a residential property in such a
manner that it is closer than six feet from any property line at its closest
point and in such a manner that it is visible from ground level or from
any portion of the improvement of the residential property. Appropriate
screening materials shall conform to existing code requirements. This
subsection shall not pertain to thirty-two-gallon or smaller domestic
waste receptacles, nor larger receptacles while temporarily in active
use in connection with any building project for which a permit has been
issued.
§ 150-8 LIBRARY § 150-10
142:471
are responsible for the cleanliness of streets during and upon completion of
construction.
§ 150-11. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private
property.
§ 150-12. Handbills and circulars.
No person shall cast or place, or cause to be cast or placed, in any of
the streets of the City or on the sidewalks thereof, or into vestibules or
yards, or upon porches of any dwelling houses or other buildings, or on
private property within the limits of the City or into any vehicle while on the
public highways or public places thereof any paper, advertisement, handbill,
circular or wastepaper; provided, however, that nothing contained herein
shall be held to apply to newspapers and addressed envelopes delivered to
subscribers and addressees.
§ 150-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-9-2008 by Ord. No.
08-50; 10-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-64]
Chapter 154
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 201.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter with respect to
litter shall be subject to a fine of $100 for a first offense and, for
subsequent offenses, shall be subject to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, provided that the court shall
have the discretion in all cases to modify any penalties provided herein
upon a showing by the defendant that the offense occurred despite
reasonable and diligent efforts made to prevent the offense from
occurring and/or to maintain the property in compliance with the trash
set-out regulations.60
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter with respect to
dumping shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for a first offense and, for
subsequent offenses, to a fine not exceeding $10,000 pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Solid Waste.
§ 150-10 TRENTON CODE § 150-13
154:472
ARTICLE I
Loitering for Prostitution Purposes
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-33 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 154-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, words and phrases shall
have the meanings given herein:
LOITERING — Standing, lingering or moving around through any place
open to the public in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the
specific intent of inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit an
act of prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered
are repeatedly stopping and/or attempting to stop motor vehicles and/or
pedestrians by waving arms or other bodily gestures.
PATRONIZE — Support, aid and/or assist.
PROSTITUTION — Sexual activity with another person in exchange for
something of value, or the offer or acceptance of an offer made in or within
view of a public place to engage in sexual activity in exchange for something
of economic value.
PUBLIC PLACES — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot, public library or any
other public building, structure or area.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Includes but is not limited to sexual intercourse,
including genital-genital, oral-genital and oral contact, whether between
persons of the same or opposite sex; masturbation; touching of the genitals,
buttocks or female breasts; sadistic or masochistic abuse and other deviant
sexual relations.
SOLICIT — To invite and/or obtain by asking or pleading through words or
gestures addressed to a particular individual to perform an act or activity.
§ 154-2. Regulations.
The following regulations are established to prohibit loitering which is
specifically performed to encourage, promote, solicit, patronize and/or
induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of prostitution:
A. No person, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle, shall:
(1) Wander, remain or prowl in a public place with the purpose of
committing a prostitution offense as defined herein.
(2) Engage in conduct that, where warranted under the circumstances,
may be deemed to manifest a purpose to procure, solicit or
patronize prostitution, including but not limited to:
§ 154-1 LOITERING § 154-2
154:473
§ 154-3. Violations and penalties.
Persons found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the general penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty, of the Code of the City of Trenton.
(a) Repeatedly beckoning to or stopping pedestrians or motorists
in a public place.
(b) Repeatedly circling in a public place in a motor vehicle in an
area where prostitution offenses commonly occur.
§ 154-2 TRENTON CODE § 154-3
154:474
ARTICLE II
Gang Loitering
[Adopted 7-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-88]
§ 154-4. Police procedure.
Whenever a police officer observes a member of a criminal street gang
engaged in gang loitering with one or more persons in any public place
designated under § 154-5 of this article, the police officer shall, subject to
all applicable procedures promulgated by the Police Director:
§ 154-5. Policy, procedures and area designations to be
promulgated.
§ 154-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Inform all such persons that they are engaged in gang loitering within
an area in which loitering by groups containing criminal street gang
members is prohibited;
B. Order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from the
designated area at which the order was issued;
C. Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to
obey the order promptly or engage in further loitering, within the next
three hours, within the designated place at which the order was issued.
A. The Police Director shall, by written directive, designate areas of the
City in which the Police Director has determined that enforcement of
this article is necessary because criminal gang loitering has enabled
criminal street gangs to establish control over identifiable areas in
order to intimidate others from entering those areas or to conceal
illegal activities in detriment to the public good and safety. Prior to
making a determination under this subsection, the Police Director shall
consult, as he/she deems appropriate, with persons who are
knowledgeable about the effects of gang activity in areas in which this
article may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be
limited to, members of the Trenton Police Department with special
training and/or experience related to criminal street gangs, elected and
appointed officials of the area, community-based organizations, and
members of the CPAC community groups. The Police Director shall
develop and implement procedures for the periodic review and update
of designations made under this subsection.
B. The Police Director shall, by written directive, promulgate policy and
procedure to prevent the enforcement of this article against persons
who are engaged in collective advocacy activities that are protected by
the Constitution of the United States or the State of New Jersey.
§ 154-4 LOITERING § 154-6
154:475
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — The commission, attempted commission
or solicitation of the following offenses, provided that the offenses are
committed by two or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of
or in association with, any criminal street gang with the specific intent to
promote, further, or assist in any criminal conduct commonly engaged in
by criminal street gang members. The following is a listing of such activity
under the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice:
2C:11-2 Homicide; 2C:13-1 Kidnapping; 2C:13-2 Criminal Restraint;
2C:12-lb Aggravated Assault (Firearm); 2C:28-5 Tampering with
Witnesses; 2C:15-1 Robbery (Home Invasion); 2C:33-28 Gang
Recruitment, Threats, Intimidation; 2C:18-2 Burglary; 2C:35-1 Controlled
Dangerous Substances; 2C:35-3 Leader of Narcotics Trafficking Network;
2C:35-4 Maintaining or Operating a Controlled Dangerous Substance
House or Facility; 2C:35-4.1 Fortified Premises; 2C:35-6 Employing a
Juvenile in Drug Distribution; 2C:35-7 CDS within 1,000 feet of School;
2C:35-10 Possession of CDS; 2C:17-1 Arson; 2C:39-3 Possession of
Firearms and all subsections; 2C:39-6 Possession of Explosives; 2C:39-4
Possession of Weapons (Firearms) for Unlawful Purpose; 2C:39-13
Unlawful Use of Bulletproof Vest. All subsections of the statutes listed
apply as well as those that were mentioned specifically.
CRIMINAL STREET GANG — Any ongoing organization, association, in fact
or group, of three or more persons, having as one of its activities the
commission of one or more criminal acts enumerated herein, and whose
members individually, or collectively, engage in or have engaged in a
pattern of criminal gang activity.
GANG LOITERING — Remaining in any one place under circumstances that
would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect
of that behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control
over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering such areas, or
to conceal illegal activities of which criminal street gangs engage in daily
causing an extreme danger to the public at large.
PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — Two or more acts of criminal
gang activities of which at least two such acts were committed within five
years of each other.
PUBLIC PLACES — The public way and any other location open to the
public, whether publicly or privately owned.
§ 154-7. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a maximum penalty for such violation of one or more of the
following:
(1) A fine not exceeding $1,250.
(2) Imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days.
(3) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 154-6 TRENTON CODE § 154-7
154:476
B. Any person convicted of a subsequent violation of this article within a
one-year period shall be fined an additional amount as a repeat
offender. The additional fine shall not exceed $1,250 and shall be in
addition to, and calculated separately from, the fine imposed for the
violation of the article.
C. Any person in default of the payment of any fine imposed may be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or be
required to perform community service for a period not exceeding 90
days.
§ 154-7 LOITERING § 154-7
154:477
Chapter 158
MEETING HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 97. Licensing — See Ch. 146.
§ 158-1. License required; exceptions.
No person either as principal or agent, clerk employee, either for himself/
herself or any other person, or for any corporation or other association shall
maintain or operate any premises primarily devoted for the use of meetings,
gatherings or group activities, whether for profit or otherwise, including,
but not limited to, social clubs or athletic clubs, whether formally organized
or otherwise, within the City without first having obtained a license from
the City Clerk and without complying with the provisions contained in this
chapter. This chapter shall not be construed to require additional licenses
for premises for which an alcoholic beverage license has been issued,
unless the meeting, gathering or activity is conducted in a portion of the
premises not included within the existing license, nor shall it apply to taxexempt
educational, governmental, charitable or church premises or public
buildings.
§ 158-2. Contents of application.
Applicants for meeting hall licenses or renewals thereof shall submit an
application form to be provided by the City Clerk. Applications shall include
the full name and current address of the owner of the premises and local
managing agent thereof, and of the proposed licensee. In the case of a
partnership or corporate owner or licensee, the application shall include
the name of each shareholder or partner holding 10% or more of the
outstanding stock, and in the case of organized clubs, whether incorporated
or otherwise, the principal officers and a brief description of the nature of
purposes of the organization.
§ 158-3. Investigation; reports.
The City Clerk shall transmit copies of all applications for meeting hall
licenses to the Police Director, the Fire Chief and the Building Inspector,
who shall investigate the licensed premises in accordance with their
respective jurisdictions and report back, in writing to the City Clerk, their
findings of fact and recommendations.
§ 158-4. Issuance and transfer of license.
A. The City Clerk shall either issue or deny a license or renewal within 30
days of receipt of the application. No license shall be issued until all
Code violations have been abated.
§ 154-7 TRENTON CODE § 158-4
158:478
§ 158-5. Appeal.
§ 158-6. License term; renewals.
Each license shall be effective for a term of one calendar year, expiring
midnight, December 31 of each year and shall be subject to renewal upon
approval of a renewal application which shall be submitted, together with
the license fee, to the City Clerk between November 1 and December 1 of
each year and which shall be approved or rejected on or before December
31. Applications for new licenses may be applied for at any time during
any calendar year and shall be approved or rejected within 30 days of
submission in proper form.
§ 158-7. Fees.
The annual nonrefundable license fee of $25 shall be paid to the City Clerk
at the time of the initial issuance of the license and submitted annually
thereafter, together with the renewal application form.
§ 158-8. License display.
Licenses shall be at all times displayed conspicuously upon the premises.
§ 158-9. Notice to abutting owners.
All applicants for initial licenses under the terms of this chapter shall
also, at least five days prior to the submission of the license application,
give notice to all owners and occupants of property within 200 feet of the
property involved in the application. Such notice may be given by personal
service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, provided
that notice shall not be deemed necessary or required in the case of any
application for license or premises presently in use as meeting halls prior to
the adoption of this chapter. The notice, in a form to be provided by the City
Clerk, shall advise the recipient to file any objections to the granting of the
license in writing to the City Clerk within 10 days.
§ 158-10. Location restrictions.
B. The license shall be nontransferable from person to person or place to
place.
A. In the event of a denial, the Clerk shall state her reasons in writing,
addressed to the applicant, which reasons shall be limited to those
specified in Chapter 146, Licensing, § 146-9E.
B. Any person who shall be aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk,
either in the granting or denial of a license, shall be entitled to appeal to
the City Council within 30 days of the receipt of the decision by filing a
written request for review by City Council with the City Clerk within the
thirty-day period.
§ 158-4 MEETING HALLS § 158-10
158:479
§ 158-11. Safety standards.
A. No license shall be issued for the operation of a meeting hall, dance
hall, or rental hall which is located within 1,000 feet of any school,
church, or public building or within 1,000 feet of another premises
licensed under this chapter or premises licensed as dance halls, rental
halls or pool or billiard parlors, or license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages, retail or plenary consumption or distribution under this
Code. This provision shall not apply to meeting halls, dance halls, or
rental halls, existing as such on or before October 5, 1978.
B. Upon application to the City Clerk, which application shall be upon
forms provided by the City Clerk, and upon notice to owners and
occupants of property within 200 feet of the proposed location, an
authorized representative of a social organization actually in existence
and functioning on a regular basis prior to October 5, 1978, in its
present location or in another location may apply to the City Council for
a variance from the foregoing distance requirements, which application
shall be granted upon a showing that:
(1) A variance is needed due to failure, through inadvertence or
excusable neglect, of the owner or organization to obtain and
maintain an initial license as required by this chapter; or
(2) A need for relocation has occurred as a result of a hardship and
that relocation to a site within the restricted distances set forth
herein would not jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare.
The City Council will make its determinations following a public
hearing to be convened on not less than 10 days' notice to all
persons concerned.
A. The applicant, at the time of initial application, shall submit a complete
floor plan of the premises indicating entrances, exits, fire exits and
measurements of those portions of the premises to be included in the
license or under the control of the licensee.
B. Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe by the written report
of the Building Inspector, or a fire hazard by the written report of the
Fire Chief, shall be deemed to be ineligible for a license and shall not be
operated until such violations are abated. The licensed premises shall
be subject to inspection by appropriate City officials in the same
manner as the other licensed premises or buildings within the City to
enforce the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of all
appropriate health and safety codes.
C. The premises shall be evaluated by the Fire Department which shall
prescribe occupancy limitations which shall be inscribed upon the
license. It shall be a condition of the issuance of the license that the
licensee shall not allow the occupancy limitations to be exceeded at any
time. No licensee, agent, employee or invitee shall obstruct, in any way,
the inspectors from performing their duties.
§ 158-10 TRENTON CODE § 158-12
158:480
§ 158-12. Responsibilities of owners and operators.
§ 158-13. Conduct of premises; nuisances.
No person, owner, tenant or occupant shall conduct any licensed premises
in such a way as to create a nuisance to the detriment of the peace and
tranquility of the neighborhood by allowing, permitting or suffering on or
about the premises, including any sidewalk area, and other portions of the
licensed premises immediately adjacent to, and a part of, the property for
which the license has been issued, any loud, disorderly or unlawful behavior
of any invitee or patron or other person whether or not specifically invited
to occupy or visit the premises licensed. It shall be the responsibility of the
person described in § 158-1 hereof to take reasonable action to maintain the
peace and tranquility of the neighborhood in which the licensed premises
is situated by actively abating and removing any such conduct. Any and
all complaints of noise or nuisance of any sort registered by any person
with the City Clerk shall be processed for license disciplinary hearings,
subjecting the licensee to suspension or revocation of the license pursuant
to the procedures set forth in Chapter 146, Licensing.
§ 158-14. Applicability to dance and rental halls.
In addition to its application to meeting halls, the operational restrictions,
application disclosure requirements, penalties and disciplinary procedures
provided in this chapter shall be applicable to the conduct of any dance hall
or rental hall separately licensed hereunder.
A. The owner of any premises within the City, which is primarily and
regularly devoted to the uses described in § 158-1 shall procure and
maintain a valid license pursuant to the procedures prescribed herein.
In addition to the owner's responsibility, it shall be the responsibility of
any person having dominion or control of the premises in the absence of
the owner to comply with the licensing and other provisions of this
chapter.
B. At the time of application for each license or renewal, and periodically
thereafter, whenever necessary to provide an accurate record, the
licensee shall designate by full name and current address the adult
person who shall bear the full responsibility for the maintenance and
management of the licensed premises at all times. Whenever the
licensed premises is in use for any gathering or activity, it shall be the
further obligation of the licensee to have available on the premises an
adult person who shall be the representative of the licensee and who
shall be responsible to correct or abate any and all violations of this
chapter or any breach of the peace in cooperation with the officers and
agents of the City. In the event of any violation of this chapter, the
owner and/or other person having tenancy, dominion or control over
such premises at the time of the occurrence of the violation shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed herein.
§ 158-12 MEETING HALLS § 158-15
158:481
§ 158-15. Interpretation.
This chapter shall not be construed to supersede or supplement any other
licensing provisions provided for by Chapter 146, Licensing, Article III, and,
in particular, a license granted hereunder for the operation of a meeting hall
shall not constitute a license for the operation of a rental hall or dance hall
and shall not constitute a license for the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 158-16. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any of the license revocation or review procedures and
penalties provided generally in, the penalty for violation of this chapter shall
be the penalty prescribed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 163
MUTUAL AID
§ 158-15 TRENTON CODE § 158-16
163:482
ARTICLE I
Emergency Police Services
[Adopted 10-20-2005 by Ord. No. 05-105]
§ 163-1. Mutual aid agreements established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, 40A:14-156.1, 40A:14-156.2 and
40A:156.3, there are hereby established mutual aid agreements among and
between this municipality and each of the aforementioned municipalities in
the County of Mercer,61 New Jersey, which shall become effective upon the
adoption by one or more of the aforementioned municipalities (hereinafter
referred to as "participating municipalities") of reciprocal ordinances to
provide mutual aid in police services in case of emergency. This agreement
shall apply whenever this municipality may have an emergency within
its boundaries requiring additional police assistance to protect life and
property, and whenever any of the aforementioned municipalities may
experience a similar emergency.
§ 163-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the term "emergency" shall be defined to
include situations in which the number of available police officers in a
participating municipality is insufficient to meet the public need in a
particular situation and situations where police aid involving special
expertise, training or equipment is required in order to protect life and
property or to assist in suppressing a riot or disorder. No formal declaration
of emergency is required to implement the provisions of the mutual aid
agreement.
§ 163-3. Requests for assistance.
The Chief, Police Director or acting head of the Police Department, or
Mayor or Chief Executive Officer of a participating municipality, is hereby
authorized to request assistance from the Chief or other head of the Police
Department of any other participating municipality to provide aid in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq.
§ 163-4. Provision of assistance.
A participating municipality shall provide police assistance when a valid
request in accordance with this agreement to supply personnel is made,
to the extent possible without endangering persons or property within the
confines of the providing municipality.
61.Editor's Note: The municipalities involved are enumerated in the preamble to this
ordinance as follows: "The County of Mercer consists of 13 municipalities, 12 of which
have municipal police or fire departments operating for or within the Township of East
Windsor, the Township of West Windsor, the Township of Ewing, the Township of Hamilton,
the Borough of Hightstown, the Township of Hopewell, the Township of Lawrence, the
Borough of Pennington, the Borough of Princeton, the Township of Princeton, the
Township of Washington and the City of Trenton, which regularly interact and provide
assistance to each other in police-related emergencies."
§ 163-1 MUTUAL AID § 163-5
163:483
§ 163-5. Powers, rights, immunities.
The members of the providing municipality's police department supplying
aid shall have the same powers, authorities, rights, and immunities as the
members of the police force of the requesting municipality when aid is being
rendered therein. Said members shall also have, while so acting, such rights
and immunities as they may otherwise enjoy in the performance of their
normal duties in the municipality rendering such assistance.
§ 163-6. County Critical Incident Management Plan.
These mutual aid agreements established herein by and between the
aforementioned municipalities in the County of Mercer shall further
authorize mutual police aid and assistance under the County Critical
Incident Management Plan as established by the Mercer County Prosecutor
as the Chief Law Enforcement Official in the County. The plan provides
for a response by a specially trained regional Emergency Response/Special
Weapons and Tactics Team in the event of certain hostage, barricade,
sniper, high-risk armed apprehensions, terrorist, or similar situations
occurring within a municipality within the County of Mercer.
§ 163-7. Benefits, injury, death.
Members of the police force of the providing municipality suffering injury,
or their legal representatives, if death results while rendering assistance
in the requesting municipality, shall be entitled to all such salary, pension
rights, workers' compensation, or other benefits as they would have accrued
if such injury or death had occurred in the performance of duties in their
own municipality, with such benefits to be the responsibility of the providing
municipality.
§ 163-8. Reimbursement.
A. A municipality receiving police assistance hereunder pursuant to the
terms of the County Critical Incident Management Plan shall not be
required to directly reimburse the regional team for services so
provided. The member municipalities shall, however, otherwise support
the function of the respective regional response teams by providing the
necessary manpower, equipment, and supplies on an ongoing annual
basis pursuant to the terms of the County Critical Incident Management
Plan.
B. Where emergency police aid is otherwise provided under
circumstances outside of the County Critical Incident Management
Plan, reimbursement shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, or such
other terms and conditions for reimbursement specifically agreed to
between specific municipalities.
§ 163-5 TRENTON CODE § 163-9
163:484
§ 163-9. Internal affairs.
Any complaints of an internal affairs nature made against an officer for
conduct while serving in a municipality other than his/her home
municipality pursuant to this mutual aid agreement shall be investigated
by appropriately designated police officials from the home municipality.
This investigation may be assisted by police officers from the municipality
where the alleged incident occurred. Any allegations of potential criminal
conduct by an officer shall be immediately referred to the Mercer County
Prosecutor's Office for review.
§ 163-10. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law. It shall become effective with respect to this municipality's activities
with another participating municipality, when such other participating
municipality has adopted an ordinance reciprocal to this one, and such
ordinance has become effective in that municipality.
§ 163-9 MUTUAL AID § 163-10
163:485
Chapter 167
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Barking dogs — See Ch. 21, § 21-7.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 201.
Nuisances — See Ch. 171.
§ 167-1. Prohibited noises.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person
to make, cause or suffer or permit to be made or caused upon any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him/her or upon any public street, alley
or thoroughfare in the City of Trenton, any unnecessary noises or sounds
by means of the human voice, or by any other means or methods which are
physically annoying to persons, or which are so harsh or so prolonged or
unnatural, or unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical
discomfort, or which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of
the inhabitants of the City, or any number thereof.
§ 167-2. Loud and unnecessary noises enumerated. [Amended
2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this chapter, but this enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive:
A. Radios, televisions, phonographs. The playing of any radio receiving
set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or
device for the production or reproduction of sound with louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person so playing, using
or operating such instrument or device and any persons who are
voluntary listeners thereto, or in such manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants.
B. Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The playing, for advertising
purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the passing
public, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound on the streets or public places of the
City of Trenton or in any place where the sound therefrom is cast
directly upon the streets or public places, or which is so placed and
operated that the sound therefrom can be heard to the annoyance or
inconvenience of travelers upon any street or public place or of persons
in neighboring premises.
C. Sound trucks. The playing, for advertising purposes or for any other
purpose whatsoever, on or upon the public streets, alleys or
§ 163-10 TRENTON CODE § 167-2
163:486
thoroughfares in the City of Trenton, of any device known as a sound
truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or radio or phonograph with
a loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or any other instrument known as
a calliope, or any instrument of any kind or character which emits
therefrom loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any
vehicle operated or standing upon the streets or public places
aforementioned. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any official
agency of the State of New Jersey or its political subdivisions from
operating a sound truck for any official purpose, provided, however,
that the agency desiring to operate such truck shall first notify the
Police Director of the times and places of such proposed operation.
D. Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or warning device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except when
required by law or when necessary to give timely warning of impending
danger to persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street;
as well as the sounding of any horn or warning device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which shall emit an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
E. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary jet or internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
loud or explosive noises therefrom.
F. Vehicles and their loads. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck,
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or operated in such a manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise,
especially on hill grades.
G. Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street or property adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church or court while it is in use, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or
unduly annoys patients in the hospital.
H. Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan on
any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from
such blower or fan is adequately muffled and such engine is equipped
with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noises.
I. Lawn mowers and chain saws. The operation or use of any power lawn
mower or other internal combustion landscaping equipment, including,
but not limited to, leaf blowers, vacuums, and golf course maintenance
equipment or chain saws between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
[Amended 5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-24]
J. Miscellaneous night noises. When occurring in close proximity to
residences between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the warming up or idling
§ 167-2 MUTUAL AID § 167-2
163:487
§ 167-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 171
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 6.
Removal of dog waste — See Ch. 21, Art. II.
Keeping of birds and animals — See Ch. 21,
Art. III.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 38.
Dry-cleaning and laundry facilities — See Ch.
68.
Food handling— See Ch. 113.
Slaughterhouses — See Ch. 237.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 268.
§ 171-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD — Natural or prepared food, beverages and all other items intended
for human consumption.
OWNER — Any person having any interest, legal or equitable, either alone
or in combination with others, in any premises.
PERSON IN CONTROL OF PREMISES — Any person responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of any premises or any person actually exercising
control over any premises, whether as tenant, lessee or occupant, or as
agent of any of them or as agent of an owner or otherwise.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, lot of land or part thereof.
§ 171-2. Notice to abate nuisance.
of buses, trucks or tractors, and the unnecessary and repeated idling,
acceleration and deceleration or starting and stopping of automobiles
and motorcycles.
K. Animals. The keeping of any animal which causes frequent or continued
noise plainly audible beyond the property line which shall disturb any
person in the vicinity.
A. Whenever anything declared by this Code to be a nuisance or any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any premises within the
City of Trenton, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control
of the premises to remove or abate it within the time specified but not
§ 167-2 TRENTON CODE § 171-2
163:488
§ 171-3. Abatement by Health Officer.
If the owner or person in control of the premises upon being notified
as provided by § 171-2 does not comply with the notice within the time
specified and fails to remove or abate the nuisance or condition, the Health
Officer or his/her agents or employees shall proceed to abate the nuisance
or condition or may cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner
by such means as shall be deemed proper.
§ 171-4. Recovery of costs.
Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the City of Trenton as a result
of the Health Officer, his/her agents or employees abating or removing or
causing to be abated or removed any nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy
condition, such costs and expenses may be recovered in the following
manner:
§ 171-5. Manner of giving notice.
Notice required by the provisions of this chapter shall be in writing and
shall be given to all of the persons affected by it. Notice shall be served
personally upon the person affected or by leaving a copy at his/her usual
or last known place of abode or by mailing it to him/her at his/her usual
or last known place of abode. Where the notice relates to any premises, a
duplicate of it shall be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants.
If the owner of the premises in question cannot be notified speedily, notice
may be given by leaving it with one of the tenants or occupants or by posting
it in a conspicuous place on the premises.
less than twenty-four hours from the date of service. [Amended
10-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-46]
B. Whenever anything declared by this chapter to be a nuisance or any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any public property or on
any highway or other public premises or place, notice shall be given to
the person in charge to remove or abate the same within the time
specified.
A. In all cases where permitted by law, such costs may be certified to the
Division of Taxation and shall be a part of the taxes next assessed upon
the premises upon which the nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy
condition was located.
B. Where the City is not permitted by law to proceed under Subsection A,
the cost or expense shall be recovered by an action at law in any court
of competent jurisdiction, which action shall be instituted by the Health
Officer in the name of the City.
C. Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in addition
to and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties for the violation of
this chapter.
§ 171-2 MUTUAL AID § 171-6
163:489
§ 171-6. Emergency powers.
Whenever the Health Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, (s)he may exercise one or more of the following powers without
having to resort to legal proceedings:
§ 171-7. Inspection of premises.
The Health Officer, his/her agents and employees shall have the right to
inspect any premises in the City of Trenton if they have reason to believe
that any provision of this chapter is being violated. Any person who hinders,
obstructs, resists, delays or prevents the Health Officer or any of his/her
agents or employees from having full access to any premises shall be guilty
of a violation of this chapter.
§ 171-8. Search warrant.
In addition to any penalties imposed for the violation of § 171-7, the Health
Officer may apply to the Judge of the City of Trenton for a search warrant.
The application shall be based upon an affidavit setting forth the conditions
and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition exists on the premises. If
the Judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the affidavit, (s)he
shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and
inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or unsanitary
or unhealthy condition may exist.
§ 171-9. Rules and regulations.
The Health Officer shall have the power to make whatever written rules and
regulations (s)he may decide are necessary for the proper administration
and enforcement of this chapter, but no rule or regulation shall conflict
with or in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Power to prevent the sale of food. The Health Officer may prohibit the
importation into the City or sale of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected of
being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
B. Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Health Officer may
order the seizure and destruction of any unstamped meat and of any
food, drink or other item intended for human consumption which is
unwholesome or dangerous or likely to cause sickness or injury to
persons who consume it.
C. Suspension of licenses. The Health Officer may suspend temporarily the
license of any person required to be licensed by any of the provisions of
this chapter if (s)he finds that the licensed activity is being conducted in
such a manner as to endanger the health or safety of the public.
§ 171-6 TRENTON CODE § 171-10
163:490
§ 171-10. General enforcement powers.
The Health Officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and of any
other ordinance provision of the City of Trenton concerning health and
sanitation, including but not limited to the Plumbing Code.62
§ 171-11. Nuisances defined and prohibited.
The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this municipality:
A. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become detrimental
or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of this municipality.
B. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become an
annoyance or interfere with the comfort or general well being of the
inhabitants of this municipality.
C. Pollution, or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution, of any waters in this municipality in such manner as
to cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of this municipality
either in their health, comfort or property.
D. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter which may cause flies or other
insects, vermin or rodents to have access or breed or exist.
E. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
F. Spitting upon any public sidewalk or the interior or exterior of any
public building or public conveyance.
G. Deposits of accumulations of the bodily wastes of humans or animals in
any street, sidewalk, lot or other public place.
H. Any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having possession of any
parcel within the City causing or allowing such parcel to be used for the
cultivation of medical marijuana, unless the person is authorized by the
state law to grow medical marijuana, and such authorized person is
complying with all state and local licensing, registration, and inspection
requirements. [Added 10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-48]
I. With respect to the legal operation of any state-licensed medical
marijuana facility, the following is hereby declared to be an unlawful
public nuisance: [Added 10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-48]
(1) Odors which are disturbing to people of reasonable sensitivity who
may be residing near or present on nearby property, including
areas open to the public.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction.
§ 171-10 MUTUAL AID § 171-11
163:491
§ 171-12. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 176
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 14.
Use of City Hall — See Ch. 53.
Disorderly assemblages — See Ch. 201, Art. I.
§ 176-1. Permit required; term defined.
No person shall engage in, form or start any parade in the City without
obtaining a permit from the Police Director. For the purpose of this chapter,
a parade shall mean any assemblage of 25 or more persons engaged in
an organized procession of any duration along a public street or highway,
following a certain route, whether predetermined or not. No permit shall be
issued to permit a parade prior to 1:00 p.m. on Sunday, except in connection
with a religious procession.
§ 176-2. Exceptions.
this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 176-3. Filing of application; fee.
(2) Repeated dispatches to the property by law enforcement.
(3) Disruption to and/or obstruction of the free passage of persons and/
or vehicles in the immediate vicinity of the property.
(4) Any other condition or act which may be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
A. Funeral processions.
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate supervision and direction of the proper school authorities.
C. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
A. Application. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the Police Director on forms provided by such officer.
§ 171-11 TRENTON CODE § 176-3
176:492
§ 176-4. Action by Police Director.
The Police Director shall act upon the application for a parade permit within
three days after the filing thereof.
B. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Police Director not less than five days nor more than 10 days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
C. Contents. The application for a parade shall set forth the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade Chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible head of such organization.
(3) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(4) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(5) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals; and
description of the vehicles.
(6) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(7) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(8) Any additional information which the Police Director shall find
reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
D. Late applications. The Police Director, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder
which is filed less than five days before the date the parade is proposed
to be conducted.
E. Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade
permit a fee of $5.
A. Notice of rejection. If the Police Director disapproves the application,
(s)he shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the date upon
which the application was filed, a notice of the action, stating the
reasons for denial of the permit.
B. Alternative permit. The Police Director, in denying an application for a
parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the
parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit,
§ 176-3 PARADES § 176-4
176:493
§ 176-5. Duties of permittee.
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade
Chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the
parade permit upon his/her person during the conduct of the parade.
§ 176-6. Interference.
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with
any parade or parade assembly, or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a parade.
§ 176-7. Driving through parades.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.
§ 176-8. Parking on parade route.
The Police Director shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof
constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Police Director shall post
signs to this effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
§ 176-9. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 180
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 58.
§ 180-1. Findings.
The City Council finds and declares that the uncontrolled and unsupervised
activities of minor persons within the City are detrimental to the
within one day after notice of the action of the Police Director, shall
file a written notice of acceptance with the Police Director. An alternate
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the
effect of a parade permit under this chapter.
§ 176-4 TRENTON CODE § 180-1
180:494
maintenance of public safety and contrary to the general welfare. It is
further found and declared that parental responsibility for the proper
control and supervision of minor children is essential to effective law
enforcement within the City.
§ 180-2. Definitions.
The following word meanings shall apply herein:
MINOR — Any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Includes either or both natural parents of a minor, the legal
guardians of the minor or any other adult persons who have voluntarily or
otherwise assumed the responsibilities of a natural parent with respect to
custody, care and control of the minor. For the purposes of the enforcement
of this chapter, the term "parent" shall not apply to natural parents, legal
guardians or other persons whose responsibility for the custody and control
of the minor has been transferred to another person or otherwise
terminated by court order or by the emancipation of the minor by marriage,
military service or other circumstances. Persons claiming the benefit of any
such termination or transfer of responsibilities shall bear the burden of
establishing the same in any proceedings hereunder.
VIOLATION OF THE PUBLIC PEACE — Includes any of the following acts:
defacing, damaging or destroying public property or the private property
of another within the City; or committing an assault or assault and battery
upon another in the City; robbery, stealing or larceny including shoplifting;
knowingly receiving stolen property; violation of any existing loitering or
curfew laws of the City; or breaking and entering or entering without
breaking into the property of another with the intent to steal; or threatening
another with the intent of extorting money or anything of value; or
possession or use of a controlled dangerous substance, as same shall be
defined under N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq., or juvenile delinquency based upon
any of the above offenses.
§ 180-3. Certain acts prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit,
suffer or encourage a minor to commit a violation of the public peace,
as defined herein, either by overt act, by failure to act or by lack of
supervision and control over such minor. Whenever a minor shall be
taken into custody or detained for the commission of any such violation
of the public peace within the City of Trenton, the parents of such minor
shall be immediately notified by the Police Department of such custody
or detention and the reasons therefor and of the responsibility of
parents under this chapter.
B. In addition to those procedures established as a deterrent to juvenile
acts of vandalism and to parental neglect of child supervision pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-14, and upon the conviction of any juvenile under the
age of 18 years for any high misdemeanor, misdemeanor or violation of
any statutes of the State of New Jersey or ordinances of the City of
§ 180-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 180-3
180:495
§ 180-4. Violations and penalties.
Any parent who shall violate the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
§ 180-5. Cumulative remedy.
The remedy provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, not exclusive,
and the state or any other person shall have the right to proceed under any
legally available remedies.
Chapter 184
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 14.
Parking meters — See Ch. 188.
Unattended vehicles — See Ch. 305.
§ 184-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words,
terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed
to them in this section:
COMMERCIAL — Concerned with business activity involving the
purchasing, selling or exchanging of goods, products or property.
GARAGE — See "parking lot."
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled.
OPERATOR — Any person conducting the operation of a parking lot or
garage, as defined by this chapter, or receiving the consideration for
parking or storage of motor vehicles at such parking place.
Trenton which acts include vandalism, destruction or damage to realty,
personalty, pets, animals, livestock, or other chattel, the parent or
parents, lawful guardian or guardians of such juvenile shall be
responsible for financial reimbursement to the victim of such crime or
offenses. A complaint shall issue and upon determination by the court
that there in fact have been financial losses suffered by the victim, the
court shall determine the amount of restitution to be made within a
prescribed time but not longer than 30 days.
C. Any person who fails to comply with an order for restitution as
hereinabove set forth shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and
shall be in contempt of court and in violation of this chapter.
§ 180-3 TRENTON CODE § 184-1
184:496
PARKING LOT or GARAGE — Any building, structure, premises, enclosure
or other place, whether enclosed or not, except a public way, within the
City where two or more motor vehicles are stored, housed or parked for
hire, charge, fee or other valuable consideration in a condition ready for
use, or where rent or compensation is paid to the owner, manager or
lessee of the premises for the housing, storing, sheltering, keeping or
maintaining such motor vehicles; provided, however, that such terms shall
not include residential parking provided for single-family homes or multiplefamily
dwelling units wherein an arrangement for such parking is provided
on a rental basis for off-street parking, the consideration therefor being set
forth in the house or apartment lease or in a separate writing between the
landlord and tenant, whether the parking charge is payable to the landlord
or to the operator of the parking lot or garage.
PERSON — Any natural person, trustee, court-appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation,
business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal
corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier,
vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees
or other representative, acting either for himself/herself or for any other
person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties.
PUBLIC — Open to all; not limited or restricted to any particular class of
the community.
§ 184-2. License for public and commercial parking facility.
§ 184-3. Parking spaces.
§ 184-4. License fee.
A. License required. Every public and commercial parking facility shall
obtain a business license and register with the City Clerk's office.
B. Information to be included. Every license shall include in its
registration the number and location of each parking space and the
entrance and exit locations.
C. Term of license. The license fee shall be effective for a calendar year. A
calendar year is January 1 through December 31.
A. Designation. Every public and commercial parking facility shall have
parking spaces designated by lines or markings. No person shall park
any vehicle in any unmarked area of a parking facility.
B. Maximum number of spaces. Every parking facility shall conspicuously
display the maximum number of designated spaces that its facility can
accommodate.
A. Fee imposed. Every public and commercial parking facility shall pay a
license fee. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and
§ 184-1 PARKING LOTS § 184-4
184:497
§ 184-5. Fees to be paid into treasury.
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the fees under this chapter,
including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Trenton.
§ 184-6. Refusal to pay fee; notification.63
If any public or commercial parking facility engaged in the business of
parking, garaging or storing motor vehicles fails or refuses to pay the
annual fee when required herein, the City Clerk is authorized to determine
the amount of the fee and, by mail, notify the business of the amount
determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon become the amount due
and shall be immediately payable. For the purposes of determining the
amount of the fee due, the City Clerk shall have access to all of the books,
records and any and all papers and documents necessary. It is unlawful
for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the City Clerk or his/
her duly authorized representatives in the discharge of their duties in the
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 184-7. Access to premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse the City Clerk or his/her duly
authorized agents free access thereof at all reasonable times.
§ 184-8. Enforcement.
privilege of parking a motor vehicle in or upon any parking lot or
garage in the City a fee of $10 for each designated parking space. The
ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of such fee is to be borne
by the operator of the parking facility.
B. Nonpayment of fee on due date. Whenever the license fee required to
be paid is not paid on or before the date on which it becomes due, as
herein provided, a penalty shall be imposed. A penalty at the rate of 7%
will be imposed for nonpayment as of January 1 through January 31.
Thereafter, an additional 1.5% will be imposed for each delinquent
calendar month.
C. Exceptions. The fee herein levied shall not apply to residential off-street
parking for house or apartment tenants, wherein an arrangement for
such tenant parking is provided in the house or apartment lease or in a
separate writing between landlord and tenant, whether the parking
charge is payable to the landlord or to the operator of the parking lot or
garage.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers and members of the Police
Department of the City to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In
addition, the City's license inspector and parking meter collectors shall
have the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 184-4 TRENTON CODE § 184-8
184:498
§ 184-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of the chapter shall be liable for a
penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 185
PARKING SURCHARGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking lots — See Ch. 184. Parking meters — See Ch. 188.
§ 185-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words,
terms and definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed
to them in this section:
COMMERCIAL — Concerned with business activity involving the
purchasing, selling or exchanging of good, products or property.
GARAGE — See "parking lot."
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled.
OPERATOR — Any person conducting the operation of a parking lot or
garage, as defined by this chapter, or receiving the consideration for
parking or storage of motor vehicles at such parking place.
PARKING LOT or GARAGE — Any building, structure, premises, enclosure
or other place, whether enclosed or not, except a public way, within the
City where two or more motor vehicles are stored, housed or parked for
hire, charge, fee or other valuable consideration in a condition ready for
use, or where rent or compensation is paid to the owner, manager or lessee
of the premises for housing, storing, sheltering, keeping or maintaining
such motor vehicles; provided, however, that such terms shall not include
residential parking provided for single-family homes or multiple-family
dwelling units wherein an arrangement for such parking is provided on
a rental basis for off-street parking, the consideration therefor being set
forth in the house or apartment lease or in a separate writing between the
landlord and tenant, whether the parking charge is payable to the landlord
or to the operator of the parking lot or garage.
B. The City Clerk and his/her duly authorized agents shall have access to
public and commercial parking facilities to inspect the premises to
ensure compliance with this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to
prevent, hinder or interfere with the City Clerk or his/her duly
authorized representatives in the discharge of his/her duties in the
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 184-8 PARKING LOTS § 185-1
184:499
PERSON — Any natural person, trustee, court-appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation,
business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal
corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier,
vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees
or other representative, acting either for himself/herself or for any other
person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties.
PUBLIC — Open to all; not limited or restricted to any particular class of
the community.
§ 185-2. License surcharge imposed.
In addition to the license fee in Chapter 184, every public and commercial
parking facility shall collect and pay a 7% surcharge on each and every fee
for the parking, garaging, or storing of motor vehicles, to the City of Trenton
as per § 185-3. The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such fee
is to be borne by the operator of the parking facility.
§ 185-3. Payment into treasury; use of funds.
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the surcharge under this
chapter, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City
of Trenton. The surcharge collection shall only be used by the City of
Trenton for the purpose of demolishing and removing abandoned buildings
or structures. If there are any collections in excess of the amount necessary
for this purpose, the remainder would be used for infrastructure projects in
municipalities.
§ 185-4. Refusal to pay surcharge; notification.
If any public or commercial parking facility engaged in the business of
parking, garaging or storing motor vehicles fails or refuses to pay the
surcharge when required herein, the City Clerk is authorized to determine
the amount of the surcharge due and, by mail, notify the business of
the amount determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon become the
amount due and shall be immediately payable. For the purposes of
determining the amount of the surcharge due, the City Clerk shall have
access to all the books, records and any and all papers and documents
necessary. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with
the City Clerk or his/her duly authorized representatives in the discharge of
their duties in the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 185-5. Access to premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse the City Clerk or his/her duly
authorized agents free access thereof at all reasonable times.
§ 185-6. Enforcement.
§ 185-1 TRENTON CODE § 185-6
184:500
§ 185-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of the chapter shall be liable to a penalty
as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 188
PARKING METERS
A. It shall be the duty of the officers and members of the Police
Department of the City to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In
addition, the City's license inspector and parking meter collectors shall
have the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The City Clerk and his/her duly authorized agents shall have access to
public and commercial parking facilities to inspect the premises to
ensure compliance with this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to
prevent, hinder or interfere with the City Clerk or his/her duly
authorized representatives in the discharge of his/her duties in the
enforcement of this chapter.
C. The collections and expenditures permitted pursuant to this chapter
shall be included in the annual audit of the municipality required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-4 to ensure surcharges are spent for the
purposes provided under this chapter.
§ 185-6 PARKING LOTS § 185-7
184:501

ARTICLE I
On-Street Parking Meters
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as Ch. XIV-A of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 188-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device installed or used for the
regulation of parking in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Each parking meter installed shall indicate, by proper legend, the legal
parking time established by the City and when in operation shall indicate
the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of the legal parking
shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone adjacent
to a parking meter.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any municipal lot, street or part of a street on
which parking meters are installed and in operation.
§ 188-2. Parking meter locations.
Parking meter locations are designated in the schedule below; provided,
however, where an emergency or temporary condition is declared by
resolution of the City Council, all rules and regulations set forth hereinafter
shall be subject to such changes as shall be provided by that resolution.
Name of Street Sides Location
Academy Street Both Between Stockton Street and Old Canal Fill
North Between 65 feet east of Broad Street and 35
feet west of Montgomery Street
Between a point 65 feet east of the east curb
of Montgomery Street and a point 35 feet
west of the west curb of Stockton Street
South Between a point 60 feet east of the east curb
of Montgomery Street and a point 65 feet
west of the west curb of Stockton Street
Armory Drive Both Entire length
North Broad
Street
Both Between Academy Street and Olive Street
East Between Hanover and Academy Streets
From 120 feet north of Perry Street to 35
feet south of Feeder Street
Between Penn-Central Railroad and a point
200 feet south of the south curb of
Brunswick Avenue
§ 188-1 PARKING LOTS § 188-2
184:503
Name of Street Sides Location
West From 60 feet north of Perry Street to 135
feet south of Allen Street extended
Between Hanover Street and Academy
Street
North Broad
Street
West From 60 feet north of Perry Street to 135
feet south of Allen Street extended
Between Hanover Street and Academy
Street
Between a point 35 feet south of the south
curbline of Allen Street extended and a point
70 feet south of the south curbline of Allen
Street extended
North Broad
Street
West Between a point 100 feet north of the north
curbline of Allen Street extended and a point
35 feet south of south curbline of Feeder
Street extended
From 80 feet south of Pennington Avenue to
Penn-Central Railroad
Between a point 35 feet north of the north
curb of Hanover Street and a point 75 feet
north of the north curb of Hanover Street
Between a point 135 feet north of the north
curb of Hanover Street and a point 85 feet
south of the south curbline of Academy
Street extended
South Broad
Street
Both Between Madison and Malone Streets
Between Harding and Liberty Streets
East From 50 feet south of Livingston Street to
265 feet south thereof
Between a point 315 feet south of the south
curb of Livingston Street and a point 90 feet
north of the north curb of Market Street
From 35 feet north of Front Street to
Windsor Alley
West Between 100 feet south of Market Street to
140 feet north of Centre Street
Between a point 100 feet south of the south
curb of Greenwood Avenue and a point 35
feet north of the north curb of Ferry Street
From 120 feet south of Livingston Street to
45 feet south thereof
§ 188-2 TRENTON CODE § 188-2
184:504
Name of Street Sides Location
From 195 feet south of Livingston Street to
120 feet north of Market Street
From 35 feet north of Livingston Street to
130 feet south of Lafayette Street
Carroll Street East Between a point 170 feet north of the north
curb of State Street and a point 265 feet
north of the north curb of State Street
West Canal Street East Between East State and Merchant Streets
West Between East State Street and a point 80
feet south of the south curb of Merchant
Street
Chambers Street East Between St. Francis Avenue and a point 250
feet south of the south curb of Hamilton
Avenue
Chancery Lane East Between 35 feet north of West State Street
and 35 feet south of Hanover Street
Chestnut Street North Between Clinton Avenue and Genesee Street
North Clinton
Avenue
East Between a point 300 feet north of the north
curb of State Street and Lincoln Avenue
North Clinton
Avenue
North Between a point 35 feet east of the east curb
of Webster Street extended and a point 110
feet east of the east curb of Webster Street
extended
Between a point 170 feet east of the east
curb of Webster Street extended, and a point
180 feet west of the west curb of Olden
Avenue
From 190 feet east of Olden Avenue to 35
feet west of Sherman Avenue
South Between Meade and Webster Streets
Between a point 35 feet east of the east curb
of Webster Street and a point 200 feet west
of the west curb of Olden Avenue
Between a point 120 feet east of the east
curb of Olden Avenue and a point 35 feet
west of the west curb of Sherman Avenue
extended
South Clinton
Avenue
East From East State Street to Raoul Wallenberg
Avenue
West From 35 feet south of Magowan Street to
370 feet south thereof
Ewing Street East Between State Street and Elizabeth Alley
§ 188-2 PARKING LOTS § 188-2
184:505
Name of Street Sides Location
West Between State Street and Cross Street
Franklin Street West From 35 feet south of Hamilton Avenue to 85
feet south thereof
East Front Street
[Added
9-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-90]
Both Between South Broad Street and North
Warren Street
East Front Street
[Amended
9-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-90]
Both Between Anderson Street and Bert Avenue
South From Union Alley to 240 feet east thereof
Between a point 30 feet east of the east curb
of Jackson Street and a point 215 feet west
of the west curb of Montgomery Street
From 80 feet east of South Montgomery
Street to 165 feet west of Stockton Street
Hanover Place Both Entire length
East Hanover
Street
North Between Montgomery Street and a point 65
feet west of the west curb of Stockton Street
Between 160 feet west of Montgomery
Street to 85 feet west thereof
South From 170 feet east of Broad Street to 150
feet east thereof
From 40 feet west of Montgomery Street to
105 feet west thereof
Between Montgomery and Stockton Streets
From 45 feet east of Broad Street to 80 feet
east thereof
West Hanover
Street
North Between Willow and Calhoun Streets
South Between a sign 60 feet west of the west curb
of Willow and Calhoun Streets
Hudson Street North Between Genesee and Broad Streets
Lafayette Street North Between Peace and Willow Streets
From 34 feet west of Broad Street to 238
feet west therefrom
From South Warren Street to Howells Alley
South From 58 feet west of Broad Street to a point
148 feet west therefrom
§ 188-2 TRENTON CODE § 188-2
184:506
Name of Street Sides Location
Between Memorial Drive and South Warren
Street
Market Street South From 120 feet east of Broad Street to
Jackson Street
From Cooper Street to 55 feet west of Broad
Street
From 120 feet east of Warren Street to
Cooper Street
Merchant Street South Between Stockton Street and West Canal
Street
South
Montgomery
Street
East Between Front and State Streets
West From 105 feet south of State Street to 125
feet south thereof
From 80 feet north of Front Street to 95 feet
north thereof
North Olden
Avenue
West Between Prince Street and Agnes Alley
Between a point 100 feet north of the north
curb of Clinton Avenue and Agnes Alley
Perry Street North Between Broad and Stockton Streets
St. Francis Avenue South Between Chambers Street and
Commonwealth Avenue
East State Street North Between Ewing and Carroll Streets
From 125 feet east of Olden Avenue to 185
feet east thereof
Between a point 185 feet east of the east
curb of Olden Avenue and a point 270 feet
east of the east curb of Olden Avenue
Between a point 250 feet east of the east
curb of Clinton Avenue and a point 400 feet
west of the west curb of Wall Street
Between Carroll Street and a point 180 feet
west of the west curb of Clinton Avenue
From 75 feet east of South Walter Avenue to
120 feet west of Olden Avenue
From 125 feet east of Olden Avenue to 150
feet east thereof
§ 188-2 PARKING LOTS § 188-2
184:507
Name of Street Sides Location
East State Street South Between a point 100 feet east of the east
curb of Cuyler Avenue and a point 35 feet
west of the west curb of Walter Avenue
Between Clinton and Fairview Avenues
West State Street Both Between Warren Street and Chancery Lane
Between Chancery Lane and Willow Street
Between Calhoun Street and Taylor's Alley
North Between 105 feet west of Willow Street and
30 feet east of Taylor's Place
Between a point 120 feet west of the west
curb of Calhoun Street and a point 35 feet
east of the east curbline of Rutgers Place
extended
Between a point 35 feet west of the west
curbline of Rutgers Place extended and a
point 135 feet west of the west curbline of
Rutgers Place extended
South Between a point 644 feet west of the west
curb of South Willow Street and a point 960
feet west of the west curb of South Willow
Street
Between Perdicaris Place and a point 200
feet west of Rutgers Place, except in front of
No. 383 West State Street
From 232 feet west of Barrack Street to 366
feet west thereof
Steward Alley South From Stockton Street to 70 feet east thereof
Stockton Street East Between East State and Commerce Streets
South Stockton
Street
East From 75 feet south of State Street to 170
feet north of Front Street
Walnut Avenue
Extension
West From 80 feet north of Greenwood Avenue to
115 feet north thereof
North Warren
Street
Both Between Perry and Hanover Streets
Between Perry Street and the Penn-Central
Railroad
East Between Penn-Central Railroad and a point
150 feet south of the south curb of Tucker
Street extended
West Between 35 feet south of Ringold Street and
Penn-Central Railroad
§ 188-2 TRENTON CODE § 188-2
184:508
Name of Street Sides Location
Old South Warren
Street
East From Market Street to 320 feet south
thereof
West From 250 feet south of Market Street to 70
feet south thereof
South Warren
Street
East Between a point 180 feet south of the south
curb of State Street and Front Street
Between a point 105 feet south of the south
curb of Front Street and Lafayette Street
South Warren
Street
East From Lafayette Street to 130 feet north of
John Fitch Way
West From 50 feet south of Front Street to 110
feet south thereof
From 160 feet south of Front Street to 50
feet north of Lafayette Street
From 100 feet south of Lafayette Street to
150 feet north of John Fitch Way
Between John Fitch Way and Market Street
William Trent
Place (formerly
Old South Warren
Street)
West Between Market Street and the southerly
property line of the Trent House grounds
Willow Street West Between Hanover and Capitol Streets
North Willow
Street
Both Between Spring and Hanover Streets
South Willow
Street
South From 35 feet north of Front Street to 90 feet
south of State Street
§ 188-3. Time limits; fees. [Amended 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
Parking meter rates for motor vehicles shall be as follows:
§ 188-4. Hours of operation. [Amended 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
A. Business Zone A. Where the boundary for the Business Zone A is in the
center of the street, this rate shall apply to both sides of the street.
(1) For a thirty-minute period, a charge of $0.50.
(2) For a one-hour period, a charge of $1.
B. All other areas of the City, for a one-hour period, a charge of $0.75.
A. The hours of operation of parking meters in the respective zones shall
be from 9:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and legal
§ 188-2 PARKING LOTS § 188-4
184:509
§ 188-5. Installation of meters.
Parking meters shall be installed in all zones established as parking meter
zones in this article; provided, however, that no parking meters shall be
installed in any of the areas where parking is prohibited by statute pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
§ 188-6. Marking of spaces and meters.
The Director of Public Works may have lines or markings painted or placed
on the curb and/or the street indicating the parking space controlled by the
parking meter. When installed, no person shall park any vehicle across any
such line or marking or park any vehicle in such position that it shall not be
entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings, unless the
vehicle could not physically fit within the space.
§ 188-7. Manner of parking.
When single-mounted parking meters are used in any parking meter zone
which has parallel parking, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall
be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to
the parking meter. When dual-mounted parking meters are used, the above
requirement shall apply to the rear vehicle and for the forward vehicle the
hindmost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the parking meter. When a
parking space in any parking meter zone is other than parallel parking, the
vehicles shall head in to the parking meter unless otherwise instructed by
an appropriate sign.
§ 188-8. Operation and use.
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space in any of
the parking meter zones established by this article during the hours of
operation of those zones without depositing one or more appropriate coins
of the United States of America at the rate provided for that zone in the
parking meter adjoining such parking meter space and turning the lever to
cause the parking meter to operate.
§ 188-9. General regulations and prohibitions.
holidays, and further excepting those times when parking or standing
is expressly prohibited on streets or parts of streets in the zones.
B. Parking is expressly prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:29 a.m. unless
otherwise permitted in Chapter 14 of the Code of the City of Trenton.
A. No person shall cause a vehicle to remain in or to be parked in a
parking meter space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter
displays a device or signal indicating the period of time for such parking
has expired. No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle
registered in his/her name to be parked in any parking meter space
§ 188-4 TRENTON CODE § 188-9
184:510
§ 188-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 188-11. Parking meter bags. [Amended 3-5-2009 by Ord. No.
09-09]
herein designated or to be hereafter designated in violation of the
provisions of this article.
B. No person shall deposit in any parking meter a slug, device or metallic
substitute, or any other substitute, for a coin of the United States of
America.
C. No person shall deface, tamper with, damage, unlawfully open or
willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this article.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department of the City of
Trenton, Parking Enforcement Officers of the City of Trenton, and
parking meter collectors to enforce the provisions of this article. Unless
another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of
a violation of the provisions of this article shall be liable to a penalty of
$70 for each offense, or may be imprisoned in the county jail for a
period not exceeding 15 days for each offense, or both. Such fine and
imprisonment shall be at the discretion of a Municipal Judge of the City
of Trenton. [Amended 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
B. In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance provision or
regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such provisions, together with proof identifying its registered
owner, shall constitute prima facie proof that the registered owner of
such vehicle parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred.
A. Whenever it becomes necessary for representatives of the New Jersey
Bell Telephone Company, Public Service Electric and Gas Company, any
service, repair or construction contractor or individuals having
temporary specific need to use a parking metered space for a vehicle,
dumpster or storage for longer than the allotted time prescribed by this
article, then parking meter bags may be issued upon approval of an
application by the Trenton Parking Utility. A deposit of $40 will be
required for each bag and the user will be required to employ a secure
lock when bags are placed over meters.
B. The fee for the use of parking meters bags shall be $20 per twenty-fourhour
period, or part thereof. The fee shall be charged until the time of
the return of the parking meter bags. Failure to return bags promptly
shall also result in the forfeiture of the deposit.
§ 188-9 PARKING LOTS § 188-11
184:511
C. No person shall utilize the parking meter bags for any purpose or use
other than those approved in the application to the Trenton Parking
Utility.
D. The Director of the Trenton Parking Utility shall formulate any further
rules or regulations necessary to implement the intent and purposes of
this section.
E. Use of any parking meter bag at a time or place other than specifically
applied for and approved shall constitute a violation of this section
punishable by a fine of up to $500 for each violation.
F. No person shall utilize parking meter bags obtained from any other
source, except those applied for and authorized by the Trenton Parking
Utility. Such use shall be punishable by a fine as listed in Subsection D,
and all unauthorized parking meter bags shall be subject to
confiscation.
§ 188-11 TRENTON CODE § 188-11
184:512
ARTICLE II
Trenton Parking Utility Facilities
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as Ch. XIV-B of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 188-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
METERED SURFACE FACILITY — Any lot where any mechanical device
is installed or used for the regulation of parking in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Each parking meter installed will indicate by
proper legend the legal parking time established by the City and, when
in operation, shall indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the
expiration of the legal parking shall indicate legal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking metered surface
facility adjacent to a parking meter.
PARKING SPACE — Any space within the Trenton Parking Utility facility
other than a metered space, that is leased during the hours of operation and
in the manner prescribed at each facility.
§ 188-13. Marking of spaces. [Amended 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
The Business Administrator may have lines or markings painted in any of
the Trenton Parking Utility facilities indicating the parking space. When
installed, no person shall park any vehicle across any such line or marking
or park any vehicle in such position that it shall not be entirely within the
area so designated by such lines or markings. No person shall park any
vehicle in any unmarked area of any Trenton Parking Utility facility.
§ 188-14. Manner of parking.
When a parking space in any Trenton Parking Utility facility is other than
parallel parking, the vehicles shall head into the parking space unless
otherwise instructed by an appropriate sign.
§ 188-15. Operation and use.
§ 188-16. General regulations and prohibitions.
A. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space during the
hours of operation without depositing one or more appropriate coins of
the United States of America at the rate provided for that facility in the
parking meter adjoining such parking meter space, and turning the
lever to cause the parking meter to operate.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space during the hours of
operation without having obtained a monthly permit for the month
applicable from the Trenton Parking Utility. [Amended 3-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-09]
§ 188-12 PARKING LOTS § 188-16
184:513
§ 188-17. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 188-18. (Reserved)64
§ 188-19. Unattended metered surface facilities. [Amended
3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
A. No person shall cause a vehicle to remain in or to be parked in a
parking meter space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter
displays a device or signal indicating that the period of time for such
parking has expired.
B. No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his/her
name to be parked in any parking meter space herein designated or to
be hereafter designated in violation of the provisions of this article.
C. No person shall deface, tamper with, damage, unlawfully open or
willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this article.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department of the City of
Trenton, parking enforcement officers of the City of Trenton, and
parking meter collectors to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If
authorized pursuant to applicable law, and by way of a contract with the
City of Trenton, the Trenton Parking Authority shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by law, every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
article shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $70 for each offense,
or may be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 15
days for each offense, or both. Such fine and imprisonment shall be at
the discretion of a Municipal Judge of the City of Trenton. [Amended
3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
B. In facilities where parking spaces or parking meter spaces are leased,
the Trenton Parking Utility may direct the towing of vehicles at the
expense of the owner of such vehicle where the vehicle in question is in
violation of prescribed provisions of this article.
C. In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance, provision or
regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such provision, together with proof identifying its registered owner,
shall constitute prima facie proof that the registered owner of the
vehicle parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the
time during which, such violation occurred.
A. Mill Hill Lot (Market Street, 225 feet east of the intersection of South
Broad Street, including land known as 208 South Broad Street).
64.Editor's Note: Former § 188-18, Attended surface facilities, as amended, was repealed
3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09.
§ 188-16 TRENTON CODE § 188-19
184:514
(1) Daily rate: a metered two-hour period at a charge of $0.50 per halfhour
increment.
(2) Monthly rate: The charge for a leased space shall be $125.
(3) Traffic: two-way traffic throughout the facility with entrances and
exits at Market and Livingston Streets.
(4) Hours of operation.
(a) Metered spaces: from 9:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, excluding Sundays and holidays.
(b) Monthly spaces: 24 hours Monday through Sunday, including
holidays.
B. Hamilton Lot (520 Hamilton Avenue, 220 feet west of the intersection of
Hamilton Avenue and Chambers Street, as depicted on the plan
attached to original Ord. No. 75-117).
(1) Daily rate: a metered two-hour period at a charge of $0.50 per halfhour
increment.
(2) Traffic: one-way traffic northbound from Hamilton Avenue through
the parking lot to Moody Alley.
(3) Hours of operation: from 9:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, excluding Sundays and holidays.
C. Wilbur Lot (1149-1151 East State Street, 170 feet west of the
intersection of East State Street and Olden Avenue as depicted on the
plan attached to original Ord. No. 75-117).
(1) Daily rate: a metered two-hour period at a charge of $0.75 per onehour
increment.
(2) Traffic: one-way traffic southbound from East State Street through
the parking lot to Wilmar Alley.
(3) Metered spaces: from 9:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, excluding Sundays and holidays.
D. Brunswick Avenue Lot (934-936 Brunswick Avenue, as depicted on the
plan attached).
(1) Daily rate: a metered one-hour period at a charge of $0.75 per onehour
increment.
(2) Traffic: two-way traffic with an entrance and an exit on Brunswick
Avenue and Page Alley.
(3) Metered spaces: from 9:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, excluding Sundays and holidays.
§ 188-19 PARKING LOTS § 188-19
184:515
§ 188-20. Unattended unmetered surface facilities. [Amended
3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
E. Broad - Liberty Lot (1126-1130 South Broad Street at the intersection
of Liberty Street and South Broad Street as depicted on the plan
attached).
(1) Daily rate: a metered one-hour period at a charge of $0.75 per onehour
increment.
(2) Traffic: one-way traffic through the lot with an entrance on South
Broad Street and an exit on Liberty Street.
(3) Metered spaces: from 9:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, excluding Sundays and holidays.
F. (Reserved)
G. South Broad Street Lot (1011 South Broad Street, as depicted on the
plan attached).
(1) Daily rate: a metered one-hour period at a charge of $0.75 per onehour
increment.
(2) Traffic: two-way traffic with an entrance and an exit on South
Broad Street.
(3) Metered spaces: from 9:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, excluding Sundays and holidays.
H. (Reserved)
I. Capital South Parking Lot (711 South Broad Street).
(1) Daily rate: a metered one-hour period at a charge of $0.75 per onehour
increment.
(2) Traffic: two-way traffic with an entrance and an exit on South
Broad Street.
(3) Metered spaces: from 9:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, excluding Sundays and holidays.
A. East State Street Lot (142-144 East State Street).
(1) Free parking: There shall be no charge for parking.
(2) Parking shall be permitted only at marked spaces.
(3) Parking shall be limited to one hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m.65
65.Editor's Note: Former § 188-21, Attended structured facility, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 3-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09.
§ 188-19 TRENTON CODE § 188-20
184:516
Chapter 193
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 21.
Graffiti — See Ch. 123.
Littering — See Ch. 150.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 201.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 206.
§ 193-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 193-2. Vehicles.
§ 193-3. Vehicular traffic in Cadwalader Park. [Amended 9-4-2014
by Ord. No. 14-44]
A. Purpose. The following provisions are made for the purpose of
governing the use, protection and care of parks, playgrounds, public
squares, reservations and parkways established, maintained and
controlled by the City of Trenton, hereinafter referred to as "park
areas."
B. Scope. Except where the context indicates otherwise, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply to all persons except employees of the City in
the performance of their duties.
A. Established driving areas. No person shall drive any vehicle in any park
area other than on roads and drives intended for vehicular travel, nor
operate any vehicle on such roads and drives so as to interfere with
general traffic.
B. Funeral processions. No person shall drive any vehicle in a funeral
procession within any park area.
C. Heavy vehicles. No person shall drive any vehicle other than a private
passenger car or taxicab within the driveways of any park area.
D. Standing or parking after park closing. No person shall park any vehicle
on any road or drive within any park area after sunset, except by
authority of the Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural
Resources and Culture, or his/her designee.
E. Speed limits. No person shall drive any vehicle within any park area at a
greater speed than 15 miles per hour.
A. Movement of vehicles.
§ 188-20 PARKING LOTS § 193-3
184:517
§ 193-4. Damage to park areas or property.
No person shall destroy, damage, deface or remove any fence, vegetation,
equipment or other thing belonging to any park area, nor shall any person
damage or destroy any building within any park area.
§ 193-5. Destruction of curbing, roadways and sidewalks.
No person shall damage, destroy or remove any of the curbing, roadways,
sidewalks or paths within any park area without the written permission
of the Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture, or his/her designee.
§ 193-6. Defacement of public notices.
No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notices, rules or regulations
for the governing of any park area, which are posted by order or permission
(1) Traffic shall be limited to one way upon all park drives, except at
entrance and exit points.
(2) For northbound traffic entering at Parkside and Bellevue Avenues,
no left turn shall be permitted at the entrance. Vehicles are to
follow the drive in a northerly and westerly direction and then in an
easterly and southerly direction to the place of entry.
(3) The outer drive to the deer padlock and the Hilvista Boulevard
entrance shall be open to traffic on Sundays and during Cityapproved
special events between its intersection with the inner
drive, near the road leading to Maple Avenue, to its second
intersection with the inner drive, near the children's play area, and
from its intersection with the road to Ellarslie, the City Museum, to
the park entrance. The outer drive shall be closed to traffic all other
times.
(4) The Hilvista Boulevard entrance and Hillcrest Avenue entrance
shall be closed. The Maple Avenue entrance shall be open to the
City's maintenance and emergency vehicles only.
B. Parking.
(1) Parking is allowed along the inner drive for the picnic grove and
Ellarslie, the City Museum, in designated parking places only. No
parking shall be allowed on the lawn areas.
(2) Parking is allowed along the outer drive on Sundays and during
City-approved special events. No parking shall be allowed on the
lawn areas.
C. Speed limit. No vehicle shall be driven at a speed greater than 15 miles
per hour on any park drive.
§ 193-3 TRENTON CODE § 193-6
184:518
of the Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture, or his/her designee.
§ 193-7. Misuse of appurtenances.
No person except an employee of the City while engaged in the performance
of his/her duties shall go within the shrubbery, climb a tree, stand or sit on
a balustrade, monument, wall or fence, or stand or lie down on any bench
within any park area.
§ 193-8. Lighting of fires.
No person shall make any fire within any park area except at such places as
may be designated by the Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural
Resources and Culture, or his/her designee, and only under such conditions
and restrictions as the Department may impose.
§ 193-9. Sales and solicitations.
A. No person shall sell or give away merchandise or circulars or display
any sign or advertising device, or solicit subscription or contributions
within any park area, except that certain signs and commercial
advertising may be erected and maintained by or under the direction of
properly constituted athletic leagues on fences and structures used to
contain ball fields of such leagues, provided that the leagues first obtain
permits for the use of the aforesaid fields from the Department of
Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture.
B. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to sales and solicitations by
any participant in an activity conducted under the sponsorship in whole
or in part by the City or any civic group or nonprofit organization to
whom a permit has been issued for such purposes by the Department of
Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture. The Department shall have
the discretion of conditioning approval of any such permit upon a
demonstration by the applicant that such activity will substantially
benefit a City park or recreation area or a specific recreation activity
thereon, and upon compliance with all other rules and regulations
governing the use of the park or area and may impose any reasonable
special conditions, such as the provision of insurance, and/or security
devices and personnel as shall be in the interests of the City. Any vendor
conducting sales in connection with such event, the proceeds of which
shall be deposited as a dedicated revenue with the City to be expended
for a specific public purpose, shall be exempt from the vendor permit
fee requirements of Chapter 146, Licensing, of the Code of the City of
Trenton.
C. Under such terms as shall be approved by the City Council from time to
time on the basis of a contract entered pursuant to the Public Contracts
Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) governing competitive practices, the
Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture shall be entitled to designate certain qualified vendors to
§ 193-6 PARKING LOTS § 193-9
184:519
§ 193-10. Horseback riding.
No person shall ride a horse in any park area except upon the drives and
bridle paths established for that purpose and with the permission of the
Director of Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture, or his/her designee.
No person shall permit any horse to stand on any such drive or bridle path
unattended, unless the horse is securely tied to a post or rail provided for
that purpose.
§ 193-11. Dogs.
No person shall walk a dog in any park area unless such dog is held by a
leash. All dogs must have the required licenses. Pet owners shall clean up
after their animals.
§ 193-12. Wild animals and birds.
No person, except by direction of the City, shall kill or capture any wild
animal or bird within the limits of any park area, and no person shall disturb
or frighten any wild animal or bird or attempt to drive them out of such
areas.
§ 193-13. Permission for public events.
No person shall make a speech, preach, sing, play a musical instrument or
conduct a public meeting, parade, drill or procession within any park area
without the written permission of the Department of Recreation, Natural
Resources and Culture.
§ 193-14. Coasting and sledding.
No person shall coast/sled in any park area except in places especially
designated for that purpose by the Department of Recreation, Natural
Resources and Culture.
§ 193-15. Skating and water sports.
No person shall bathe, skate or fish, or place in the water a boat or raft
within any park area, except in a place provided therefor.
§ 193-16. Hours.
operate food and recreation concessions in portions of Cadwalader Park
and Wetzel Field, on the basis of a competitive bid process for specified
concessions and in conformance with appropriate terms and conditions
for insurance, hours of operation, sanitation and maintenance.
A. The City parks and recreation areas operated and controlled by the City
under the jurisdiction of the Department of Recreation, Natural
Resources and Culture listed below shall be closed to the general public
for all purposes, including sports activities or group congregations of
§ 193-9 TRENTON CODE § 193-16
184:520
§ 193-17. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 197
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 25.
Licensing — See Ch. 146.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 213.
§ 197-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities or printed evidences of indebtedness; or purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as a furniture storage warehouseperson and lending money
on goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
§ 197-2. License required. [Amended 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 11-46]
No person shall engage or continue in business as a pawnbroker in the
City except as authorized by this chapter, and without first obtaining a
license from the City Clerk. No person other than a licensee under this
chapter shall display any sign or other device in or about the premises of
the business, or in any advertising matter or other printed matter which
in anywise resembles the emblem or sign commonly used by pawnbrokers,
nor shall there be any sign displayed which is calculated to deceive, nor
shall the word "pawnbroker" be used in or about the premises of the
any size for any purpose, during the period from sunset to 7:00 a.m.,
except as shall be specifically permitted to any person or group of
persons by permit issued by the Director of the Department upon
suitable application therefor.
B. This section shall not be construed to limit access to such parks and
recreation areas for persons desiring to traverse the area.
C. The Director of the Department shall be responsible to post adequate
notice of all pertinent closing restrictions appropriately and
conspicuously in a manner to advise the public entering each park of
the restrictions of this section.
§ 193-16 PARKING LOTS § 197-2
184:521
business or in any advertising matter or other printed matter, nor shall
any such person hold himself/herself out to the public to be a pawnbroker,
either through advertising, soliciting, signs or otherwise. A separate license
shall be required for each location, place or premises used to conduct
such business. Such license shall not be transferable to any other location
without the approval of the City Clerk.
§ 197-3. Contents of application for license.
Application for such license shall be in writing and shall state the full name
and place of residence of the applicant, or, if the applicant be a partnership,
of each member thereof, or, if the applicant be a corporation or association,
of each officer and stockholder thereof, together with the place or places
where the business is to be conducted.
§ 197-4. Issuance of license; fee.
Upon application to the City Clerk, such official shall issue to the applicant
upon payment of the license fee a license to do business in this City. The
license shall be renewed annually. The City Clerk shall charge a fee of $500
for a license. The license shall run from the date of issuance to the end of
the calendar year.
§ 197-5. Number of licenses.
The Clerk shall issue no more than three pawnbroker licenses per year;
provided, however, that this limit shall not bar the issuance of a license
to a pawnbroker who is actually doing business in the City on or before
September 2, 1999. In the event that there are more than three licenses
issued, no additional licenses shall be issued. It is the intent of this section
to reduce the number of licenses issued to three by attrition.
§ 197-6. Location restriction.
No pawnbroker license shall be issued for or transferred to premises within
2,500 feet of any other premises for which a pawnbroker license has been
issued. Such 2,500 feet shall be measured from the nearest entrance of
the premises sought to be licensed to the nearest entrance of an existing
premises, in a normal way that a pedestrian would properly walk.
§ 197-7. Disposition of license fees.
All license fees received by the City Clerk under the chapter shall be
deposited in a general account for the use of the City.
§ 197-8. Revocation of license.
The City Clerk, upon five days' notice to the licensee and after hearing,
may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter for any
violation of the provisions hereof.
§ 197-2 TRENTON CODE § 197-9
184:522
§ 197-9. Display of license; change in place of business.
The license so issued shall be kept conspicuously posted in the licensee's
place of business. Whenever the licensee shall change his/her place of
business written notice thereof shall be given to the City Clerk, who shall
indicate his/her approval of the change of location, in writing, on the
license.
§ 197-10. Maintenance and inspection of records. [Amended
7-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-69]
The Police Director is authorized to issue rules and regulations concerning
the maintenance of records by licensees for the purpose of the prevention of
trafficking in stolen property and other crimes and offenses. Violation of any
such rules and regulations shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
The rules and regulations that shall apply are:
§ 197-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-2005 by Ord. No.
05-69]
In addition to any penalties prescribed for violations of any provision of
this chapter, including but not limited to license suspension or revocation,
all violations are subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
Chapter 201
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
A. Pawnshops will provide the police with a computerized download of all
pawn and purchase transactions, along with a hard copy of the
transaction which will include the subject's signature.
B. All precious metals and gems purchased will be held for no less than 15
days.
C. Pawnshops are required to obtain at least one form of valid
identification.
D. Pawnshops will incorporate into their computer database a method of
obtaining a picture of the seller or person pawning the property. This
picture is entered into their database and provided to the police upon
request.
§ 197-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 197-11
201:523

ARTICLE I
Civil Disturbances
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-21 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 201-1. Purpose.
The State of New Jersey, under N.J.S.A. 2A:48-1 et seq., imposes the
responsibility upon cities for injuries and damages to persons and property
caused by mob action, and it is deemed necessary and in the public interest
that the City take all appropriate action to protect persons and property
of the citizens of the City. N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(6) grants to the City the power
to preserve the public peace and order and to prevent and quell riots,
disturbances and disorderly assemblages, and the regulations in this article
are deemed necessary.
§ 201-2. Emergency proclamation.
Whenever the Mayor or, in the event of his/her inability to act, the President
of the City Council determines that an emergency exists as a result of mob
action or other civil disobedience causing danger of injury or damages to
persons or property, (s)he shall have the power to impose by emergency
proclamation any of the following regulations necessary to preserve peace
and order in the City:
§ 201-3. Issuance of proclamation.
An emergency proclamation shall become effective upon its issuance and
dissemination to the public by appropriate news media.
A. Curfew.66 Impose a curfew on all or any portion of the City requiring all
persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public areas;
provided, however, that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators
performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential
public services, fire fighters and City-authorized or -requested law
enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew.
B. Closure of businesses. Order the closing of any business establishments
anywhere within the City for the period of the emergency, such
businesses to include those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt
beverages, gasoline or firearms, but without limitation thereto.
C. Closure of streets. Designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle
parking areas closed to motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
D. Law enforcement. Call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement
agencies and organizations within or without the City to assist in
preserving and keeping the peace within the City.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Curfew.
§ 201-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 201-4
201:525
§ 201-4. Termination of emergency.
An emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this article
shall terminate on the issuance of a proclamation determining and stating
that the emergency no longer exists.
§ 201-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 201-4 TRENTON CODE § 201-5
201:526
ARTICLE II
False Alarms
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-26 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 201-6. False fire and police alarms prohibited.
Any person who shall willfully by telephone, fire alarm signal or any other
means of communication give or cause to be given a false fire alarm or false
police alarm shall be in violation of this article.
§ 201-7. Violations and penalties.
Violators shall be subject to punishment in the manner provided by Chapter
1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 201-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 201-7
201:527

ARTICLE III
Urinating in Public
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-31 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 201-8. Urinating in public prohibited.67
No person shall urinate, defecate or place any bodily waste on any street,
sidewalk or other place in public view or to which the public is invited or
has access. Use of proper lavatory, toilet or similar facility is required.
§ 201-9. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 201-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 201-9
201:529

ARTICLE IV
Begging and Panhandling
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-35 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 201-10. Legislative findings.
§ 201-11. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
described herein:
A. The City Council recognizes a constitutional right to beg or solicit in a
peaceful and nonthreatening manner. The City Council finds, however,
that an increase in aggressive solicitation throughout the City has
become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and
businesses and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and
enjoyment of public places but also to an enhanced sense of fear,
intimidation and disorder.
B. Aggressive panhandling usually includes approaching or following
pedestrians, the use of abusive language, unwanted physical contact or
the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The City
Council further finds that the presence of individuals who solicit money
from persons at or near banks or automated teller machines is
especially troublesome. Motorists also find themselves confronted by
persons who, without permission, wash their automobile windows at
traffic intersections despite explicit indications by drivers not to do so.
Such activity often carries with it an implicit threat to both persons and
property. People driving or parking on City streets frequently find
themselves faced with panhandlers seeking money by offering to
perform "services" such as opening car doors or locating parking
spaces.
C. This article is timely and appropriate because current laws and City
regulations are insufficient to address the aforementioned problems.
The restrictions contained herein are neither overbroad nor vague and
are narrowly tailored to serve a substantial governmental interest.
Furthermore, in enacting this legislation, the City Council recognizes
the availability of community service and other sentencing alternatives
which may be appropriate remedies for violations of this article.
D. This article is not enhanced to limit any persons from exercising their
constitutional right to solicit funds, picket, protest or engage in other
constitutionally protected activity. Its goal, instead, is to protect citizens
from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of
solicitation that have become an unwelcome and overwhelming
presence in the City.
§ 201-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 201-11
201:531
AGGRESSIVE MANNER —
ASK — See "beg."
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE — A device linked to a financial
institution's account records which is able to carry out transactions,
including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals,
balance inquiries and mortgage and loan payments.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY — The area comprised of one
or more automated teller machines and any adjacent space which is made
available to banking customers after regular banking hours.
BANK — Any banking corporation as defined in the United States Code or
the New Jersey statutes.
BEG — Using the spoken, written or printed word or bodily gestures, signs
or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of
money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS — Any person or entity duly licensed by the
New Jersey Department of Banking to engage in the business of cashing
checks, drafts or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions
of the New Jersey banking laws.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway,
parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park,
playground and any hallway, lobby and other portion of an apartment house
or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence.
Approaching or speaking to a person or following a person before,
during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended
or is likely to cause a reasonable person to:
Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of
property or the commission of an offense under the New Jersey
Code of Criminal Justice upon oneself or another;
(1)
Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;
or
(2)
(3) Suffer unreasonable inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
A.
Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person
or with an occupied vehicle, without that person's consent, in the
course of soliciting, asking or begging.
B.
Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a
pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a
pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical
contact.
C.
D. Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited.
§ 201-11 TRENTON CODE § 201-11
201:532
Public places shall also include door-to-door begging in an aggressive
manner as defined herein.
SOLICIT — See "beg."
§ 201-12. Prohibited acts.
No person shall:
§ 201-13. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any unenclosed automated
teller machine located within any building, structure or space whose
primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including,
but not limited to, supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided
that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during
the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which
such machine is located.
§ 201-14. Violation and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitution a violation
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place.
B. Solicit, ask or beg within 10 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or
check cashing business during its business hours or within 10 feet of
any automated teller machine during the time it is available for
customers' use; provided, however, that when an automated teller
machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such
distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated
teller machine facility; provided, further, that no person shall solicit,
ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a
reasonable person would or should know that (s)he does not have the
permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in
possession of such facility. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas.
C. Approach an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such
vehicle is located on any street for the purpose of either performing or
offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or
otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services, if such approaching,
performing, offering or soliciting is done in an aggressive manner as
defined in § 201-11; provided, however, that this subsection shall not
apply to services rendered in connection with the lawful towing of such
vehicle or in connection with emergency repairs requested by the
operator or other occupant of such vehicle.
§ 201-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 201-14
201:533

ARTICLE V
Sleeping on Streets
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-36 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 201-15. Prohibitions.
No person shall sleep, lodge or take up residence:
§ 201-16. Emergency shelter.
The Trenton Police Department shall:
§ 201-17. Violations and penalties.
A. On or in any streets, sidewalks, concourses, parks or any other public
areas, including the floors and passageways of public buildings; or
B. On or in the floors and passageways of the common areas of any private
building, structure or place.
A. Advise any person found to be in violation of this article as to the
availability of emergency shelter.
B. Offer to transport or arrange for transportation to such emergency
shelter if necessary and appropriate.
A. Violations and penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this
article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
B. Exception. No person shall be found to be in violation of this article
unless such person has been first advised as to the availability of
emergency shelter.
§ 201-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 201-17
201:535
Chapter 206
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND ITINERANT VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food handling — See Ch. 113.
Littering — See Ch. 150.
Nuisances — See Ch. 171.
Special Improvement District — See Ch. 252.
§ 201-17 TRENTON CODE § 201-17
201:536
ARTICLE I
Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as §§ 6-1 through 6-10 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 206-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER — Any person, other than a peddler or solicitor, traveling by
foot or vehicle of any kind, who distributes printed matter or any other thing
from house to house or who calls in person upon the occupants of such
houses seeking contributions or anything of value.
NONPROFIT MAKING VENDOR — A person who sells goods, the proceeds
of which are devoted exclusively to the purpose of a philanthropic,
charitable or religious society on whose behalf (s)he acts as agent, with
or without pay, including those individuals or organizations soliciting funds
or other things of value for which no merchandise, wares or services are
required.
PEDDLER — Any person traveling by vehicle of any kind, who conveys or
transports goods, articles or property of any kind or description for the
purpose of offering for sale, selling and delivering the same to customers, or
offering to render immediate services of any kind or description; and shall
include the words "hawker," "huckster" or "itinerant vendor."
SOLICITOR — Any person traveling by foot or vehicle of any kind, who sells
or offers to sell goods, articles or property of any kind or description by
sample or otherwise for future delivery, or who offers to render services
at some time in the future, with or without accepting payment or partial
payment for the same.
§ 206-2. License or permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of a peddler
within the City of Trenton without first having obtained a license therefor
as provided herein. No person shall engage in the activity of a solicitor or
canvasser within the City without first having obtained a permit therefor
as provided herein. Licenses and permits shall be issued to individual
persons only, and if an employer or other person desires that more than
one employee or member engage in the activities of a peddler, solicitor or
canvasser within the City, each such employee or member must obtain a
separate license.
§ 206-3. Application for license or permit.
A. Applicants for a license or permit under this article must file with the
City Clerk a sworn application in writing which shall give the following
information:
§ 206-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-3
201:537
§ 206-4. Investigation of applicants.
(1) Name and physical description of applicant.
(2) Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant.
(3) A description of the nature of the business and the goods, services
or wares to be sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired and
the days of the week and hours of the day within which the business
will be conducted.
(6) The source of supply of the goods, products or services proposed to
be sold; where such goods, services or products are located; and
the method of delivery.
(7) Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant which will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance
other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor. The applicant should
submit a detailed explanation of mitigating factors that should be
considered in the Police Director's evaluation of negative
information in the applicant's background. This may include
statements of rehabilitation, reference letters and any other
information that the applicant deems relevant. [Amended
5-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-41]
B. The applicant shall be fingerprinted, if requested by the Police Director,
who shall determine whether fingerprints are necessary for proper
identification, which fingerprint records shall be immediately processed
for classification and identification.
C. At the time of filing the application, a fee of $2 shall be paid to the City
Clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein.
D. No license or permit shall be issued until the application has been
approved by the Police Department, allowing adequate time for
investigation of the facts stated therein.
A. Each application shall be referred to the Police Director or officer in
charge of the Police Department who shall immediately institute such
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as (s)he
deems necessary for the protection of the public good and endorse the
application in the manner prescribed in this article within a reasonable
period of time after it has been filed by the applicant.
§ 206-3 TRENTON CODE § 206-4
201:538
§ 206-5. License fee.
Every applicant for a license or permit under this article shall pay a license
lee of $50.
§ 206-6. Exemptions and exceptions.
B. If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the goods, products or
services are not free from fraud, the Police Director shall endorse on
the application his/her disapproval and the reasons for same, and
return the application to the City Clerk who shall notify the applicant
that his/her application is disapproved and that no license will be
issued. If the applicant has filed a statement of mitigating factors
pursuant to § 206-3A(8), the Police Director shall file with his/her
statement of disapproval a detailed statement as to why the mitigating
factors were not sufficient to allow issuance of the license. The
applicant may file a request for reconsideration with the Police Director,
which shall promptly be evaluated and a final decision rendered.
[Amended 5-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-41]
A. Exceptions to license requirement. This article shall not apply to:
(1) An employee of any public utility which is subject to regulation by
the State Board of Public Utilities Commissioners; provided,
however, that such employee shall display the identification badge
or card issued by his/her employer.
(2) A member of any committee or organization of a duly constituted
political party as defined by N.J.S.A. 19:1-1 when any such member
is engaged in the lawful activities, functions or objectives of the
political party.
(3) Any person who as a part of the regular course of business is
engaged in the delivery of goods to the premises of persons
previously ordering or entitled to receive the goods.
(4) Any person who conducts a sale pursuant to law or court order.
B. Exemptions from fee. The requirements of this article insofar as the
same shall apply to fees shall be held not to include the following
persons who are hereby expressly exempt from its application:
(1) Any person honorably discharged from military services of the
United States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity
with N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10.
(2) Any person who is an exempt fire fighter of a volunteer fire
department as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing
a license in conformity with that law.
§ 206-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-6
201:539
§ 206-7. Sale of food and produce.
§ 206-8. Hours of operation.
(3) Any person selling fruits, vegetables and farm products grown by
himself, with or without the help of others.
(4) Any non-profit-making vendor as defined by this article.
A. All licensees who shall offer to sell, display for sale or sell or deliver
fruits and vegetables and farm products from any vehicles which are
wholly or in part open on any of the sides thereof shall, at all times,
keep all fruits, vegetables and produce of any kind and nature
completely screened and covered with satisfactory materials in order to
avoid and eliminate the accumulation of flies or other insects from
alighting around or upon any and all merchandise.
B. All licensees offering for sale, displaying for sale, selling or delivering
seafood, meats, poultry or dairy products shall transport the same
solely in refrigerated vehicles, and all such products shall remain in the
refrigerated portion of the vehicle at all times up to the time of sale or
delivery. The refrigerated portion, during the uses thereof in
accordance herewith, shall be maintained at a properly low
temperature to completely safeguard all of said products from a health
and sanitary standpoint to the fullest reasonable extent possible for the
safety and welfare of the public.
C. No licensee shall at any time permit any waste materials or parts of
produce or any other merchandise to remain in or upon any street,
roadway, curbs or walks and shall at all times remove any debris that
may have fallen from the vehicle, so that the same is immediately
placed in suitable metal or plastic containers.
D. All sales of merchandise by any licensee shall, at the time of sale, be
placed in bags or other like suitable containers when the same is
handed to customers of the licensee.
A. All licensees. No licensee shall engage in a licensed activity before 7:00
a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, except where
expressly invited into the homes of the occupants thereof and except as
further provided in Subsection B hereof.
B. Peddlers and hawkers. Peddlers or hawkers who sell or attempt to sell
manufactured, ready-to-eat food products, such as ice cream or
custard, shall be permitted to operate Mondays through Sundays
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m., subject to all other
restrictions. This subsection shall be strictly construed. [Amended
5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-26; 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 11-12]
§ 206-6 TRENTON CODE § 206-9
201:540
§ 206-9. Conduct of licensee.
Every person to whom a license is issued under the terms of this article
shall be governed by the following rules and regulations:
§ 206-10. Location restrictions.
§ 206-11. Solicitation on sidewalks near public buildings;
exceptions.
No person shall solicit any trade or business of any kind whatsoever on
any sidewalk fronting or abutting any public building or its grounds within
the City limits; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to affect the right of a duly licensed peddler to peddle goods,
wares and merchandise, or any person soliciting funds by means of the
sale of any goods, wares and merchandise in any case where the proceeds
thereof are to be used exclusively for charitable purposes.
A. All circulars, samples or other matter shall be handed to an occupant of
the property or left in a secure place located on the premises.
B. No person subject to the terms of this article shall enter or attempt to
enter the house of any resident of the City of Trenton without an
express invitation from the occupant of the house.
C. No person subject to this article shall conduct himself/herself in such a
manner as to become objectionable to or annoy an occupant of any
house.
D. All licensees and their respective vehicles or modes of transportation in
carrying on their permitted business shall, at all times, fully comply
with all of the terms, covenants and conditions of this article and all
other applicable municipal ordinances and state laws, regulations or
provisions pertaining thereto, and particularly, but not in limitation
thereof, that may deal with provisions of health, safety and general
welfare.
A. No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor
shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area where such
operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets.
B. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of the police officer,
exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 206-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-12
201:541
§ 206-12. Territory and time restrictions for nonmotorized
peddlers.68
No person licensed to operate as a nonmotorized peddler shall be permitted
to conduct such activities outside the territory and time period described in
the license. 69
§ 206-13. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
68.Editor's Note: See also Art. II of this chapter.
69.Editor's Note: Original Section 6-10.4, Hawking, Peddling or Vending Restrictions, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6.
§ 206-12 TRENTON CODE § 206-13
201:542
ARTICLE II
Nonmotorized Peddler or Vendor
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 6-11 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 206-14. License required.
Notwithstanding any other license issued to vend or peddle, no person shall
vend or peddle food or property of any kind, except balloons or flowers
within the jurisdiction of the Trenton Commons Pedestrian Mall Advisory
Commission and with appropriate permission issued for such purposes, by
means of a pushcart, trailer, tray, valise, table or mobile unit of any kind,
other than a self-propelled motor vehicle, or by displaying or showing such
merchandise manually or by attaching it to a garment, without a license
issued specifically therefor as a nonmotorized peddler license.
§ 206-15. License term; location restrictions.
All licenses for nonmotorized peddlers shall be for a specific period of time
not to exceed the duration of the public event for which it was issued and
shall permit such vending only within a specified area in connection with
special public or quasi-public events.
§ 206-16. License fee.
The license fee for each nonmotorized peddler shall be $20 per event. Such
fee shall not include any additional fees for health inspection permits where
applicable.
§ 206-17. Violations and penalties.
Nonmotorized vending in any public street or sidewalk without the
procurement of a license therefor shall be a violation of this article and
punishable in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
§ 206-14 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-17
201:543

ARTICLE III
Street Vendors; Veterans and Fire Fighters
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 6-12 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 206-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGNATED LOCATIONS — Specific locations designated for sidewalk
vending outside of the boundaries of the Trenton Special Improvement
District (Central Trenton Incorporated Zone). Such locations shall be
identified by number and maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk,
and such other locations as may be added hereafter by amendment to this
article.
HAWK, PEDDLE OR VEND — Any hawking, peddling or vending of food,
beverages, confections, goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of any
nature or description on the streets and sidewalks within the Special
Improvement District, Central Trenton Incorporated Zone, creating a
Special Improvement District within the City and establishing a District
Management Corporation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq., and Chapter
252, Special Improvement District, of the Code of the City of Trenton 70.
VENDING UNIT — Any pushcart, wagon or any other wheeled vehicle or
device which may be moved without assistance of a motor and which is not
required to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles,
used for the displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered for sale
by a vendor.
VENDOR — Any person who sells, peddles or vends any goods, wares or
merchandise on the streets and sidewalks, traveling by foot, automotive
vehicle or any other type of conveyance. The word "vendor" shall also
include "peddler" and "hawker."
§ 206-19. Right to hawk, peddle or vend.
A. No person shall engage in hawking, peddling or vending within the City
unless (s)he holds and has in his/her possession a valid license
permitting hawking, peddling or vending issued pursuant to and in
accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.
B. This article shall be in addition to any and all ordinances regulating
motorized vending vehicles.
C. This article shall not prohibit sales activities conducted by a person
holding a license to operate a restaurant from operating a pushcart on a
sidewalk immediately adjacent to a licensed premises, provided that all
health permits and other regulations established hereby are obtained
and complied with.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 206-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-20
201:545
§ 206-20. Registration requirements; fee.
Any person having a type of license referred to in § 206-18 who desires to
hawk, peddle or vend within the City shall first register with the City in the
following manner:
A. The applicant for registration shall produce a license issued to him/her
by a County Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-10.
B. The applicant shall complete and sign a form of appreciation for
registration provided by the City, setting forth the following
information:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Description of the applicant.
(3) Places of residence of the applicant for the past five years
immediately preceding the date of application.
(4) A description of the nature of the business proposed.
(5) A description of the vending unit to be utilized. If a motor vehicle is
to be utilized, the registration number, license plate number and
name and address of insurance carrier and insurance policy
number and coverage must be listed.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has ever had a license to conduct this
business sought to be registered and whether or not (s)he ever had
a license to conduct such business denied or revoked, and if so,
setting forth the details thereof.
(7) The date, place and nature of the conviction of the applicant of any
crime.
(8) Two photographs showing the applicant's face, front and profile,
representative of the applicant's appearance at the time of the
application for registration, of a minimum size of 1 1/2 inches
square, which photographs shall be affixed to the application for
registration.
(9) Proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey protecting the
registrant and the City from all claims for damage to property and
bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations
under or in connection with the vending, hawking or peddling.
Such insurance shall name as an additional insured the City and
shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled
prior to the expiration date without 30 days' advance written notice
to the City. The amounts of the insurance to be maintained are:
(a) Personal injury:
[1] Per person: $100,000.
§ 206-20 TRENTON CODE § 206-20
201:546
[2] Per occurrence: $300,000.
(b) Property damage: $50,000.
C. Upon satisfactory completion of the registration process and upon
payment of the registration fee, there shall be issued to the applicant a
registration certificate to conduct the business applied for. Such
certificate shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall
show the name, address and photograph of the applicant, type of
business registered, the kind of goods and services to be sold, the date
of issue, the length of time the certificate shall be operative and the
license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in
the activity licensed. This certificate shall be worn by the vendor in
clear view of the public at all times in which the vendor is conducting
business on the street or sidewalk in connection with the vending
business.
D. In the case of food vendors, a certificate of health compliance, issued by
the City of Trenton Health and Human Services Department, shall be
conspicuously displayed on the vending unit in clear view of the public.
No food vending unit shall be permitted on the streets or sidewalks of
the City without such a certificate of health compliance.
E. Any vending unit on the streets of the City must have a serial number,
issued without charge by the towing division manager, affixed to it.
Removal and/or destruction or damage of any kind to this plate or decal
will be considered alteration for criminal intent, and the registration
certificate will be confiscated. In the event the vendor sells such cart or
vending unit, the new owner must present to the towing division
manager a notarized receipt for sale. At the time, the original owner
will be taken off the master list and a new identification number will be
given to the new owner. Failure to obtain a serial number or transfer
number will result in the vending unit being unauthorized for use on the
streets of the City. Substitute carts or vending units used to substitute
for street carts or vending units, while such cart is being sanitized,
cleaned or otherwise unavailable, shall also need a registered serial
number.
F. The registration shall be renewable each year on or before January 1,
unless such registration has been revoked.
G. Only licensed vendors may have an ownership interest in vending units
and shall have an ownership interest in only one vending unit, and may
operate only that one vending unit and no other. An ownership interest,
for the purpose of this subsection, is defined as having the sole
proprietorship of such unit or being a partner in partnership or
shareholder in a corporation owning such unit.
H. Each vending unit shall have painted thereon an identification number,
which shall be the unit's registration number.
I. Registration shall not be assignable nor transferable.
§ 206-20 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-20
201:547
§ 206-21. Regulations.
The business of hawking, peddling or vending shall be subject to the
following regulations:
J. Before the permit shall be issued for engaging in the business of
peddling, such applicant shall file with the Clerk of the Licensing
Bureau an instrument nominating and appointing the City Clerk his/her
true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge
service or notice of process for and on behalf of such applicant in
respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business
transacted under such permit and the bond given.
K. There shall be an annual registration fee of $250 per vending unit.
L. The City shall be notified of any change in business address or
residence of the vendor within 30 days, by notice, either in writing or in
person.
A. No vending units shall be permitted to be in use and shall be off the
streets and sidewalks of the City from 7:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m., and
there shall be no vending of any type during this period.
B. All vending units must be on wheels and must be capable of being
manually moved by one person.
C. No vending unit shall be permitted upon the streets and sidewalks of
the City unless in operation and attended by an honorably discharged
veteran or exempt fire fighter licensed by the State of New Jersey
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9. Such vendor will be permitted to leave the
vending cart for a period not to exceed 20 minutes. Such period of
unattendance cannot occur at intervals closer than two hours.
D. There shall be no sale of food or beverage for immediate consumption
unless the vendor has made available for public use a waste receptacle
attached to the vending unit or motor vehicle.
E. No vendor shall leave any location without first picking up, removing or
disposing of all trash or refuse which shall be found within a radius of
20 feet from the cart. The vendor shall not sweep into or deposit any
accumulation of litter into any gutter, street, drain or storm sewer.
F. No vendor shall allow any items relating to the operation of the vending
business to be placed anywhere other than in or on the vending unit.
G. No vendor shall set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate,
carton, rack or other device to increase the selling or display capacity of
his/her unit or motor vehicle. There shall be no stacking of items to be
sold upon any sidewalk or street. All materials and/or merchandise
must be located solely on the vending unit.
H. No vendor shall solicit or conduct business with persons in motor
vehicles.
§ 206-20 TRENTON CODE § 206-21
201:548
§ 206-22. Designated locations; assignment.
I. No vendor shall sell anything other than such commodities described in
his/her registration application.
J. No vendor shall call out or use any device which produces noise, or use
or operate any bell, loudspeaker, public address system, sound
amplifier or similar device to attract the attention of the public.
K. No vendor shall allow his/her vending unit, or any other item relating to
the operation of the vending business, to be placed against any building
or other structure without the consent of the owner of such building or
structure.
L. No vendor shall hawk, peddle or vend unless (s)he has in his/her
possession and displayed prominently and visibly upon his/her shirt or
blouse a valid state license issued pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised
Statute of New Jersey, and his/her city registration card.
M. All vending units must be thoroughly covered with proper material to
assure that no portion that is heated is exposed where the public is able
to come in contact with it.
N. No vendor shall use any conveyance, device or thing whatsoever which,
when fully loaded with merchandise, cannot be easily moved and
maintained under control by the vendor.
O. There shall be no mixing of food and nonfood items for sale.
P. Every vending unit shall be located one foot from the sidewalk curb and
shall provide a continuous space of five feet for pedestrian passage.
Q. Any vendor who is legally blind or totally disabled may be assisted by
one veteran or exempt fire-fighter vendor, which veteran or exempt fire
fighter must be registered with the City. The blind or disabled vendor
must be present at the vending unit at all times. The assisting veteran
or exempt fire fighter shall be considered, for the purposes of this
section, as having an ownership interest in the vending unit from which
(s)he is assisting.
R. Vendors must be actively vending, and their vending units, if any, must
be in operation at all times. No sleeping or other inactivity of any kind
by the vendor shall be permitted.
A. There shall only be vending in the following designated locations:
(1) North Broad and Perry Streets, north of Perry Street.
(2) Outside of main gate of Cadwalader Park.
(3) South Broad Street at Route 1 overpass.
(4) Old Wharf Area on Route 29.
§ 206-21 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-22
201:549
§ 206-23. Size restrictions for vending units.
No sidewalk vending unit shall exceed four feet in width, seven feet in
length and eight feet in height, inclusive of umbrellas or any other items
that may be placed on the cart.
§ 206-24. Health and sanitation requirements.
(5) West State and Prospect Streets.
(6) Sidewalk adjacent to William Trent House.
B. These locations shall be assigned by lottery at the time of the issuance
of the registration certificate. The designated location shall be subject
to change at the direction of the City Council in the interest of the
public safety, health or welfare. The assignment of each location shall
be subject to change or rotation at the time of registration renewal as
shall be determined by the City Council upon the basis of the
experience of the initial six months of implementing this article.
C. The City will designate the locations for each vendor. No vendor may
occupy the designated location assigned to another vendor, regardless
of whether or not the assigned vendor is present.
D. No vendor shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall (s)he be permitted to operate in any congested area
where his/her operation might unreasonably impede the public
movement.
E. The City Clerk shall advise the City Council of the number of applicants
for such registrations to allow the City Council to determine whether
sufficient areas have been designated for such vending purposes.
A. Vendors of food and beverages shall comply with the inspection
provisions and standards of the City of Trenton Retail Food
Establishment Code.71 The equipment used in the vending of food and
beverages shall be inspected upon application for registration and
receive a certificate of inspection upon compliance with all applicable
City ordinances and state statutes. 72
B. Each food and beverage vending unit shall be inspected at least once a
month.
C. In addition to any other health and sanitation requirements, the
following regulations must be followed:
(1) All vending units shall be stored in an enclosed garage when not in
use. The garage shall have an impervious floor and have adequate
floor drains to allow for cleaning and washing of the vending unit.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 113, Food Handling, Art. I, Retail Food Establishments.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 206-22 TRENTON CODE § 206-24
201:550
(2) The location of the food storage, food preparation and cart storage
shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C. 8:21 through 8:24 et seq., and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
(3) All food product storage and preparation areas shall be enclosed by
partition and separated from any cart storage or nonfood
preparation related operations. In the event that the mobile cart
base is the same as an individual's residence, the commercial food
storage and preparation shall be separate from the residential
portion of the premises.
(4) Mobile food units shall operate from a commissary or other fixed
wholesale or retail food establishment, and shall report at least
daily to such location for all food supplies and for all cleaning and
servicing operations. The commissary, or other fixed wholesale or
retail food establishment used as a base of operation for mobile
food units or push carts, shall be constructed and operated in
compliance with the requirements of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code.
(5) A mobile food unit servicing area shall be provided and shall
include at least overhead protection for any supplying, cleaning or
servicing operation. Within this servicing area, there shall be a
location provided for the flushing and drainage of liquid wastes
separate from the location provided for water servicing and for
loading and unloading of food and related supplies. This servicing
area will not be required where only packaged food is placed on the
mobile food unit or pushcart or where all mobile food units contain
waste retention tanks. The surface of the servicing area shall be
constructed of a smooth, nonabsorbent material, such as concrete
or machine-laid asphalt, and shall be maintained in good repair,
kept clean and be graded to drain.
(6) Potable water servicing equipment shall be installed according to
law and shall be stored and handled in a way that protects the
water and equipment from contamination. The mobile food unit
liquid waste retention tank, where used, shall be thoroughly
flushed and drained during the servicing operation. All liquid waste
shall be discharged to a sanitary sewerage disposal system, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:24-6.5.
(7) All vending units dispensing hot food shall be equipped with:
(a) Twin potable water tanks consisting of a minimum capacity of
eight gallons each, heated electrically or otherwise, and tilted
toward a capped draincock so that tanks can be completely
evacuated of water. All tanks shall be equipped with an access
hatch in order to facilitate cleaning and sanitizing internal
surfaces of the tanks. Such access hatch shall be approved by
the City Health and Human Services Department.
§ 206-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-24
201:551
(b) A hand wash sink, seamless, with running hot and cold water,
soap and single service towels.
(c) A suitable waste tank, with an adequate method of gauging the
contents, and having a capacity at least equal to the capacity of
the water supply tank, tilted toward a draincock. All waste
shall be emptied and flushed in a sanitary manner into a
sanitary sewer as often as necessary in order to maintain
sanitary conditions.
(d) A refrigerated box capable of maintaining a temperature of 45º
F. or below, and equipped with an indicating thermometer, for
various ingredients carried, with metal rack or platforms
provided to store ingredients.
(e) A refuse container with cover attached to the cart for deposit
of paper and other solid wastes by customers and operators.
Such container must be readily cleanable and be kept clean.
(8) In addition to the above:
(a) Every vending unit shall be constructed of such acceptable
material as to enable it to be readily cleaned and shall be kept
clean, and food will not be contaminated during cooking,
serving, display or storage.
(b) Food-contact surfaces of vending units shall be provided with a
close-fitting lid to protect food products from dust, dirt and
splash.
(c) Vending units shall be disassembled and cleaned daily, or more
often as deemed necessary by the health authority. All foodcontact
surfaces of vending units shall be washed, rinsed and
sanitized in accordance with procedures of the applicable
chapter of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code. All such
cleaning is prohibited in public places.
(d) The cart cleaning process at the vending base of operation
shall be segregated from food product storage, preparation,
cleaning or refuse areas.
(e) Waste water from any discharge shall be disposed of in a
sanitary manner and shall not create a nuisance.
(f) All perishable and/or potentially hazardous foods shall be
maintained at temperatures below 45º F. or above 140º F. until
removed from storage for preparation and use. All food items
shall be protected from contamination at all times.
(g) All vehicles or other means of transport shall have adequate
facilities and capacity to dispose of any trash or food waste
associated with the transport of food or breaking down of food
products. Such vehicles shall be maintained in a clean and
§ 206-24 TRENTON CODE § 206-24
201:552
§ 206-25. Safety requirements.
All vending units, whether in motor vehicles or not, in or from which food is
prepared or sold, shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 206-26. Summons for violation; towing of unit.
Where it is determined that a violation of this article exists, there shall be
an ordinance summons given to the violator involved, or affixed to his/her
vending unit if (s)he is not present, at which time all vending must cease. If
the violation does not cease within a reasonable time thereafter, the vending
unit shall be subject to removal by towing. If the vendor feels aggrieved
by the towing of the unit, (s)he shall have an immediate hearing before a
superior police officer in order to determine whether or not there existed
probable cause concerning the violation and the towing. If probable cause
does not exist, the vending unit towed shall be released.
§ 206-27. Suspension or revocation of registration.
sanitary manner and subject to inspection by the City Health
and Human Services Department.
A. All equipment installed in any part of the vending unit shall be secured
in order to prevent movement during transit and prevent detachment in
the event of a collision or overturn.
B. All utensils shall be stored in order to prevent their being hurled about
in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder
shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives.
C. Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery
chargers, gas-fueled water heaters and similar equipment shall be
installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the units.
A. Registrations issued under the provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the City Clerk, upon notice and hearing, for
any of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud or material misrepresentation contained in the application.
(2) Fraud or material misrepresentation made in the course of carrying
on the business of vending.
(3) Conducting the business in such a manner as to create a public
nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare
or morals.
(4) Violation of any City ordinance or law.
(5) Any activity injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
B. Appeals of a revocation decision shall be made to the Superior Court of
New Jersey.
§ 206-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-28
201:553
§ 206-28. Additional rules and regulations.
The Mayor is hereby empowered to promulgate such rules and regulations
as are necessary to carry out the purposes and the intent of this article.
§ 206-29. Violation and penalties.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction in Municipal Court, be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty.
B. Vendors who do not comply with the lawful direction of the City's law
enforcement officers within a reasonable length of time shall have their
vending units confiscated.
C. Every day that a violation of this article exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 206-28 TRENTON CODE § 206-29
201:554
ARTICLE IV
Itinerant Photographers
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-7 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 206-30. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ITINERANT VENDORS OF PHOTOGRAPHS AND PHOTOGRAPHIC
SERVICES — Includes any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, who engage in the business
of selling, or offering to sell, photographs or rendering any photographic
services in the City of Trenton, by means of traveling by any means or
methods, from house to house, or from street to street, or from place to
place, and who do not have a permanent local studio within the City of
Trenton which is equipped to perform a complete job of photography or
who intends to close out and discontinue such studio and business within a
period of one year from the date of the commencement thereof.
§ 206-31. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business
of itinerant vendors of photographs and photographic services, in the City
of Trenton, without first having procured a license from the City so to do,
or without complying with any and all of the provisions concerning the
same contained in this article, or in any ordinance heretofore or hereafter
adopted by the City of Trenton in full force and effect.
§ 206-32. Application for license; procedure; payment of fee.
Every person engaged in, or about to engage in the business hereinabove
defined, shall file a written application, in duplicate, duly sworn to in the
manner required by law, on a form furnished by the City Clerk. It shall
contain the full name of the applicant and the local address, if any; if there
be no local address, the regular and permanent address of the applicant; the
name of the employer (unless the applicant is self employed, in which event
it shall be so stated); the nature of the photographic services to be offered,
sold or rendered; a statement whether the applicant has been convicted of
crime and, if so, the nature thereof and penalties imposed therefor. Upon
the request of the local police authorities, the applicant may be required
to furnish a photograph and to submit to fingerprinting. Upon the filing
of the application with him, the City Clerk shall immediately forward a
copy of the same to the Police Director of the City who shall immediately
check and investigate the same and certify to the City Clerk the result
thereof. Immediately upon the receipt of such information, the City Clerk
shall prepare the license and deliver the same to the applicant upon the
payment to him/her of the required license fee which shall be paid for
in lawful money of the United States at the office of the City Clerk. The
§ 206-30 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-32
201:555
license shall date from the date of its issuance and for a period of one year
therefrom.
§ 206-33. Bond.
An applicant for a license shall, before a license is used, post a good
and sufficient bond in the sum of $1,000 with the City Clerk conditioned
to indemnify and pay or reimburse any purchaser of photographs or
photographic services in a sum equal to at least the amount of any payment
that such purchaser may have been induced to make through the
misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of such goods or services,
whether the misrepresentation was made by the owners or their agents
or employees either at the time of making the sale or through any
advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated or made
orally with reference to the goods or services or any part thereof.
§ 206-34. Appointment of agent for service of process.
Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk
an instrument, in writing, appointing the City Clerk as his/her true and
lawful agent, with full powers and authority to acknowledge service on
notices or process for and on behalf of the applicant, in respect to any
matters connected with or arising out of the license and the bond given as
required by the provisions of this article, or for any breach thereof, which
instrument shall state that the applicant for the license consents and agrees
that service of any notice or process may be made upon his/her agent, and
when so made shall be taken and held to be valid as if personally served
upon the applicant according to the laws of the State of New Jersey or of
any other state, and waiving all claims or right of error by reasons of such
acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
§ 206-35. License fee.
The fee for a license under this article shall be the sum of $300 and shall be
paid by the applicant to the City Clerk upon the granting of the license.
§ 206-36. License not transferable.
No license granted or issued under the provisions of this article shall be in
any manner transferred or assigned or authorize any person other than is
therein mentioned or named to carry on such business.
§ 206-37. Refunds.
No refund shall be made on any license fee paid on account of a cessation
of business after such license shall have been issued.
§ 206-38. Exemptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require the procurement of
a license, and the payment of a fee therefor, to sell photographs or render
§ 206-32 TRENTON CODE § 206-38
201:556
photographic services by any person who carries on such sales or renders
such services wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, philanthropic or
educational purposes, and from which profit is not derived either directly or
indirectly by the persons carrying on said business.
§ 206-39. Revocation of licenses.
Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked as provided in Chapter 146, Licensing.
§ 206-40. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 206-38 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 206-40
201:557
Chapter 211
POLICE CHAPLAINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 2, Art. XII.
§ 211-1. Position created.
The position of Police Chaplain for the City of Trenton Police Department is
hereby created in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141. The position will be
a volunteer position. The position of Chaplain shall be under and subject to
the control of the Police Director.
§ 211-2. Qualifications.
Any person appointed as Chaplain shall be an ordained clergyman in good
standing in the religious body from which he/she is selected. The Chaplain
shall have basic training and shall be a certified Police Chaplain
credentialed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City of
Trenton Police Department and shall be qualified in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141.
§ 211-3. Duties.
The duties of Police Chaplain shall include, but not be limited to assisting
the City of Trenton Police Department in death notifications, station house
adjustments, and any other duties that may be assigned by the Police
Director.
§ 211-4. Rank and salary.
Any person appointed as Chaplain shall serve in that capacity without rank
or salary.
§ 211-5. Term of office.
A person appointed as Chaplain shall serve for a period of one year from
date of appointment and shall continue to serve in that capacity until he/she
is either terminated or reappointed with the recommendation of the Police
Director.
§ 211-6. Appointment.
The Police Director may recommend to the Mayor persons that he/she
believes meet the qualifications of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141 as well as the rules
and regulations of the City of Trenton Police Department with reference
to Chaplains, if any. All applicants for the position of Chaplain shall be
§ 206-40 TRENTON CODE § 211-6
201:558
reviewed by the Police Director and Chaplain liaison to determine his/
her qualifications in accordance with this chapter and shall make
recommendations to the Mayor regarding the appointment as Chaplain. The
Mayor shall appoint Chaplains in accordance with this chapter with the
advice and consent of City Council.
Chapter 213
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 146.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 197.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 206.
§ 213-1. License required.
No individual, person, partnership or corporation shall engage in the
business of the purchase of precious metals and gems, and all forms of
previously owned jewelry, without first obtaining a license from the City
Clerk.
§ 213-2. Application process; approval; appeal.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this article, the
Clerk shall refer such application to the Police Director, who shall
institute such investigation of the applicant's moral character and
business responsibility as (s)he deems necessary for the protection of
the public welfare.
B. Upon completion of the investigation, which shall take no more than 30
days to complete, the Police Director shall return the application, or a
copy thereof, to the Clerk, accompanied by his/her recommendations as
to whether the license should be issued or denied. If the
recommendation of the Police Director is to deny the license, the
grounds for such recommendation shall be stated. Grounds for
recommending denial of a license may include information regarding
the applicant's moral character, demonstrated business responsibility,
or conviction of a crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation. If a denial is based upon the conviction of a crime,
an additional determination shall be made by the Police Director, as
provided for in N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-1 et seq. (the Rehabilitated Offenders
Act). Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Police Director, the
City Clerk shall issue or deny the license accordingly. The decision of
the Police Director as to the acceptance or denial of the application
shall be a final administrative determination and appealable to the
Superior Court of New Jersey.
§ 211-6 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 213-3
213:559
§ 213-3. Signed receipt. [Amended 7-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-69]
Except as otherwise provided under § 197-10, all licensees shall be
mandated to obtain from each person offering items for sale a clear photo
identification of that person along with the individual's current address,
personal information and signature. All licensees under this section shall be
required to maintain a photocopy machine at their place of business and
use such equipment to acquire a clear and viewable photocopy from the
identification. This information will be submitted along with the Transaction
Record Sheet supplied to the licensee by the Trenton Police Department.
§ 213-4. Recordkeeping. [Amended 7-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-69]
Each licensee shall maintain records for each sale, which shall include: ALL
of the information specified on the Transaction Record Sheets supplied to
the licensees by the Trenton Police Department. The licensee shall record in
the property description area of the form any and all lettering or engravings
on each of the items being purchased or traded. These Transaction Record
Sheets shall be kept with the corresponding articles of purchased or traded
jewelry until a representative of the Trenton Police Department
photographs the property and takes possession of the Transaction Record
Sheets. All purchased or traded property shall be kept separate, by
transaction, in its own bag or container with identifying marks for future
retrieval for a period of not less than 30 days, except as otherwise provided
under § 197-10, after the date of the transaction.
§ 213-5. Bond.
Each licensee shall deliver a bond to the Clerk executed by the applicant as
principal, with a surety company authorized to do business under the laws
of the State of New Jersey as surety. The bond, to be approved by the City
Attorney, shall be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and
proper observance of and compliance with the provisions and requirements
of all ordinances of the City of Trenton in force or which may be adopted,
respecting the conduct of the business, and conditioned also that the bond
shall be and remain for the benefit of any person or persons who shall have
received judgment against any person listed under this chapter, by reason
of any damage sustained by any such person as a result of the operations of
the licensee under this chapter.
§ 213-6. Fees.
The fee for an initial application shall be $200 nonrefundable. Each annual
renewal fee shall be $25. If on the effective date of this chapter a person,
partnership or corporation has been in business in the City, pursuant to
§ 213-1, for a period of not less than five years, the fee for an initial
application shall be $25, and investigation pursuant to § 213-2 may be
waived by the Clerk.
§ 213-3 TRENTON CODE § 213-7
213:560
§ 213-7. Fixed location required.
No licensee shall engage in the sale or purchase of precious metals or gems
by means of a pushcart, trailer, valise, table or mobile unit. The licensee
shall advise the City Clerk of the fixed location of the business at the time
of license application.
§ 213-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 215
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
§ 213-7 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 213-8
213:561

ARTICLE I
Identification of Abandoned Property
[Adopted 10-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-86]
§ 215-1. Abandoned property list.
The public officer designated by the Mayor is hereby directed to identify
abandoned properties within the municipality, place said properties on an
abandoned property list established as provided in Section 36 of P.L.1996,
c.62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as amended by Section 28 of P.L.2003, c.210, and
provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are required to
effectuate an abandoned property list as provided by law.
§ 215-2. Applicability.
The abandoned property list shall apply to the City of Trenton as a whole.
§ 215-3. Report to Mayor and governing body.
The public officer shall provide a report to the Mayor and governing body
as required, with respect to the number and location of properties on the
abandoned property list, the status of those properties, and any actions
taken by the municipality or by any qualified rehabilitation entity
designated pursuant to the authority granted the public officer with respect
to any property on the list or any other abandoned property within the City
of Trenton.
§ 215-1 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 215-3
213:563

ARTICLE II
Creditor Responsibility for Residential Property in Foreclosure
[Adopted 5-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-11]
§ 215-4. Maintenance and security of abandoned properties.
Any creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on any
residential property shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security
and upkeep of the exterior of that property, in the event the property
is vacated or abandoned by the title owner of the property during the
pendency of the foreclosure process.
§ 215-5. In-state agent required.
If any such foreclosing creditor is located outside of the State of New Jersey,
it shall be responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to
act for the foreclosing creditor. Any out-of-state creditor shall include the
full name and contact information of the in-state representative or agent in
the notice required to be provided pursuant to Paragraph (1) of Subsection
a of Section 17 of P.L.2008, c.127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
§ 215-6. Compliance with other ordinances.
All foreclosing creditors, and, in the case of out-of-state creditors, their
in-state representatives, shall be responsible for complying with the
requirements of all other ordinances adopted by the City of Trenton relating
to vacant and/or abandoned property in the same manner as those
ordinances pertain to the title owners of such vacant and/or abandoned
property.
§ 215-7. Notice of violation.
§ 215-8. Violations and penalties.
A. The Director of the Department of Housing and Economic Development
or designee is hereby authorized to issue notices of violation pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(b) to any creditor filing a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose if the Director or designee determines that the
creditor has violated any of the City's ordinances by failing to provide
for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of any
property as required by § 215-4 of this article. Such notices of violation
shall require the person or entity to comply by correcting the violation
within 30 days of receipt of the notice of violation, or within 10 days of
receipt of the notice of violation if the violation presents an imminent
threat to public health and safety.
B. The issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to this section shall
constitute proof that a property has been vacated and abandoned by its
owner for the purposes of P.L.2012, c.70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73).
§ 215-4 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 215-8
213:565
§ 215-9. Abatement by City; recourse against creditor.
If the City expends funds in order to abate a nuisance or correct a violation
on a residential property in which the creditor was given a notice of
violation but failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violation as
directed, the City shall have the same recourse against the creditor as it
would have against the title owner of the property, including but not limited
to the recourse provided under Section 42 of P.L.2003, c.210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-100).
§ 215-10. Use of revenue.
All of the funds collected pursuant to this article shall be utilized by the City
of Trenton for purposes relating to its municipal code enforcement actions.
A. An out-of-state creditor subject to this article, found by the Municipal
Court of the City of Trenton or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state
representative or agent pursuant to this article, shall be subject to a
fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed on a
creditor for the failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent
shall commence on the day after the conclusion of the ten-day period
set forth in Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L.2008,
c.127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51), for providing notice to the Municipal Clerk
that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage
has been served.
B. In the event that the Municipal Court of the City of Trenton or any other
court of competent jurisdiction finds that a creditor subject to this
article has not complied with the notice of violation issued for failure to
provide for the care, maintenance, security, or upkeep of property
pursuant to the City's ordinances, such creditor shall be subject to a
fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant
to this subsection shall commence 31 days following receipt of the
notice of violation, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to
the public health and safety, in which case any such fines shall
commence 11 days following receipt of the notice of violation.
§ 215-8 TRENTON CODE § 215-10
213:566
Chapter 217
RAILROAD CROSSINGS
§ 217-1. Interference with use of highway prohibited.
No employee of a steam or electric railroad company shall operate a
locomotive, train or crossing gate in such a manner as to unnecessarily
prevent or interfere with the use of a highway for the purpose of travel.
§ 217-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 222
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
§ 222-1. Legislative findings.
The City Council of the City of Trenton finds that:
§ 222-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. There has existed for many years a shortage of affordable rental
housing in the City of Trenton.
B. Without some controls, such shortage will lead to excessive and
unconscionable rents and rent increases.
C. In order to provide appropriate controls, the City Council has enacted
ordinances to control rent and rent increases and to establish a Rent
Stabilization Board to oversee such controls.
D. It is necessary for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of the
residents of the City that the previously imposed controls on rents
effective prior to January 1, 1997, be continued uninterrupted and that
rents be rolled back to the levels in existence on December 31, 1996,
and that rental provisions inconsistent with the requirements of this
chapter contained in any agreements entered in subsequent to
December 31, 1996, be invalidated.
§ 215-10 RAILROAD CROSSINGS § 222-2
217:567
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — A permanent improvement that is reasonably
expected to last more than one year. The improvement must benefit the
dwelling and must be subject to allowances and depreciation under the
United States Internal Revenue Code, except that any improvement in
a Historic District established by the City, other than painting, may be
considered a capital improvement according to the Rent Stabilization
Ordinance, without regard to its status under federal or state tax law.
COMMERCIAL USE — Any use for nonresidential business activity such
as retail, office, warehouse or similar uses. Whenever an entire building is
rented to a single tenant for a combination of commercial and residential
uses under a single lease without an allocation of the rental between the
commercial and residential portions, the entire tenancy shall be deemed to
be commercial and exempted under the definition of "dwelling."
DEPRECIATION — The cost of an asset whose term of life is more than one
year, the expense of which shall be in accordance with the applicable time
schedules then in existence under the United States Internal Revenue Code.
DWELLING — Any building or structure rented to one or more individuals
or households. Exempt from this chapter are owner-occupied one- and twofamily
dwellings; public or other federally subsidized housing; any motel,
hotel or other premises primarily serving transient guests; or any portion of
a building or structure rented for commercial use. Newly created housing
units, whether through new construction or conversion from nonresidential
use and rented for the first time, are exempt, and the initial rent may
be established by the landlord without reference to the provisions of this
chapter. All subsequent changes in rent in such units will be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
DWELLING UNIT — That portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent for
living and dwelling purposes to one individual or household unit, together
with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and
improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the
property.
LANDLORD — Any person who, under written or oral agreement, leases
real property to another either as lessor or sublessor. When used in relation
to petitions for rent increases, the term "landlord" shall include any person
who is either a contract purchaser or assignee of the landlord regarding
such real property that is the subject of the petition, and who has the
written consent of the landlord to petition the Rent Stabilization Board for
relief.
PRESENT ANNUAL RENTAL VALUE — The sum of money actually charged
as rent for the rental unit calculated on the basis of one year's occupancy,
whether or not actually rented. The current fair market rental value of the
unit as determined by the Board shall be deemed to be the present annual
rental value of any unit not actually rented at the time in question.
RENT INDEX — The statistical index governing rent increases under this
chapter. The rent index shall be subject to change every six months
commencing with January 1 and July 1 of each year, and shall remain
§ 222-2 TRENTON CODE § 222-2
222:568
unchanged during each six-month period. The rent index shall be computed
by taking the twelve-month average of the United States Housing
Component of the Consumer Price Index-U for Rent (Residential)
immediately preceding the beginning of each six-month period. For
example: if the twelve-month average of the United States Housing
Component of the Consumer Price Index-U for Rent (Residential) for the
period of January 1 through December 31, 1995, was 2.83%, then the rent
index in effect for the period January 1 through June 30, 1996, would
be 2.83%. If the twelve-month average of the United States Housing
Component of the Consumer Price Index-U for Rent (Residential) for the
period July 1, 1995, through June 30, 1996, is 2.90%, then the rent index for
the six-month period commencing July 1, 1996, will be 2.90%.
RENTAL SPACE — The total portion of a dwelling rented or offered for
any purposes or uses, including commercial, professional, industrial or
residential.
RENTAL UNIT — Any space in a dwelling, whether or not governed by this
chapter, offered for rent or actually rented as residential, commercial or
other space as a single, individual unit.
UNIT TAX BURDEN — That portion of the total local real estate taxes
assessed against a dwelling which is allocable to each separate rental
unit as determined by reference to the following formula: divide the total
present tax assessment levied upon the entire dwelling by the sum of the
present annual rental value of every rental unit therein and multiply the
number thus obtained by the present annual rental value of each unit.
§ 222-3. Rent Stabilization Board; administrative officer; hearing
officers.
A. There is hereby created a Rent Stabilization Board within the City of
Trenton. The Board shall consist of seven members. The makeup of the
Board shall be two landlords, including for this purpose managerial
agents of the landlords, who own rental property in the City; two
tenants who live in the City; and three persons who are neither landlord
nor tenants in the City, and who shall be residents of the City.
B. Appointment of members and alternates.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint the members of the Rent Stabilization
Board with the advice and consent of City Council; two appointees
serving initial terms which shall expire on December 31, 1997,
three appointees serving initial terms which shall expire on
December 31, 1998; and two appointees serving initial terms which
shall expire on December 31, 1999. Following the initial term of
each appointee the term of each set on the Board shall be three
years. Board members shall continue to serve after the expiration
of their respective terms until their successor has been appointed
and qualified. All members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
§ 222-2 RENT CONTROL § 222-3
222:569
§ 222-4. Responsibilities of Rent Stabilization Board.
The Rent Stabilization Board shall study local problems and issues relating
to landlord-tenant relations, supply information to the public and advise the
Mayor and City Council from time to time or as requested on any such issue
as may concern the conduct of City government. The Board shall further
be responsible for establishing reasonable rules for the conduct of its own
business, including the election of its officers, and shall recommend to the
Mayor and City Council rules, regulations and ordinances necessary and
(2) The Mayor shall also appoint three alternate members to the Rent
Stabilization Board with the advice and consent of City Council, one
of whom shall be a landlord, one of whom shall be a tenant; and one
of whom shall be neither a landlord nor a tenant. Alternate
members shall satisfy the residency requirements of regular
members. Each alternate member shall be appointed for a term of
one year and shall serve upon the Board without compensation.
(3) The Board shall be assisted in its operations by a City employee to
be designated as the Rent Stabilization Board administrative
officer, whose duties shall include the initial review of all petitions
and other pleadings addressed to the Board for compliance with
the procedural rules of this chapter and the procedural rules
adopted by the Board. The administrative officer shall also be
responsible for the preparation of all properly filed pleadings for
hearing by the Board. The administrative officer shall also provide
information and guidance to any landlord or tenant seeking
guidance with respect to the procedural requirement of his/her
case and shall take charge generally of all administrative matters
necessary to the smooth and efficient operation of the Board.
(4) If, in the opinion of the Board, the calendar of hearings should
exceed the capacity of the Board to give proper attention to each
case in timely fashion, or that a case is of such a nature that it
deems it appropriate, it shall have the power to assign cases to a
hearing officer, who shall be knowledgeable in law, accounting, real
estate or related matters, and who shall preside over hearings,
receive evidence and report his/her findings of fact and conclusions
of law, in writing, to the Board which, after review of such findings
of fact and conclusions of law and the documentary evidence, shall
either approve or modify the findings and enter a final ruling
consistent with the evidence, all within such time periods and
according to such procedural rules as the Board shall prescribe. In
so doing, members of the Board shall have access to a transcript or
tape recording of the testimony and all documentary evidence
received by the hearing officer.
(5) The Board, at its discretion, may grant hearing officers the
authority to issue orders on behalf of the Board disallowing rent
increases where the basis for such action is grounded in the
provisions of § 222-12B.
§ 222-3 TRENTON CODE § 222-4
222:570
desirable to supplement and to implement the purposes of this chapter. In
addition to the powers expressly granted thereby, the Board shall have all
other powers necessary and proper to carry out and execute the purposes
of this chapter. The funds necessary to establish and sustain the activities of
the Board shall be provided by the City from time to time in such amounts
as are appropriated by the City Council.
§ 222-5. Rental increase.
§ 222-6. Rent index increase.
At the expiration or termination of a formal lease or a periodic tenancy, no
landlord may receive a percentage increase in rent for that housing space
from any tenant which is greater than the rent index based upon the rent
index in effect 90 days prior to the expiration or termination of the lease.
For a periodic tenant whose base sum shall be less than one year, such
tenant shall not be cause to pay any increase in any rent based upon a rent
index more than once during any twelve-month period, and may only be
caused to pay a rent increase based upon the rent index in effect 90 days
prior to the effective date of the proposed increase.
§ 222-7. Tax increase.
A. Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease shall be void unless provided for in the
terms of such lease agreement or by mutual agreement between the
landlord and the tenant. Notwithstanding any such agreement, any
rental increase in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this
chapter shall be void and may be the subject of action by the Board.
B. No landlord shall be eligible for any rent increase requiring approval by
the Board or by a hearing officer designated by the Board as provided
by this chapter, except where the landlord provides evidence
acceptable to the Board that no delinquent property taxes or sewer and
water payments are owing on the property which is the subject of the
proposed rent increase.
A. In accordance with the procedural provisions of this chapter and such
procedural regulations as may be adopted by the Board, a landlord may
receive an increase in excess of that permitted by § 222-6 above in the
rent of any dwelling unit because of a current increase in local property
taxes directly affecting that dwelling, but only when such taxes increase
by a percentage greater than the applicable rent index percentage
increase last applied to the dwelling unit under § 222-6 over the twelvemonth
period immediately preceding.
B. The increase permitted under this section shall be computed in the
following manner: the percentage increase in the rent index used in
§ 222-6 shall be subtracted from the percentage increase in property
taxes for the dwelling. The percentage difference shall then be
multiplied by the appropriate unit tax burden to determine the amount
§ 222-4 RENT CONTROL § 222-7
222:571
§ 222-8. Reduction in taxes.
§ 222-9. Sewer and water charge increase.
of increase allowable as a result of a property tax increase. If the
percentage increase in the rent index used in this computation is
greater than the percentage increase in property tax, no increase in
rent shall be permitted. The landlord, prior to the imposition of any
such increase in rent, shall notify the tenant in the manner prescribed
in § 222-14 hereinafter of his/her intentions and shall provide a clear
statement of the manner in which the increase was calculated.
C. No rent increase under this section may take effect until or unless the
landlord has documented the increase on a form which the Board shall
prescribe and make available, a copy of which form shall be completed
in full and filed with the Board and copies served on all tenants affected
by the rent increase prior to the effective date of the increase.
A. In the event a tax appeal is taken by the landlord and the landlord is
successful in such appeal and the taxes are reduced, or if the taxes on
the property are reduced as a result of any other circumstance, whether
or not at the initiative of the landlord, the tenant shall receive 50% of
the reduction as applied to his/her unit tax burden after deducting all
expenses incurred by the landlord in prosecuting such appeal. In the
event taxes are decreased by virtue of any other circumstances, 50% of
the benefit of the decrease shall be credited to each rental unit in
proportion to its unit tax burden.
B. The landlord shall notify any tenants eligible for such a reduction in
rent of the total decrease in property taxes resulting from such appeal
or other circumstances, and the amount of the decrease to which each
tenant is entitled within 30 days of the landlord receiving formal
notification of the decrease. Such notification shall be filed with the
Board. The rent reduction shall be reflected in the first rental payment
coming due from the tenant after 30 days from the date on which the
landlord received formal notification of the decrease in taxes.
C. In the event that the landlord fails to provide for the appropriate rent
reduction in a timely fashion, as set forth in Subsection B above, the
Board may determine the amount owed to the tenant and order its
immediate payment with a penalty that the Board may impose at its
discretion, but not in excess of 20% of the amount owed.
A. In accordance with the procedural provision of this section and such
procedural regulations as may be adopted by the Board, a landlord may
receive an increase exceeding the limitation of § 222-6 above in the rent
of any dwelling unit because of a current increase in local sewer and
water charges directly affecting his/her dwelling only when such
charges increase by a percentage greater than the applicable rent
index percentage increase last applied to the dwelling unit, pursuant to
§ 222-6, over the twelve-month period immediately preceding. The
§ 222-7 TRENTON CODE § 222-9
222:572
§ 222-10. Grounds for rent increases.
A landlord may petition the Board to permit an increase in rent by an
amount exceeding all other limitations imposed hereby upon one or more of
the following grounds:
increase permissible under this section shall be computed in the
following manner:
(1) Where the increase applies to a single unit, or where all of the units
to which the increase applies contain the same number of
bedrooms, the increase shall be applied as in § 222-7.
(2) Where the increase applies to a building containing more than one
unit and where units in such building contain different numbers of
bedrooms, the landlord shall total the number of bedrooms in the
building and divide the number of bedrooms in each unit by that
total in order to obtain the pro rata share for each unit. The
landlord shall allocate the increase calculated as in § 222-7 among
the units in the building according to the pro rata share of each as
so determined.
B. No sewer or water charge increase under this section may take effect
until or unless the landlord has documented the increase on a form
which the Board shall prescribe and make available, a copy of which
form shall be completed in full and filed with the Board and copies
served on all tenants affected by the increase prior to the effective date
of the increase.
A. Present rents are insufficient to enable the landlord to maintain the
dwelling unit in conformity with local or state housing codes or other
appropriate legal requirements; provided, however, that no such
increase shall be approved in the absence of clear and convincing
evidence that, despite diligent efforts and reasonable measures to
economize within financial constraints affecting the operation and
management of the dwelling, the necessary funding cannot be provided
without resort to a rental increase.
B. Present rents are insufficient to enable the landlord to satisfy
reasonable mortgage or other normal and customary financial
obligations directly related to the normal maintenance and operation of
the dwelling; provided, however, that on the basis of the same proofs
that are required under Subsection A above, as well as documentation
of the particular financing provisions underlying the petition, and that
an increase under this Subsection B shall only be approved where the
Board finds that resort to rental increases is necessary to prevent a
default in such obligations entered into in good faith, and not for the
purpose of qualifying for an increase hereunder. The applicant for an
increase under this section shall further have the burden of showing
that the purchase price, mortgage terms and other financial obligations
which form the basis for the request for an increase in rent are:
§ 222-9 RENT CONTROL § 222-10
222:573
(1) Consistent with market conditions in effect at present or at the time
in which the obligation was incurred.
(2) Consistent with customary financial practice with respect to
obligations of the nature incurred.
(3) Represent a reasonable and prudent undertaking in light of all
relevant factors.
C. The landlord has made or proposes to make capital improvements or
service improvements to the dwelling which directly or indirectly have
or will have a substantial effect upon the dwelling unit for which the
increase is sought. The landlord shall compute the average cost of the
improvement per year of useful life by dividing the cost of the
completed capital improvement by the number of years of useful life of
the improvement as claimed by the landlord for income tax depreciation
purposes. The amount of the monthly increase which a landlord may
charge shall be prorated among all tenants benefiting from such
improvement by dividing 1/12 of the annual cost of the capital
improvement by the total rent roll of the units affected by the
improvement in the dwelling, occupied or unoccupied. No tenant who
receives no benefit from the improvement shall be liable for a capital
improvement increase, and no tenant who benefits from an
improvement shall be liable for an increase exceeding the percentage of
rent paid by him/her as calculated above, and all such rent increases
shall be charged for no period greater than the depreciation period of
such improvements. The landlord shall notify the tenants at least 60
days before the effective date of the increase. The notice shall include
the amount of increase. The tenant may request a hearing within 30
days of receipt of notice from the landlord. Any increase may be
approved prior to improvements being made, but the increase shall not
take effect until after the improvements have been completed.
D. Any substantial hardship created by circumstances beyond the control
of the landlord or his/her agent which arose or substantially changed
during the term of the lease or period of tenancy under which the
present rent is fixed.
E. As a result of the landlord's past failure to impose the rent increases
permitted under § 222-6, the rent is now significantly below prevailing
market rents for units of comparable size and location. Where the
Board finds that such is the case, the landlord shall compute the
maximum rent that would be in effect if all increases had been made as
permitted under § 222-6, and shall submit documentation of the base
rent used for purposes of this showing, and the calculations made to
determine the maximum rent that would be in effect at the time of the
petition. Where the Board finds that such documentation is in order, it
shall permit maximum rent, provided that:
(1) If the increase from the current rent is less than 15%, the increase
may be imposed at the next anniversary of the tenant's occupancy.
§ 222-10 TRENTON CODE § 222-10
222:574
§ 222-11. Procedures.
§ 222-12. Tenant petitions.
(2) If the increase is more than 15% but less than 30%, it shall take
place in two equal annual installments.
(3) If the increase is more than 30% but less than 50%, it shall take
place in three equal annual installments.
(4) If the increase is more than 50% but less than 65%, it shall take
place in four equal annual installments.
(5) If the increase is more than 65% but less than 80%, it shall take
place in five equal annual installments.
(6) If the increase is 80% or more, it shall take place in such number of
years as the Board shall prescribe.
A. No landlord shall impose upon any tenant an increase in rent exceeding
the amount permitted under §§ 222-6, 222-7 and 222-9 without first
obtaining the approval of the Board by way of petition. It shall be within
the discretion of the Board to fix the effective date of any approved
increase at any reasonable time prior to or after the determination of
the Board; provided, however, that in no case shall the Board permit
any increase applied for under § 222-10C to become effective prior to
the completion of the capital project, which completion shall be
certified to the Board upon notice to the tenants and which certificate
and notice shall contain an accurate statement of the total cost of the
improvement and the sum allocated to each unit of the dwelling and,
provided that, except as explicitly provided in this section, the Board
shall not have the power to ignore or supersede the terms of a lease
agreement, written or oral, with respect to rent increase or any other
condition of tenancy. Nothing herein shall limit the authority of the
Board to order a landlord to rescind any rent increase illegally or
improperly imposed and to repay such increase to the tenant with or
without interest on such terms and conditions that the Board shall
impose.
B. Notwithstanding the language above, no rent increase granted by the
Board shall be made retroactive to a date prior to the determination of
the Board where the landlord previously imposed the increase, in whole
or in part, without Board approval and has been the subject of an order
disallowing such increase pursuant to § 222-12.
A. A tenant may petition the Board pursuant to the rules of procedure for
an order disallowing an increase in rent proposed by the landlord
pursuant to §§ 222-6, 222-7, 222-9 and 222-10 upon one or more of the
following grounds:
(1) The landlord has failed to provide, during the term of the current
tenancy, essential, normal services to the tenant; and/or the
§ 222-10 RENT CONTROL § 222-12
222:575
§ 222-13. Tenant protection.
It shall be unlawful for any landlord to evict or fail to renew the lease of
any tenant or to take any other steps whatsoever in reprisal regarding the
performance of services or otherwise because of a tenant's petition for an
order disallowing a proposed rent increase or because of the exercise of any
other power or procedure provided herein, or in order to compel, induce or
encourage a tenant to vacate the premises.
§ 222-14. Rules of procedure.
The Board shall hear and determine petitions for an adjustment in rent
for any individual dwelling unit subject to this chapter according to the
following rules of procedure or according to regulations adopted by the
Board with the approval of City Council not inconsistent herewith:
landlord has failed to maintain the dwelling in a safe, sanitary or
habitable condition during all or part of the term of the tenancy.
(2) An increase, as imposed or proposed, is calculated improperly or
without proper notice or in any other manner which violates this
chapter.
(3) The proposed increase does not relate to a capital or service
improvement which substantially affects the tenant's housing space
directly or indirectly.
(4) The tenant seeks to challenge any of the facts or assertions on
which the landlord relied in seeking a rent increase under § 222-10.
B. Nothing in this or any other section shall prevent any tenant of any
dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this chapter from bringing a
petition to the Board where the tenant believes that the landlord has
illegally or improperly increased the rent of the unit or reduced services
to the unit, whether or not the landlord has sought approval of such
rent increase from the Board.
A. A landlord of any dwelling or a tenant of any dwelling unit subject to
this chapter may petition the Board for an adjustment of the rent for
any individual dwelling unit or units by first giving notice, in writing, of
the proposed filing of a petition for rent adjustment and the precise
form of relief requested, citing the appropriate section of this chapter
under which (s)he requests relief.
B. A landlord shall serve notice upon the record tenant of the affected
dwelling unit by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to
him/her at the dwelling unit and by posting a copy of the notice
conspicuously in a central location within the dwelling. A tenant shall
mail such notice to the landlord by mail addressed to him/her or his/her
agent at the dwelling affected or at any other known address of the
landlord or his/her agent.
§ 222-12 TRENTON CODE § 222-14
222:576
§ 222-15. Maintenance of services.
During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment
in the housing space and dwelling as was provided or was required to
be provided by law or lease at the date the lease was entered into. Any
transfer from the landlord to the tenant of the costs or responsibilities
for supplying essential services such as public utilities and heat shall be
C. Service shall be made or attempted no less than 10 days prior to the
filing of the petition.
D. A petition for rent adjustment shall be filed together with an affidavit of
service of proper notice with the secretary of the Board. Upon receipt of
a properly filed petition, the Board shall cause the matter to be set
down for a hearing and shall notify all persons affected thereby of the
time and place of the hearing.
E. Every hearing shall be conducted by a quorum of the Board consisting
of a simple majority of the full Board membership and which quorum
shall also consist of at least one member who is a landlord, one member
who is a tenant and one member who is neither a landlord nor tenant.
Two or more petitions involving the same landlord, in the discretion of
the Board, may be consolidated for a single hearing. The Board shall
reduce its findings of fact and conclusions to writing and shall serve
such written opinion upon all parties and shall file the original thereof
with the City Clerk.
F. Any party may appeal the final determination of the Board to the court
of proper jurisdiction.
G. The failure of any party to a rent adjustment proceeding to appear in
defense of or in response to a petition shall not be cause for the
granting of the relief petitioned for; provided, however, that the Board
shall not be obligated to await the appearance of any party failing to
respond to a notice of a hearing and may proceed to a hearing and
determination upon whatever evidence is produced before it.
H. If the Board shall determine that a tenant has been caused to pay
excessive rents in excess of the limitations provided herein, it shall
incorporate in its final determination an order compelling an
appropriate reimbursement or credit to be made by the landlord.
I. All rules, regulations, notices or other literature for general
informational purposes issued by the Board, or required to be issued, or
served by any landlord or tenant shall be written in English and in
Spanish.
J. The Board shall have the authority to approve a petition for a rent
increase in an amount less than the entire amount sought by the
petition or, if the petition seeks relief in separate categories, to approve
or reject them individually.
§ 222-14 RENT CONTROL § 222-15
222:577
deemed a rental increase, the amount of which shall be determined by
computing or estimating the average monthly costs of providing the same
projected on the basis of current costs for such services or supplies and
upon prior actual consumption rates to the extent known. It shall be the
responsibility of the landlord to produce adequate records of prior costs and
volumes equitably allocated for each rental unit for which such a transfer
is sought. The projected amount of the increase in rent resulting from
such transfer shall not exceed the amount resulting from application of the
rent index permitted by § 222-6, except where the landlord has obtained
approval of an increase greater than the index under the provisions of
§ 222-10.
§ 222-16. Rental of vacant units.
§ 222-17. Violations and penalties.
A willful violation of any provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, the willful filing with the Board of any material misstatement of fact
or any violation of an order duly issued by the Board, shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. A violation affecting
more than one leasehold shall be considered a separate violation as to each
leasehold.
§ 222-18. Construction.
This chapter being necessary for the welfare of the City of Trenton and its
inhabitants shall be liberally constructed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 222-19. When effective; duration.
This chapter shall become effective upon final adoption and approval as
provided by law but, for the protection of the health, welfare and safety
of the residents of the City, in order that the previously imposed controls
on rents effective prior to January 1, 1997, continued uninterrupted it
shall have retroactive effect to January 1, 1997, and rents shall be rolled
back to the levels in existence on December 31, 1996, and any rental
A. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the owner of a newly created unit,
either through new construction, rehabilitation of a previously
uninhabitable structure or conversion of a nonresidential structure, in
the initial rent charged.
B. Upon a previously occupied unit being vacated by its tenant, the
landlord may increase the rent charged for the unit for the new tenant
without application to the Board; provided, however, that where the
rent charged the new tenant exceeds the last rent charged the previous
tenant by more than 25%, the tenant shall have the right to seek a
reduction in the rent which shall be granted by the Board, except where
the landlord can demonstrate that the rent increase is justified under
the provisions of this chapter, or can demonstrate that the previous
tenancy was not based on an arms-length business relationship.
§ 222-15 TRENTON CODE § 222-19
222:578
provisions inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter contained in
any agreements entered into subsequent to December 31, 1996, are hereby
invalidated.
Chapter 223
RETIREMENT
§ 222-19 RENT CONTROL § 222-19
222:579

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 7-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-3773]
§ 223-1. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 223-2. Positions exempt from participation.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 223-3. Implementation and construal of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A. Business Administrator.
B. Department Directors.
C. Municipal Judge.
D. Chief Municipal Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer.
B. Tax Collector.
C. Chief Financial Officer.
D. Construction Code Official.
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
F. Tax Assessor.
G. Municipal Planner.
H. Registered Municipal Clerk.
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
73.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Defined Contribution
Retirement Program, adopted 11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 08-58.
§ 223-1 RENT CONTROL § 223-3
222:581
Chapter 226
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 25.
§ 223-3 TRENTON CODE § 223-3
226:582
ARTICLE I
Yard and Garage Sales
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 6-13 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 226-1. Yard sales.
§ 226-2. Garage sales.
§ 226-3. Registration.
Any individual seeking to conduct a yard sale or garage sale shall register
with the City Clerk's office prior to conducting such sale.
§ 226-4. Block sales/flea markets.
Block sales/flea markets are those sales of used furniture and personal
household items that are sold by more than four individuals collectively on
the front yards of their residences. These sales will be limited to a maximum
number of four sales per year. Individuals conducting such sales shall obtain
the written approval of the Police Department and register with the City
Clerk's office, all properties included, by address, for each event 10 days
before the scheduled event.
§ 226-5. Fees.
The City Clerk shall collect a permit fee for yard sales, garage sales, block
sales and flea markets. All license fees shall be paid in advance by cash,
money order, certified check or bank check at the office of the City Clerk.
Personal checks are prohibited. The following fees are hereby established
for such sales:
A. Definition. Yard sales are those sales of small, personal household items
that are sold by individuals from the front yard of their residences.
B. Limited. No more than four yard sales per calendar year shall be
permitted from any one household.
A. Definition. Garage sales are those sales of furniture from an individual's
home.
B. Restrictions. Garage sales shall be conducted from the back yard area
of the individual's residence. No furniture shall be displayed or sold
from the front of the residence.
C. Limited. No more than six garage sales per calendar year shall be
permitted from any one household.
A. Yard sale: $10.
B. Garage sale: $10.
C. Block sale: $25.
§ 226-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 226-5
226:583
§ 226-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
D. Flea market: $25.
§ 226-5 TRENTON CODE § 226-6
226:584
ARTICLE II
Distress Sales
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 5-5.5 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 226-7. Types of sales and licenses.
§ 226-8. Application information.
The application for a distress sale license, in addition to all the
requirements of this chapter, shall contain the following information:
A. The license for distress sales shall include sales designated as follows:
(1) Insurance.
(2) Bankruptcy.
(3) Mortgage.
(4) Insolvent.
(5) Assignees.
(6) Receivers.
(7) Trustees.
(8) Removal or closing-out.
(9) Liquidation.
(10) Creditors.
(11) Loss-of-lease.
(12) Forced-out-of-business.
(13) Goods damage by fire, smoke or water.
B. Distress sales shall include the sale by anyone of the goods, wares,
chattels or merchandise of another, and/or any and all sales advertised
in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that such sale or
sales are anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, wind-up,
discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in
connection with the sale or sales, and that upon the disposal of the
stock of goods on hand the business shall cease and be discontinued.
A. A description of the place in which the proposed sale is to be held.
B. The nature of the occupancy of such place, whether by lease or
sublease, and the effective date of the termination of occupancy.
C. The true name of the owner of the goods to be offered for sale.
§ 226-7 SALES, SPECIAL § 226-8
226:585
§ 226-9. Issuance of license; Council approval.
No license shall be issued by the City Clerk to conduct or operate a distress
sale until (s)he has investigated the application for license. If the City
Clerk has any reasonable doubt as to the truth of the statements and
representations contained in the application, (s)he shall not issue the
license without the approval of the City Council.
§ 226-10. Period of license validity; examination of merchandise;
revision of inventory list.
Any license granted under this article shall be valid for not more than a
period of 60 days and shall not be renewable, nor shall any other such
license be granted to the same person for a period of one year succeeding
the expiration of a previous license. A duplicate original of the application
and inventory pursuant to which the license was granted shall be available
at all times to the investigators of the City; and the licensee shall permit
such investigators to examine all merchandise on the premises for
comparison with the inventory. In the event that the sale or sales extend
beyond a period of 30 days, the inventory as attached to the application,
on or before the expiration of the thirty-day period, shall be revised and
the items on the list disposed of during the period shall be noted thereon.
Suitable books and records shall be kept by the licensee and shall be
available at all times to the investigators of the City.
§ 226-11. Offering goods other than inventory items prohibited.
No licensee under this article shall add to and include in any distress sale
any goods, wares, merchandise or chattels other than those which were
listed in the inventory filed with the application for license.
§ 226-12. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
D. The name of the operator of the sale if the operator is other than the
true owner of the goods proposed to be sold under the license.
E. A full and complete itemized inventory of the quantity, kind and
character of goods to be offered for sale, which shall include a listing of
all goods which have been in stock prior to the application for the
license; a listing of all goods which have been ordered and will be
placed in stock during the pendency of the sale; the place where such
stock was purchased or acquired; and if not purchased, the manner of
acquisition and the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
such goods.
§ 226-8 TRENTON CODE § 226-12
226:586
Chapter 230
SICK LEAVE FOR PRIVATE EMPLOYEES
§ 230-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The Department of Health and Human Services.
CALENDAR YEAR — A regular and consecutive twelve-month period, as
determined by an employer.
CONSTRUCTION UNION — A labor organization that represents, for
purposes of collective bargaining, employees involved in the performance
of construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication,
or repair work and who are enrolled or have graduated from a registered
apprenticeship program.
EMPLOYEE — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(h), one who works in the
City of Trenton for at least 80 hours in a year, except that "employee,"
for purposes of this chapter, does not include any person employed by any
governmental entity or instrumentality including any New Jersey school
district or Board of Education or any person who is a member of a
construction union and is covered by a collective bargaining agreement
negotiated by that union.
EMPLOYER — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(g), except that "employer"
does not include the United States government; the state or its political
subdivisions, or any office, department, agency, authority, institution,
association, society or any instrumentality of the state, including the
legislature or judiciary; or the City of Trenton.
FAMILY MEMBER —
A biological, adopted or foster child, stepchild or legal ward, a child of
a domestic partner, a child of a civil union partner, or a child to whom
the employee stands in loco parentis;
A.
A biological, foster, stepparent or adoptive parent or legal guardian of
an employee or of an employee's spouse, domestic partner or civil union
partner or a person who stood in loco parentis when the employee was
a minor child;
B.
A person to whom the employee is legally married under the laws of
New Jersey or any other state or with whom the employee has entered
into a civil union under N.J.S.A. Title 37;
C.
A grandparent or spouse, civil union partner or domestic partner of a
grandparent;
D.
E. A grandchild;
§ 226-12 SALES, SPECIAL § 230-1
226:587
HEALTH-CARE PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed under federal or
New Jersey law to provide medical or emergency services, including but not
limited to doctors, nurses and emergency room personnel.
PAID SICK TIME — Time that is compensated at the same hourly rate
and with the same benefits, including health-care benefits, as the employee
normally earns during hours worked and is provided by an employer to
an employee for the purposes described in § 230-3 of this chapter, but in
no case shall the hourly wage be less than that provided under N.J.S.A.
34:11-56a.
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM — An apprenticeship program
that is registered with and approved by the United States Department of
Labor and which meets not less than two of the following requirements:
RETALIATION — The denial of any right guaranteed under this chapter and
any threat, discipline, discharge, suspension, demotion, reduction of hours,
or any other adverse action against an employee for the exercise of any
right guaranteed herein, including for filing a complaint or informing any
person about any employer's alleged violation of this chapter; cooperating
with the Agency in its investigations of alleged violations of this chapter;
participating in any administrative or judicial action regarding an alleged
violation of this chapter; and informing any person of his or her potential
rights under this chapter.
§ 230-2. Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements.
A domestic partner of an employee as defined in N.J.S.A. 26:8A-3 et seq;
or
F.
G. A sibling.
A. Has active, employed, registered apprentices;
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during a majority
of the years that the program has been in operation; or
B.
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during three of the
immediately preceding five years, provides each trainee with combined
classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close
supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an
apprenticeable trade and meets the program performance standards of
enrollment and graduation under 29 CFR 29.63.1.
C.
A. All or any portion of the applicable requirements of this chapter shall
not apply to employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement,
to the extent that such requirements are expressly waived in the
collective bargaining agreement in clear and unambiguous terms.
B. With respect to employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement in effect at the time of the effective date of this chapter, no
provision of this chapter shall apply until the expiration of the collective
bargaining agreement; however, if the terms of an expired collective
§ 230-1 TRENTON CODE § 230-2
226:588
§ 230-3. Accrual of paid sick time.
bargaining agreement provide paid sick leave that is more generous
than provided by this chapter, those terms of the expired collective
bargaining agreement apply to the extent required by law.
A. All employees accrue a minimum of one hour of paid sick time for every
30 hours actually worked, subject to the limits set forth below in
Subsections B and C.
B. Employers who employ 10 or more employees for compensation are not
required to provide more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a calendar
year;
C. Employers who employ fewer than 10 employees for compensation are
not required to provide more than 24 hours of paid sick time in a
calendar year, except for employees who are child-care workers, home
health-care workers and food service workers. For child-care workers,
home health-care workers and food service workers, employers are
required to provide up to 40 hours of paid sick time, so long as the
hours are accrued in a calendar year as set forth in Subsection B above.
D. In determining the number of employees performing work for an
employer, all employees performing work for compensation on a fulltime,
part-time, or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that
where the number of employees who work for an employer for
compensation fluctuates, business size may be determined for the
current calendar year based upon the average number of employees
who worked for compensation during the preceding calendar year.
E. Employees who are exempt from overtime requirements under 29
U.S.C. § 213(a)(1) of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act are assumed
to work 40 hours in each workweek for purposes of paid sick time
accrual unless their normal workweek is less than 40 hours, in which
case paid sick time accrues based upon that normal workweek.
F. Employees begin to accrue paid sick time on the first day of
employment. Employees are entitled to use accrued paid sick time
beginning on the 90th calendar day of their employment, and thereafter
employees are entitled to use paid sick time as it is accrued.
G. Accrued but unused paid sick time shall be carried over to the following
calendar year, provided that no employer shall be required to carry over
more than 40 hours of unused paid sick time from one calendar year to
the next or allow the use of more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a
calendar year. An employer shall not be required to carry over unused
paid sick time if the employee is paid for any unused paid sick time at
the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued.
H. Any employer with a paid leave policy, such as a paid time off policy,
that provides an amount of paid leave sufficient to meet the total annual
accrual requirements of this section that may be used for the same
§ 230-2 SALES, SPECIAL § 230-3
226:589
§ 230-4. Use of paid sick time.
purposes and under the same conditions as paid sick time under this
chapter is not required to provide additional paid sick time.
I. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring financial or other
reimbursement to an employee from an employer upon the employee's
termination, resignation, retirement, or other separation from
employment for accrued paid sick time that has not been used.
J. If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity, or location,
but remains employed by the same employer in the City of Trenton, the
employee is entitled to all paid sick time accrued at the prior division,
entity, or location and is entitled to use all paid sick time as provided in
this section. If there is a separation from employment and the employee
is rehired within six months of separation, previously accrued unpaid
sick time that had not been used shall be reinstated. Further, the
employee is entitled to use accrued unpaid sick time and accrue
additional unpaid sick time at the re-commencement of employment.
K. When a different employer succeeds or takes the place of an existing
employer, all employees of the original employer who remain employed
by the successor employer are entitled to all paid sick time accrued
when employed by the original employer and are entitled to use all paid
sick leave previously accrued.
L. At its sole discretion, an employer may loan paid sick time to an
employee in advance of accrual by such employee. A decision by an
employer to deny a loan request by an employee shall not subject the
employer to any liability under this chapter.
A. Paid sick time shall be provided to an employee by an employer for:
(1) An employee's mental or physical illness, injury, or health
condition; an employee's need for medical diagnosis, care, or
treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition;
an employee's need for preventive medical care;
(2) Care of a family member with a mental or physical illness, injury, or
health condition; care of a family member who needs medical
diagnosis, care, or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury,
or health condition; care of a family member who needs preventive
medical care;
(3) Closure of the employee's place of business by order of a public
official due to a public health emergency or an employee's need to
care for a child whose school or place of care has been closed by
order of a public official due to a public health emergency, or care
for family member when it has been determined by the health
authorities having jurisdiction or by a health-care provider that the
family member's presence in the community would jeopardize the
health of others because of the family member's exposure to a
§ 230-3 TRENTON CODE § 230-4
226:590
§ 230-5. Exercise of rights protected; retaliation prohibited.
§ 230-6. Notice and posting of rights.
communicable disease, whether or not the family member has
actually contracted the communicable disease.
B. Nothing in this chapter prohibits an employer from requesting that an
employee confirm in writing following use of paid sick time that the
paid sick time was used for an authorized purpose under this chapter.
C. Where the need to use paid sick time is foreseeable, an employer may
require reasonable advance notice of the intention to use paid sick time.
In no event shall an employee be required to give notice more than
seven days prior to the date such sick time is to begin. Where such need
is not foreseeable, an employer may require an employee to provide
notice of the need for the use of sick time before the beginning of the
employee's work shift or workday, or, in cases such as emergencies
where advance notice is not possible, notice shall be provided by the
employee as soon as practicable.
D. An employer may not require, as a condition of an employee's taking
paid sick time, that the employee search for or find a replacement
worker to cover the hours during which the employee is absent.
E. Accrued sick time may be used in the smaller of hourly increments or
the smallest increment that the employer's payroll system uses to
account for absences or use of other time.
F. After an employee has used paid sick time for three consecutive days or
three consecutive instances, an employer may require an employee to
provide reasonable documentation that the time has been used for a
purpose covered by Subsection A. In this instance, the employer may
require documentation signed by a health-care professional indicating
that the paid sick time was necessary; however, an employer may not
require that the documentation explain the nature of the illness.
A. No person shall interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or the
attempt to exercise, any right protected under this chapter.
B. No person shall retaliate against an employee because the employee
has properly exercised rights protected under this chapter.
A. All employers shall give written notice to each employee at the
commencement of the employee's employment (or as soon as
practicable if the employee is already employed on the effective date of
this chapter) regarding the employee's rights under this chapter. Such
notice shall describe the right to paid sick time, the accrual rate and the
amount of paid sick time, and the terms of its use under this chapter;
the right to be free from retaliation for properly requesting use of paid
sick time; and the right to file a complaint or bring an action in
municipal court if paid sick time is denied by the employer or the
§ 230-4 SALES, SPECIAL § 230-6
226:591
§ 230-7. Fines; restitution of paid sick time.
Any employer who violates the provisions of this chapter is subject to a
fine as provided in §§ 1-17 and 1-18 of the Code of the City of Trenton. In
addition to the fines set forth above, any employer who violates this chapter
is subject to payment of restitution in the amount of any paid sick time
unlawfully withheld.
§ 230-8. Employer records.
Employers shall allow the Agency reasonable access to records and to
monitor compliance with the requirements of this chapter. An employer's
failure to maintain or retain adequate records documenting hours worked
by an employee and paid sick time taken by an employee creates a
rebuttable presumption that the employer has violated this chapter, absent
clear and convincing evidence otherwise.
§ 230-9. Enforcement; complaints; adjudication.
employee is retaliated against for requesting or taking paid sick time.
Such notice shall be in English and the primary language spoken by
that employee, so long as the primary language of that employee is also
the primary language of at least 10% of the employer's workforce.
B. Employers shall also display a poster in a conspicuous and accessible
place in each business establishment where employees are employed
containing the information required in Subsection A. The poster shall
be in English and in any language that is the first language of at least
10% of the employer's workforce.
C. The Agency can create and make available to employers notices and
posters in English and Spanish and any other languages deemed
appropriate by the Agency that contain the information required under
Subsection A for employers' use in complying with this section.
A. The Agency shall coordinate implementation and enforcement of this
chapter and promulgate appropriate guidelines or regulations for such
purposes.
B. The Agency shall have broad powers to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
C. In the event an allegation of noncompliance cannot be resolved by the
Agency with the employer, a complaint may be filed, by the Agency and/
or the employee as the complainant, in the Trenton Municipal Court for
any alleged violation of this chapter.
D. The Municipal Court shall have the power to adjudicate all allegations
of violations of this chapter and impose fines or penalties provided for
in this chapter, or any further relief deemed appropriate by the court,
including but not limited to restitution, reinstatement or injunctive or
declaratory relief.
§ 230-6 TRENTON CODE § 230-9
226:592
§ 230-10. Confidentiality and nondisclosure.
§ 230-11. Effect on more generous policies.
§ 230-12. Interpretation of provisions.
This chapter provides minimum requirements pertaining to paid sick time
and shall not be construed to preempt, limit, or otherwise affect the
applicability of any other law, regulation, requirement, policy, or standard
E. Submitting a complaint to the Agency is neither a prerequisite nor a bar
to bringing a private action.
F. The Agency shall have the power to do outreach to inform the residents
of the City of their rights under this chapter and to publicize online and
in other media the names of employers who violate this chapter.
A. An employer may not require disclosure of the specific details relating
to an employee's or an employee's family member's medical condition
as a condition of providing paid sick time under this chapter. If an
employer possesses health information about an employee or
employee's family member, such information shall be treated as
confidential and shall not be disclosed by the employer except to the
affected employee or with the permission of the affected employee.
B. The Agency shall maintain confidential the identity of any complaining
person unless disclosure of the identity is necessary for resolution of
the investigation. The Agency shall, to the extent practicable, notify a
complaining person that the Agency will be disclosing his or her identify
prior to such disclosure.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to discourage or prohibit an
employer from the adoption or retention of a paid sick time policy more
generous than the one required herein.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the obligation
of an employer to comply with any contract, collective bargaining
agreement, employment benefit plan, or other agreement providing
more generous paid sick time to an employee than required herein.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the rights of
public employees regarding paid sick time or use of paid sick time as
provided in the laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining to public
employees.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the rights
secured by S-2177, the New Jersey Security and Financial
Empowerment Act, for domestic violence victims in the City of Trenton.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted in a way that
would conflict with any State or Federal law pertaining to paid sick time
or employee benefits.
§ 230-9 SALES, SPECIAL § 230-12
226:593
that provides for greater accrual or use by employees of sick time, whether
paid or unpaid, or that extends other protections to employees.
§ 230-13. When effective.
This chapter will take effect 120 days following enactment, except that
in the case of employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement in
effect on the effective date prescribed herein, this chapter shall apply on the
date of the termination of such agreement unless the collective bargaining
agreement expressly waives the protections set forth in this chapter.
Chapter 233
SIGNS
§ 230-12 TRENTON CODE § 230-13
226:594
ARTICLE I
Placement of Advertising; Guide or Identification Signs
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-13 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 233-1. Vehicles used for advertising.
No vehicle used wholly or partially for exterior advertising shall be driven
or operated in or through any public street, avenue, or other public place
in the City, provided that business notices upon ordinary business vehicles
shall be permitted so long as such vehicles are engaged in the usual
business or regular work of the owner and are not used merely or mainly for
advertising; and provided, further, that vehicles participating in any public
demonstration may be used wholly or partially for exterior advertising
unless such advertising shall be libelous in its character. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed to prevent anyone who offers himself/herself for
public office or preferment, by election, from advertising his/her candidacy
on vehicles driven or operated in and through the public streets, avenues,
or other public places of the City.
§ 233-2. Advertisements on public sidewalks or roadways
prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall carry or display, by any means whatsoever, any
advertisement on any sidewalk or roadway of any street, avenue or other
public place in the City for the purpose of attracting public notice, provided
that nothing in this section shall apply to noncommercial advertisement
worn upon the person or carried or displayed in any public demonstration
which does not expose any person to hatred, contempt, ridicule or obloquy,
and which is not calculated to injure any person in his/her business or
occupation; nor shall it apply to any ordinary business advertisement on
the front or side of any building, or to any stationary sign now permitted
by law, or to the display of goods, wares or merchandise within two feet
of any house line, or to any political advertisement carried or displayed in
any political campaign, or to any advertisement carried or displayed upon
objects or devices used in connection with a public purpose, when such
form of advertisement or the use of such objects or devices has first been
approved by the City Council.
§ 233-3. Signs across public streets prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall place or string any sign, banner, streamer or other device
for advertising purposes over and across the whole or any portion of any
public street within the corporate limits of the City, except upon occasions
of public celebrations and exhibitions and upon the written permission of
the Police Director. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the erection of
advertising signs in conformity with the provisions of existing ordinances
not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 233-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 233-4
226:595
§ 233-4. Posting on property of another restricted.
No person shall post or cause to be posted any bill, placard, notice or
advertisement of any kind whatsoever upon any building, wall, fence or post
without the consent of the owner thereof, within or adjoining any street or
thoroughfare of the City.
§ 233-5. Guide or identification signs.
A. Findings.
(1) The City Council has determined that the health, safety and welfare
of the City can best be served by placing certain restrictions upon
the presence of guide or identification signs on public right-of-way
lines of streets in the City; and
(2) The City of Trenton is an urban city consisting of numerous streets
and multiple neighborhoods and districts; and
(3) Many of the visitors to the City have experienced much difficulty in
locating neighborhoods and/or districts within the City; and
(4) Many residents and merchants have notified the City
administration of the need to place guide or identification signs on
City sidewalks or roadways; and
(5) It is in the best interests of the City to encourage and facilitate the
travel of people visiting the City by installing guide or identification
signs at designated locations.
B. Guide or identification signs for neighborhoods and/or districts. Guide
or identification signs for neighborhoods and/or districts shall be
permitted to be installed on public right-of-way lines of streets in the
City, subject to the review and approval of the Director of the Division of
Traffic and Parking, and restricted to the following designated
locations:
Streets Location
South Broad Street and
Chestnut Avenue
In front of Pentecostal Assembly of
God Church
South Broad Street and
Liberty Street
In front of DeLorenzo Restaurant
South Broad Street and
Roebling Avenue
In front of 848 South Broad Street
(Puerto Rican Record Shop)
South Broad Street between
Cedar Lane and Capner
Avenue
In front of 1518 South Broad Street
§ 233-4 TRENTON CODE § 233-5
226:596
Streets Location
Cass Street between John
Fitchway and Lamberton
Street
In the grassy area, approximately 20
feet from a "No Stopping or
Standing" sign and an "Acorn"
streetlight Pole Number 14261, both
near Lamberton Street
Cedar Lane between
Chambers Street and Franklin
Street
Approximately 15 feet from Public
Service Electric and Gas Company
Pole Number 67866 TN
Chambers Street between
Liberty Street and Morris
Avenue
In front of 1036 Chambers Street
South Clinton Avenue and
Greenwood Avenue
Corner of the intersection, near the
big brown stone, and in front of
"fire" box facing Greenwood Avenue
South Clinton Avenue and
Hamilton Avenue
In front of Friendly Pharmacy Store
South Clinton Avenue and
Liberty Street
In front of Chambers Chiropractic
Center
South Clinton Avenue and
Roebling Avenue
Diagonally from Clinton Hardware
Plumbing & Electric Supplies
South Clinton Avenue
between Cedar Lane and
Capner Avenue
In front of 1924 South Clinton
Avenue
Greenwood Avenue and
Chestnut Avenue
Corner of the intersection, in front
of "fire" box
Hamilton Avenue, across from
715 Hamilton Avenue
A sign reading "KNIGHTS of
COLUMBUS - TRENTON COUNCIL
NO. 355"
Hamilton Avenue and
Chestnut Avenue
In front of 379 Hamilton Avenue
Hamilton Avenue between
South Logan Avenue and
Cleveland Avenue
In front of 1284 Hamilton Avenue
Liberty Street; in front of
1440
A sign reading "KNIGHTS of
COLUMBUS - TRENTON COUNCIL
NO. 355"
Liberty Street between South
Olden Avenue and Park
Avenue
In front of 2078 Liberty Street
South Olden Avenue between
Hamilton Avenue and Hobart
Avenue
In front of Thunder Video
entertainment store
§ 233-5 SALES, SPECIAL § 233-5
226:597
§ 233-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
C. Dimension of lighting restrictions. The height dimension and lighting of
the sign shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) The size of the sign shall not exceed a dimension of 24 inches in
height and 18 inches in width.
(2) The sign shall be placed on a freestanding pole at least seven feet
above the sidewalk.
(3) The sign shall not be lit, but may contain reflective lettering to
assist with nighttime visibility.
D. Requirements prior to installation.
(1) Written approval. A sign may not be installed without prior written
approval from the Director of the Division of Traffic and Parking,
certifying that the sign does not impair visibility or present a traffic
hazard.
(2) Notice to adjoining owners; hearing before City Council. Prior to
installing the sign, the applicant shall serve certified notice to all
property owners within 50 feet of the proposed sign location,
notifying them that a public hearing is to be held before City
Council to approve the installation of the sign. This certified notice
shall be distributed at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
Notice shall also be provided to the occupants of these properties.
E. Maintenance of sign. If the sign falls into disrepair or is found to pose
any type of hazard to pedestrians or drivers, the Director of the Division
of Traffic and Parking may order the immediate removal of the sign and
present an ordinance to City Council recommending deletion of this
sign from the designated location list.
§ 233-5 TRENTON CODE § 233-6
226:598
ARTICLE II
Campaign and Special Event Advertising
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 3-28 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 233-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPAIGN MATERIAL — Any circular, handbill, banner, card, statement,
advertisement, poster, printed sticker, painted words or material having
reference to any primary, general or special election or to the adoption or
rejection of any public question at any general, primary or special election.
PERSON — Any individual, candidate, corporation, political committee,
citizen's committee, partnership, organization, association or any
committee or group of persons.
PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC FACILITY — Any property owned by the United
States, the State of New Jersey, the County of Mercer, the City of Trenton or
any subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, traffic signal
poles, traffic signal facilities, utility poles, parking meters and any other
types of poles, trees, United States mail receptacles, litter receptacles,
benches, bus shelters, vacant buildings, fences bordering vacant lots, public
buildings, streets or sidewalks, or any object affixed to or placed upon the
streets or sidewalks for public purposes or for the use of the public.
SPECIAL EVENT MATERIAL — Any sign, bulletin, poster or other written or
printed advertising having reference to a gathering, meeting, show or other
event of a public, quasi-public or private nature.
§ 233-8. Painted signs.
§ 233-9. Deadline for removal of material.
Any campaign or special event material posted in a lawful manner shall be
removed by the person who posted that material not later than 14 days
subsequent to the event or election to which it refers, unless the owner
or tenant of the property upon which it is posted expressly desires the
continued presence of the material and so notifies the City Clerk, in writing,
before the expiration of such period.
A. No person shall paint or cause to be painted any words or symbols upon
any public place or public facility.
B. No campaign material shall be affixed upon any public place or public
facility.
C. No special event material shall be affixed upon any public place or
public facility without the prior approval of the City Clerk.
D. No campaign material shall be painted or affixed upon any private
property, private fence or private tree without the consent of the owner.
§ 233-7 SALES, SPECIAL § 233-10
226:599
§ 233-10. Display of name and address on face of sign required.
All campaign material and special event material shall bear upon the face
thereof a statement of the name and address of the person or persons who
caused the material to be posted.
§ 233-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 233-12. Enforcement.
A. The person or persons responsible for the removal of material posted in
violation of any provision of this article shall be liable to the penalties
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty for each day or part
thereof that the material remains unlawfully posted following the
receipt of notice of any unlawful posting, unless the material is removed
within 48 hours of the receipt of notice, weekends and legal holidays
excluded.
B. Notice of an unlawful posting may be provided by any police officer or
person seeking to enforce this article by means of certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the person who posted the material or
by personal service of notice, in written or oral fashion, to any person
above the age of 14 years at the address or responding to telephone
calls at the address, giving the description and location of the unlawful
posting.
C. It shall be the burden of the prosecution in each case to establish the
receipt of notice by the person responsible.
A. In addition to the members of the Police Department, the Division of
Sanitation shall be charged with the enforcement of this article.
B. In addition to the institution of proceedings in Municipal Court to
prosecute violations hereof, any police officer or sanitation employee
shall be empowered to remove from any public place or public facility of
the City any material unlawfully posted thereon.
§ 233-10 TRENTON CODE § 233-12
226:600
ARTICLE III
Promotion of Safe Passage for Public Use of Commercial
Establishments
[Adopted 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-5374]
§ 233-13. Posting of signs.
§ 233-14. Violations and penalties.
Persons found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the following:
§ 233-15. Provision of signage; replacement signage.
The above signage shall be provided by the City Clerk's office to all current
business license holders. Replacement signage shall be given at a cost of $5
per sign.
§ 233-16. Severability.
If any sentence, paragraph or section of this article of the Code of the
City of Trenton, or the application thereof to any persons or circumstances
shall be judged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, or if by
legislative action any sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall lose
its force and effect, such judgment or action shall not affect, impair or void
the remainder of this article.
§ 233-17. When effective.
This article shall become effective 60 days after final passage by Council.
A. All stores, commercial and retail establishments are strongly
encouraged to place signage in all places of public accommodation,
clearly and conspicuously posted, stating the following: "It is unlawful
and a violation of the State Criminal Code of New Jersey to obstruct
safe passage by commission of the following petty disorderly offenses:
N.J.S.A. 2C:33-7 (Obstruction); N.J.S.A. 2C:33-4 (Harassment); and
N.J.S.A. 2C:18-3 (Criminal Defiant Trespass)."
B. All persons committing the above unlawful acts will be subject to arrest,
prosecution, and punishment and the penalties in § 233-14.
A. For a first offense: a fine no less than $250;
B. For a second offense: a fine no less than $500;
C. For a third offense: a fine no less than $1,000 and/or 90 days in jail.
74.Editor’s Note: While this ordinance was adopted by the City Council on said date, it was
vetoed by the Mayor and was passed notwithstanding the veto by the Mayor on
12-19-2013.
§ 233-13 SALES, SPECIAL § 233-18
226:601
§ 233-18. Notice.
The City Clerk is to ensure that all current business license holders are
provided with a written copy of this article prior to the effective date.
§ 233-18 TRENTON CODE § 233-18
226:602
ARTICLE IV
Off-Site Signage of State-Licensed Medical Marijuana Businesses
[Adopted 10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-48]
§ 233-19. Purpose.
It is the intent of this article to place reasonable restrictions upon the
off-site advertisement of medical marijuana businesses and products, as
a reasonable and necessary means to promote and protect the general
welfare of the children and minors of the City of Trenton.
§ 233-20. Off-site advertising signage limited.
A. No state-licensed medical marijuana business shall place or cause to be
placed any off-site advertising signage in a prohibited area within the
City of Trenton as defined by this article, which advertises the business
and/or directs the public toward the business and/or promotes
consumption of commercial cannabis products.
B. No advertising signage shall be placed in a prohibited area within the
City of Trenton, as defined by this article, advertising and/or directing
patrons to any state-licensed medical marijuana business operation,
and/or promoting consumption of commercial cannabis products.
C. As used within this article, a "prohibited area" includes:
(1) Any area in which, under state law, any state-licensed medical
marijuana business would be prohibited from operating based upon
its proximity to a school, church, place of religious worship, park,
day care, drug rehabilitation center, or similar facility as may be
provided for under state law.
(2) Any area in which, under state and/or federal law, the sale of
intoxicating beverages is prohibited based upon its proximity to a
school, church, place of religious worship, park, day care, drug
rehabilitation center, or similar facility as may be provided for
under state or federal law.
§ 233-19 SALES, SPECIAL § 233-20
226:603
Chapter 237
SLAUGHTERHOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Offal collection — See Ch. 248, Art. III. Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 237-1. Finding of fact.
The following matters are hereby found on facts:
§ 237-2. Slaughter of animals regulated.
No person shall slaughter animals for food within the City except at a
slaughterhouse licensed under this chapter and in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 237-3. License and payment of fee required.
No person shall operate an establishment at which animals are killed or
the carcasses of animals processed for use as food, commonly known as
a slaughterhouse, without having first obtained a license and paid the
required license fee.
§ 237-4. Application.
Application for a license shall be made to the Division of Health upon forms
to be supplied by it. The applicant shall provide all information which the
Division of Health may reasonably require.
§ 237-5. Inspection.
Prior to the issuance of any license, the premises at which the licensed
activity is to be conducted shall be inspected by the Chief Veterinarian,
who shall make an inspection within a reasonable time after the filing of
the application and shall report his/her findings, in writing, to the Division
of Health. No license shall be issued unless the Chief Veterinarian finds
that the premises are in a clean and sanitary condition and conform to all
applicable state laws and regulations.
A. There exist certain laws of the State of New Jersey and regulations
promulgated under the authority of those laws relative to the slaughter
of animals for food.
B. In general, these laws and regulations are adequate to protect the
health and safety of the people of the City of Trenton; however, due to
shortages of state inspectors and other state personnel, these laws and
regulations are not being adequately enforced.
§ 233-20 TRENTON CODE § 237-6
237:604
§ 237-6. License fees.
§ 237-7. Operation in conformity with law required.
All slaughterhouses licensed under this article shall be operated in strict
conformity with all applicable state laws and regulations. Failure to so
operate shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license.
§ 237-7.1. Hours of operation. [Added 4-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-031;
amended 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-82]
No slaughterhouse located in a residential zone shall slaughter animals
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday. The Monday through Friday limitation shall not apply on the
holidays of Yom Kippur, Eid and Ramadan.
§ 237-7.2. Delivery truck waiting time. [Added 4-6-2006 by Ord. No.
06-031; amended 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-82]
In residential zones, trucks delivering animals for slaughter must complete
each delivery within 45 minutes of arrival.
§ 237-7.3. Prohibited discharge of waste. [Added 4-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-031; amended 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-82]
As set forth in § 309-28, no slaughterhouse shall discharge any prohibited
materials, including, but not necessarily limited to, whole blood, hair and
fleshings, or entrails into any storm sewer or sanitary sewer.
§ 237-7.4. Noise. [Added 4-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-031]
In addition to the criteria set forth in Chapter 167,75 no slaughterhouse
located in a residential zone shall permit any noise to occur that is likely
to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others. This includes, but is not necessarily limited to, noise that is
clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building.
A. The fees for a slaughterhouse license shall be:
(1) Slaughterhouses processing not more than 1,000 animals per year:
$50.
(2) Slaughterhouses processing more than 1,000, but less than 5,000
animals per year: $300.
(3) Slaughterhouses processing more than 5,000 animals per year:
$600.
B. A license shall not be transferred to another person or premises.
75.Editor's Note: Chapter 167, Noise.
§ 237-6 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 237-8
237:605
§ 237-8. Killing of underage animals prohibited.
No calf less than four weeks old, no pig less than five weeks old, and no
lamb less than eight weeks old shall be killed for human food within the City.
§ 237-9. Quarantining of animals.
§ 237-10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 248
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 38.
Littering — See Ch. 150.
Nuisances — See Ch. 171.
Slaughterhouses — See Ch. 237.
A. It shall be the duty of every inspector or other officer of the Division of
Health, when any cattle, pigs or lambs shall be found in a diseased,
overheated, feverish or exhausted condition, or when any calves, pigs
or lambs shall be found within the ages respectively named in § 237-8,
which animals are intended to be used for human food, to immediately
attach to any such diseased, overheated, feverish, exhausted or
underaged animal, or to the pen or stall in which it may be confined, a
label or tag on which shall be written or printed the words
"Quarantined by the Division of Health, Trenton, New Jersey." The
inspector or other officer shall immediately report such quarantine to
the Division.
B. No person other than an inspector or other officer of the Division of
Health shall destroy, deface, conceal, interfere with or remove any label
or tag so attached to any animal, stall or pen. No person shall remove
any quarantined animal or kill any such animal, except in the presence
of an inspector of the Division of Health, or use the same for human
food or sell any such animal without the permission of the Division. No
persons shall interfere with, hinder or prevent any inspector or other
officer of the Division of Health in performing the duties imposed by
this chapter.
§ 237-8 TRENTON CODE § 237-10
248:606
ARTICLE I
Garbage Collection
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as §§ 16-1 through 16-9 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 248-1. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this article, unless the context indicates
otherwise shall have the meanings given them in Chapter 150, Littering,
§ 150-2, or as herein defined.
§ 248-2. Preparation for collection.
A. Suitable approved containers for garbage pickups. For the purpose of
this section, a suitable approved container for one- or two-family
dwellings shall mean a galvanized or plastic garbage can with handles
and a tight-fitting cover, with a capacity of from 10 to 32 gallons
weighing no more than 50 pounds when filled, or plastic bags properly
tied. A suitable approved container for multiple dwellings housing three
families or more may require a front-end-load container with cover and
capacity of up to eight cubic yards. Approval of the size and number of
required containers per dwelling will be subject to the approval of the
Director of Public Works. [Amended 1-6-2001 by Ord. No. 03-8]
B. Municipal waste materials. Municipal waste materials shall be collected
by the Department of Public Works, if properly stored in suitable
approved containers or separate receptacles.
C. Garbage, domestic. Domestic garbage intended for collection shall be
drained of all free liquid, shall be wrapped or sacked, then placed and
stored in an approved container.
D. Garbage, commercial. Commercial garbage intended for collection
from eating establishments such as clubs, restaurants, institutions,
grocery stores and other food handling establishments need not be
wrapped if picked up daily. Undrained garbage of liquid or semi-liquid
nature shall not be collected, whether in approved containers or not. All
storage must be in a proper approved container and maintained in a
sanitary condition.
E. Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored in with garbage to utilize one
container to its maximum of 50 pounds full weight. Newspapers,
magazines or collapsible cardboard boxes or containers may be set out
in securely tied bundles, provided that no one bundle shall exceed 50
pounds in weight.
F. Bulk rubbish. Rubbish which is of such bulk that it cannot be put in the
prescribed containers shall be securely tied in compact bundles not to
exceed 50 pounds in weight, and placed in a location convenient for
collection. Large bulky items, such as refrigerators, stoves, beds,
§ 248-1 SOLID WASTE § 248-2
248:607
crates, etc., shall be reported to the Division of Sanitation and
arrangements made for a special pickup.
G. Dead animals. Dead animals shall be collected without charge upon
notice to the Division of Sanitation or the Bureau of Animal Control of
the Division of Health. For animals larger than a dog, a minimum fee of
$5 shall be charged. A charge shall be made for the collection of
animals from hospitals, kennels and the like.
H. Shrubs, clippings, rakings. Branches, clippings, shrubs and rakings in
excess of 24 inches but not greater than four feet in length, and not in
excess of 50 pounds in weight, may be placed at the curb for pickup if
securely tied in bundles so as to prevent their being scattered, carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
or private place or premises.
I. Trees, stumps, commercial rubbish and construction waste.
Arrangements for disposal of trees, tree stumps or commercial rubbish
and construction waste shall be made by the owner, occupant or person
in control of the premises affected, either personally or by agreement
with a landscape contractor or other worker engaged in work resulting
in such accumulation.
J. Leaves. For the period between September 1 and December 31 each
year, leaves shall not be combined with residential or commercial waste
which is to be collected by the City collection system. During this
period, leaves may be disposed of in one of two methods:
(1) Leaves may be placed loose at the curbline in front of a property
owner's own property; or
(2) Leaves may be bagged and placed at the curb only on those days so
designated in each neighborhood by the Director of Public Works.
K. Christmas trees. Christmas trees shall be placed at the curb for
collection only on those days so designated in each neighborhood by the
Director of Public Works.
L. Separation of recyclable commercial waste.76 Effective September 5,
1989, or the effective date of mandatory residential recycling as
established by the Mercer County Improvement Authority, whichever is
later, it shall be a condition of municipal collection and shall be a
requirement of this article that any commercial or institutional waste
set out curbside or otherwise for municipal collection be divided into
separately contained or bundled materials as follows:
(1) Corrugated cardboard. Corrugated cardboard shall be secured in
bundles not to exceed 30 pounds each and shall not be contained in
plastic bags.
76.Editor's Note: See Art. II, Recycling, of this chapter.
§ 248-2 TRENTON CODE § 248-2
248:608
§ 248-3. Provision and use of containers.
(2) Container glass. Container glass (i.e. bottles, mirrors, jars, drinking
glass), not including ceramics, window pane and light bulbs, shall
be contained in a reusable metal or plastic occupant- or ownersupplied
container.
(3) Aluminum cans. Aluminum cans shall be contained in a reusable
metal or plastic container.
(4) Plastic containers. Plastic soda, milk, water and laundry bottles and
plastic motor oil containers.
A. One- or two-family dwellings. A proper and sufficient number of
approved containers, as herein defined, for the storage of garbage and
rubbish between collections shall be provided by each family residing in
a single-family dwelling or in a two-family dwelling. It shall be the duty
of the occupants to maintain such containers in good repair, in a clean
and satisfactory condition and to store rubbish and garbage properly
therein. [Amended 1-6-2001 by Ord. No. 03-8]
B. Multiple dwellings. In the case of a building housing three families or
more, the owner, lessee or agent of the premises shall provide a
sufficient number of suitable approved containers, as herein defined,
for the storage of garbage and rubbish. In the case of buildings housing
75 units or more the owner, lessee or agent of the premises shall
provide front-end-load containers and maintain them in good repair and
in a clean and satisfactory condition. [Amended 1-6-2001 by Ord. No.
03-8]
C. Commercial and nonresidential establishments. The proprietor,
manager, agent or person in charge of a commercial establishment,
professional office, church or any other premises where occupancy is
nonresidential in nature shall provide proper and sufficient approved
containers as defined herein.
D. Broken and illegal receptacles. After 10 days' written notice has been
given to the responsible party by the Health Officer or his/her duly
authorized agent or agents to dispose of defective or illegal waste
containers, the condemned containers may be collected as rubbish by
the Department of Public Works.
E. Permit for servicing of large movable receptacles. Where the need
exists for the use of receptacles with a capacity of more than 32 gallons
at any establishment, these receptacles may be serviced by the City
upon application to the Director of Public Works for a permit to use one
or more large movable receptacles, and payment of the required permit
and service fees. All such receptacles must be located on private
property, accessible and equipped for handling and pickup by motorized
equipment; must be watertight, constructed of metal or plastic; cleaned
and sanitized as needed by the collection agency, and replaced by the
§ 248-2 SOLID WASTE § 248-3
248:609
§ 248-4. Building plans for storage of refuse.
All plans for new buildings and major alterations to buildings relevant to
the proper storage of garbage and refuse as defined in § 150-1 of Chapter
150, Littering, and § 248-2A of this article shall be referred to the Division
of Health for review and approval.
§ 248-5. Collection and disposal charges.
§ 248-6. Conditions for collection.
The collection of all municipal waste is made conditional to the observance
of all provisions of this article and is subject to weather and other conditions
beyond the control of the Department of Public Works.
§ 248-7. Scavenging.
No person shall overturn, spill, scatter, root through or pull apart any
garbage or refuse set out for collection, nor shall any person remove
anything from any receptacle, bundle of garbage or refuse set out for
collection.
§ 248-8. Collection schedules.
same type of receptacle if removed for emptying. The Director of Public
Works shall have the authority to designate the type and location
of such receptacles and must approve plans to construct a proper
base from which the receptacles shall be serviced. A permit shall be
issued only after payment of a fee of $5. A service fee based on time
and materials shall be charged for maintaining these receptacles in a
sanitary condition.
A. Domestic waste. Domestic waste shall be collected by the Director of
Public Works according to §§ 248-2A and B without charge, except that
waste material scattered on the ground or placed in other than suitable
approved containers may be classed as commercial waste and may be
assessed for the time and material used in its collection, plus 25%
overhead.
B. Residential buildings containing 10 or more units. The City shall not be
responsible for the collection of domestic waste from residential
buildings containing 10 or more units. The owner of any such building
shall provide for domestic waste collection through a private collection
company.
C. Commercial waste. The Director of Public Works, by resolution, shall
establish, from time to time, the rates which shall be charged for the
disposal of all commercial garbage, commercial rubbish or other wastes
delivered to a City-operated disposal system or other disposal system
paid by the City but operated by another contractor.
§ 248-3 TRENTON CODE § 248-8
248:610
§ 248-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 1-6-2001
by Ord. No. 03-8]
A. Garbage and trash. Domestic garbage and trash shall be collected in
accordance with a definite schedule announced by the Department of
Public Works.
B. Refuse. Refuse, other than garbage and trash, shall be collected in
accordance with a definite schedule to be announced one week in
advance by the Department of Public Works.
C. Recyclable waste. Collection of recyclable domestic waste and
recyclable commercial and industrial waste shall be in accordance with
a designated schedule announced by the City's Recycling Coordinator.
D. Set-out time. All approved containers must be placed for pickup, curb
or alley, not earlier than 10:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day of
collection, but not later than 7:00 a.m. collection day. Location of
approved containers will be subject to the approval of authorized
enforcement personnel of the Department of Public Works, Division of
Solid Waste Management. [Amended 1-6-2001 by Ord. No. 03-8]
E. Legal holidays. When a regular collection falls on a legal holiday, refuse
and garbage shall not be set out by the owner, operator or occupant
until the next regularly scheduled collection, unless announced
otherwise through the newspaper or other form of media including
public announcement flyers. [Amended 1-6-2001 by Ord. No. 03-8]
F. Owner responsibilities. Upon occupancy of a dwelling, the owner shall
supply each new tenant and all present tenants with a schedule of
approved garbage and rubbish collection days and maintain a signed
record of such notification for every rental unit on a yearly basis.
[Added 1-6-2001 by Ord. No. 03-8]
G. Prohibited collection hours. It shall be unlawful to collect garbage and
trash or refuse of any nature, domestic, commercial or otherwise, in any
location within the City of Trenton, regardless of zone, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
H. Public and private places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or
upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, except in
authorized receptacles for collection or in official municipal disposal
areas.77 [Added 1-6-2001 by Ord. No. 03-8]
A. Enforcement. The Director of Public Works is authorized and
empowered to exercise the powers under this article, and to appoint, fix
the duties of and delegate any of his/her functions and powers under
this article to such officers and agents as (s)he may designate,
including, Sanitation Superintendent and sanitation inspectors to issue
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Littering.
§ 248-8 SOLID WASTE § 248-9
248:611
summonses for this article and related chapters within the jurisdiction
of the Municipal Court.
B. Penalty. Any person violating an order issued by a Solid Waste
Management official, or a provision of this article adopted for the
control of the disposal of solid waste, shall be subject to the penalty
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 248-9 TRENTON CODE § 248-9
248:612
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 16-10 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 248-10. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the New Jersey
Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act, the Mercer
County Recycling System, as set forth in Ordinance No. 88-33 passed by the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Mercer, State of New Jersey,
as amended by County Ordinance 89-19, and as may be further amended
from time to time, and as more fully set forth in the amendments to the
Mercer County Solid Waste Management Plan detailing its recycling plan.
§ 248-11. Adoption of county program.
The City of Trenton hereby adopts the Mercer County Recycling Program as
its official municipal recycling program.
§ 248-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE ALUMINUM CONTAINERS — Metal aluminum containers of
the type commonly used for the packaging of beverages and food products.
ACCEPTABLE BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Those cans with side and bottom
construction made of steel with top construction made of aluminum, with
the exception of bimetal containers used for the packaging of nonfood or
nonbeverage products.
ACCEPTABLE GLASS CONTAINERS — Any clear, amber or green glass
container of the type commonly used for food or beverage products, but
shall not include glass containers used for nonfood or nonbeverage
products, and shall not include light bulbs, plate glass, safety glass,
mirrored glass, ceramic or china.
ACCEPTABLE PAPER — Newspaper, associated inserts, magazines and
corrugated cardboard.
ACCEPTABLE PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Any polyethylene terephthalate
(PET) and any high-density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic container
commonly used for beverages, and also includes other plastic containers
bearing the stamp "HDPE 2" on the bottom, but does not include containers
used for nonbeverage items.
ACCEPTABLE TIN-PLATE STEEL CONTAINERS — Metal containers of the
type commonly used for packaging of food or beverage products, but does
not include containers used for the packaging of nonfood or nonbeverage
products.
BATTERIES — Groups of two or more cells connected together to furnish
electric current.
§ 248-10 SOLID WASTE § 248-12
248:613
BEVERAGE — Alcoholic beverages, including beer or other malt beverages,
liquor, wine, vermouth and sparkling wine and nonalcoholic beverages,
including milk, fruit juice, mineral water, soda water and similar
nonalcoholic carbonated and noncarbonated drinks intended for human
consumption.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those businesses which constitute
wholesale, retail or service establishments such as restaurants, stores,
markets, theatres, hotels, warehouses and offices.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Corrugated containers having liners of
either test liner, jute or kraft.
COUNTY RECYCLING PROGRAM — The Mercer County collection
programs as more fully described in the Mercer County Recycling Plan and
amendments.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
unless the context indicates otherwise.
GRASS — Plants used as ground cover in lawns and landscape applications
and clippings from such applications.
IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY — The Mercer County Improvement
Authority.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those businesses which include
manufacturing, industrial, research and development entities.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those entities constituting schools,
hospitals, research institutions and public entities.
MAGAZINES — All weekly, monthly or other consumer periodicals and
glossy newspaper inserts.
MULTIFAMILY COMPLEX — Any building or structure containing two or
more independent housing units not receiving municipal curbside waste
disposal services prior to January 1, 1990, in those municipalities which
provide directly by contract for its own waste disposal through some
intermediate instrumentalities other than the owner, such as a
condominium association, homeowners' association, apartment complex
owner, superintendent or manager.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade paper, fine paper, bond paper, offset paper,
Xerographic paper, mimeograph paper, duplicator paper and related types
of cellulosic material containing not less than 10% by weight or volume of
noncellulosic material such as laminates, binders, coatings or saturates.
PAPER — All paper grades, inducing, but not limited to, newspaper, office
paper, duplicator paper and related types of cellulosic material containing
not less than 10% by weight or volume of noncellulosic material such as
laminates, binders, coatings or saturates.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste and which may be collected, separated, processed
§ 248-12 TRENTON CODE § 248-12
248:614
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material or
products.
RECYCLING — The activity whereby a secondary material introduced as a
raw material into a process in which it is transformed into a new product in
such a manner that its original identity is essentially lost.
RECYCLING ACT — The New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source
Separation and Recycling Act, P.L. 1987, Chapter 102, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.1
et seq. as amended.78
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials resulting
from industrial, commercial or agricultural operations, and from domestic
and community activities, and shall include all other waste materials
including liquids, except for solid animal and vegetable waste collected by
swine producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The act of segregating recyclable materials from
residential, commercial and institutional solid waste by the generator
thereof for the purpose of collection, disposition and recycling.
TIRE — A continuous solid or pneumatic rubber cushion encircling a wheel,
usually consisting, when pneumatic, of an external rubber and fabric cover
that contains and protects from injury an air-filled inner tube or area for use
on a motor vehicle.
USED MOTOR OIL — Refined petroleum from motor vehicles, lawn mowers
or other machinery which can be re-refined into petroleum products.
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, freezers, washers, dryers and other
appliances of steel construction.
§ 248-13. Residential recycling.
A. All residents, including residents of multifamily complexes, shall
recycle or cause to be recycled the following categories of recyclable
materials:
(1) Acceptable paper.
(2) Acceptable glass containers.
(3) Acceptable aluminum containers.
(4) Acceptable plastic containers.
(5) Acceptable tin-plate steel containers.
(6) Acceptable bimetal containers.
(7) Tires.
78.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 2002, c. 128. See now N.J.S.A. 13:1E-213 et seq., the Clean
Communities and Recycling Grant Act.
§ 248-12 SOLID WASTE § 248-13
248:615
§ 248-14. Commercial, industrial and institutional recycling.
(8) Vehicle batteries.
(9) White goods.
(10) Leaves.
(11) Grass.
(12) Used motor oil.
(13) Ferrous automotive scrap.
(14) Batteries.
B. All residents, including residents of multifamily complexes, shall
separate the following items on designated recycling collection days, or
in collection containers provided for recycling, and such additional days
as designated by the Improvement Authority: acceptable paper,
acceptable glass containers, acceptable aluminum containers,
acceptable plastic containers, acceptable tin-plate steel containers and
acceptable bimetal containers. Private contractors servicing
multifamily complexes within the City shall collect for recycling the
same materials collected by the Improvement Authority.
C. All residents, including residents of multifamily complexes, shall
recycle tires, vehicle batteries, white goods, leaves, grass, used motor
oil and ferrous automotive scrap and batteries in the manner
prescribed by the Department of Public Works. The Recycling
Coordinator shall advise residents not less than once every six months
of the manner in which these items are to be recycled.
D. The landlord, building owner, property manager and/or private
association of multifamily complexes shall be jointly responsible to
ensure that recycling collection services are provided to residents of
their complexes and that sufficient space is provided for the collection
and storage of recyclable materials designated for collection.
E. The landlord, building owner, property manager and/or private
association of multifamily complexes shall be jointly responsible for
informing both current and new residents, at a minimum annually, of
the manner, time and place for collection of recyclable materials.
F. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit residents from
donating or selling designated recyclable materials to any person,
whether operating for profit or not-for-profit, provided that the
receiving person may not perform curbside collection of designated
recyclable materials unless authorized by the Improvement Authority to
do so.
A. All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments shall
recycle, or cause to be recycled, the following categories of recyclables:
§ 248-13 TRENTON CODE § 248-14
248:616
§ 248-15. Ownership of recyclable materials.
(1) Acceptable paper.
(2) Acceptable glass containers.
(3) Acceptable aluminum containers.
(4) Acceptable plastic containers.
(5) Acceptable tin-plate steel containers.
(6) Acceptable bimetal containers.
(7) Tires.
(8) Vehicle batteries.
(9) White goods.
(10) Leaves.
(11) Grass.
(12) Used motor oil.
(13) Ferrous automotive scrap.
(14) Batteries.
B. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall have the right to
exempt persons occupying commercial and institutional premises from
the source separation requirements of this section if those persons have
otherwise provided for the recycling of recyclable materials designated
in the recycling plan from solid waste generated at those premises.
C. The Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture shall provide for the collection and recycling of designated
materials in all public parks.
D. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall provide for the
collection and recycling of designated materials in all municipal public
buildings.
A. All recyclable materials placed at the curb or street side or in
designated dropoff areas in multifamily complexes for collection by the
Improvement Authority shall be considered the sole property of the
Improvement Authority.
B. All recyclable materials collected from multifamily complexes by
private contractors shall be considered the sole property of the private
contractor.
§ 248-14 SOLID WASTE § 248-16
248:617
§ 248-16. Reports by private contractors.
Private contractors providing recycling service to multifamily complexes
shall provide monthly reports to the Director of the Department of Public
Works showing the total tonnages recycled from multifamily complexes.
§ 248-17. Municipal contracts for solid waste collection and/or
disposal.
The City shall enter into no contract for solid waste collection and/or
disposal unless the Director of the Department of Public Works certifies that
the contract is consistent with this article and with the recycling plan.
§ 248-18. Leaf collection system for residential premises.
§ 248-19. Tire collection.
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall accept tires generated
from residential premises at 500 Brunswick Avenue, Trenton, New Jersey.
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall dispose of all tires so
collected in a manner consistent with the recycling plan.
§ 248-20. Periodic notification to premises regarding recycling.
§ 248-21. Periodic review of Master Plan.
A. All residents, including residents of multifamily complexes, shall
source-separate leaves from solid waste generated at those premises,
and, unless such leaves are stored for recycling, composting or
mulching by the generator, shall place the leaves for collection in the
manner provided below.
B. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall collect leaves
generated from residential premises from September 1 to December 31
of each year. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall
dispose of all leaves so collected in a manner consistent with the
recycling plan.
A. The Recycling Coordinator, at least once every six months, shall notify
all persons occupying residential, commercial and institutional
premises within these municipal boundaries of recycling opportunities,
collection schedules, the source-separation requirements of this article
and of the recycling plan and other aspects of recycling.
B. The Director of the Department of Public Works, at least once annually,
shall inform the Improvement Authority, in writing, of the manner in
which such notification was given.
A. At least once every 36 months after January 21, 1994, the Planning
Board shall conduct a review and make necessary revisions to the
Master Plan and development regulations adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.,79 which revisions shall reflect changes in state, county
§ 248-16 TRENTON CODE § 248-21
248:618
§ 248-22. Recycling of construction and demolition debris.
All construction permits, demolition permits and road opening permits shall
specify the quantity of materials to be recycled, where they will be taken
and how they will be handled.
§ 248-23. Enforcement.
The Mercer County Improvement Authority shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this article.
§ 248-24. Violations and penalties.
and City policies and objectives concerning the collection, disposition
and recycling of designated recycling materials.
B. Any revisions of the Master Plan made pursuant to this section shall
include provisions for the collection, disposition and recycling of
recyclable materials designated in this article and for the collection,
disposition and recycling of designated recyclable materials within any
development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of singlefamily
housing or 25 or more units of multifamily housing and any
commercial or industrial development proposal for the utilization of
1,000 square feet or more of land.
C. The Director of the Department of Housing and Economic Development
shall notify all commercial, industrial and institutional establishments
making application to the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the requirements of the recycling plan and of this article.
A. Any resident of this City who is found to have violated the provisions of
this article shall be subject to the following procedures and penalties:
(1) Three warnings with cessation in collection of garbage containing
recyclable materials until recyclables are removed from garbage;
thereafter
(2) Penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, per
day of violation, depending upon the extent and circumstances of
the violation.
B. Any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment which is found
to have violated the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
following procedures and penalties:
(1) Three warnings with cessation in collection of garbage containing
recyclable materials until recyclables are removed from garbage;
thereafter
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 248-21 SOLID WASTE § 248-24
248:619
(2) Penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, per
day of violation, depending upon the extent and circumstances of
the violation and the size of the violating establishment.
§ 248-24 TRENTON CODE § 248-24
248:620
ARTICLE III
Offal Collection
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 9-18 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 248-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFAL — Dead animals or parts thereof, market refuse, refuse from
slaughterhouses and other flesh.
§ 248-26. License required.
A license for the collection of offal shall be obtained from the Division of
Health.
§ 248-27. Regulations.
Collection of offal shall be governed by the following regulations:
§ 248-28. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Barrels must be delivered clean and free of all accumulated fats and
debris. After each use the barrel is to be steam cleaned inside and out.
Each licensee shall paint an identifying color on each barrel or stencil
his/her name or other identifying mark on the same.
B. Trucks must be thoroughly washed down after each day's use and
otherwise kept in as clean and sanitary condition as circumstances will
permit.
C. Offal shall be transported only in a closed body truck or in an open
truck with the entire body covered with a clean tarpaulin. In the case of
a closed body truck with no rear door, the rear opening must also be
draped with a clean tarpaulin.
D. The Division of Health shall have the power to make any additional
regulations governing the collection of offal as are necessary to protect
the public health, provided that they are not in conflict with this article.
§ 248-25 SOLID WASTE § 248-28
248:621
Chapter 252
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS AND ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street vendors — See Ch. 206, Art. III. Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 248-28 TRENTON CODE § 248-28
248:622
ARTICLE I
Special Improvement District
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 2-26 of the General Revised Ordinances]
§ 252-1. Findings.
§ 252-2. Creation of Special Improvement District.
There is hereby created and designated within the City of Trenton a Special
Improvement District to be known as "Trenton Downtown Association, Inc."
comprising assessed parcels and properties hereinafter designated by
street address and tax lot and block number, and including all public streets
and sidewalks within the boundaries, set forth herein.
§ 252-3. Special assessment.
The Special Improvement District shall be subject to a special assessment
on all affected property within the district, which shall be imposed by the
City for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the
district and the City. The Special Improvement District shall be subject to a
special assessment of a maximum of 4.5% of the annual real property tax,
or charges in lieu of taxes imposed on the assessable property within the
district, which shall be imposed by the City for the purposes of promoting
the economic and general welfare of the district.
§ 252-4. Continuing assessment.
The improvements in the Special Improvement District will involve annual
costs in addition to the cost of constructing and making improvements.
Such annual costs which relate to maintenance services peculiar to the
Special Improvement District, and distinguished from maintenance services
normally provided by the City, shall be deemed to provide benefits primarily
A. The area hereinafter designated as a Special Improvement District
would benefit from being so designated.
B. District Management Corporation would provide administrative and
other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and
consumers in the Special Improvement District.
C. A special assessment should be imposed and collected by the City with
the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or
otherwise, and as hereinafter or hereafter designated by the City
Council, all of those payments should be transferred to the District
Management Corporation to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and
to exercise the powers given it by this chapter.
D. It is in the best interest of the City of Trenton and the general public to
create the Special Improvement District hereinafter specifically
outlined and designated and to establish a District Management
Corporation.
§ 252-1 SOLID WASTE § 252-4
248:623
to the properties included in the district rather than to the City as a
whole. The improvements and the facilities thereof shall be maintained and
operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65,
and the costs thereof shall be assessed or taxed to the affected properties
pursuant to this chapter. The City Council, by separate ordinance or by
amendment to this chapter, may provide that improvements and facilities
hereinafter acquired or developed shall be operated and maintained and
the costs taxed and assessed to the properties in the Special Improvement
District.
§ 252-5. Benefit of assessment.
All costs of development, on construction and acquisition relating to the
provision of improvements for the Special Improvement District, should
benefit the private, nonresidential properties included in the district.
Subject to the limitations of spending authority and powers limited herein,
all cost of development, construction and acquisition relating to the
provision of improvements for the Special Improvement District shall be
assessed and taxed to the properties within the district.
§ 252-6. Exemptions from special assessment.
§ 252-7. District boundaries.
The Special Improvement District shall include the properties listed by
street address and by block and lot in the appendix attached hereto. The
Special Improvement District shall also include all public streets and
sidewalks within the following boundary:
A. The following classifications of property, as defined in N.J.A.C.
18:12-2.2, shall be exempt from the special assessment imposed under
this chapter.
(1) Class 1: Vacant land.
(2) Class 2: Residential (four families or fewer).
(3) Class 4C: Apartment.
(4) Class 15A: Exempt public school.
(5) Class 15B: Exempt other school.
(6) Class 15C: Exempt public.
(7) Class 15D: Exempt charitable.
(8) Class 15E: Exempt cemetery.
(9) Class 15F: Other exempt.
B. The exemption from the special assessment for Class 15F shall be
limited to residential property in that class.
§ 252-4 TRENTON CODE § 252-7
248:624
Beginning at the southwest corner of Capital Street and Calhoun Street
and then running westward along the southern curbline of Calhoun Street
to its intersection with Route 29; and then
Southward along the eastern side of the right-of-way of Route 29 to its
intersection with Bridge Street; and then
Eastward along the northern curbline of Bridge Street to its intersection
with New Warren Street; and then
Northward along the western curbline of New Warren Street to its
intersection with Livingston Street; and then
Eastward along the northern curbline of Livingston Street to its
intersection with South Montgomery Street; and then
Northward along the eastern curbline of South Montgomery Street to its
intersection with the Assunpink Creek; and then
Eastward along the northern side of the Assunpink Creek to its intersection
with Wahlenberg Boulevard; and then
Northward along the western curbline of Wahlenberg Boulevard to its
intersection with Wall Street; and then
Northward along the western curbline of Wall Street to its intersection with
the rear property line of the properties facing on the north side of East
State Street; and then
Westward along the rear property lines of the properties facing on the
north side of East State Street to its intersection with North Clinton
Avenue; and then
Southward along the eastern curbline of North Clinton Avenue to its
intersection with East State Street; and then
Westward along the northern curbline of East State Street to its
intersection with Ewing Street; and then
Northward along the western curbline of Ewing Street to its intersection
with Gill Alley; and then
Westward along the southern curbline of Gill Alley to its intersection with
Carroll Street; and then
Southward along the eastern curbline of Carroll Street to its intersection
with East State Street; and then
Westward along the northern curbline of East State Street to its
intersection with Canal Street; and then
Northward along the eastern curbline of Canal Street to its intersection
with Merchants Street; and then
Westward along the northern curbline of Merchants Street to its
intersection with North Stockton Street; and then
Northward along the western curbline of North Stockton Street to its
intersection with Wood Street; and then
§ 252-7 SOLID WASTE § 252-7
248:625
Westward along the southern curbline of Wood Street to its intersection
with North Montgomery Street; and then
Northward along the western curbline of North Montgomery Street to its
intersection with Olive Street; and then
Westward along the southern curbline of Olive Street to its intersection
with North Broad Street; and then
Northward along the eastern curbline of North Broad Street to its
intersection with Perry Street; and then
Westward along the southern curbline of Perry Street to its intersection
with Bank Street; and then
Westward along the southern curbline of Bank Street to its intersection
with Chancery Lane; and then
Southward along the eastern curbline of Chancery Lane to its intersection
with Hanover Place; and then
Westward along the southern curbline of Hanover Place to its intersection
with North Willow Street; and then
Southward along the western curbline of North Willow Street to its
intersection with Capital Street; and then
Westward along the southern curbline of Capital Street to its intersection
with Calhoun Street, which is also the place of beginning
§ 252-8. Report on assessments to City Council.
Concurrent with the submission of the plan for the Special Improvement
District, and annually thereafter, the Business Administrator shall report to
the City Council an estimate of changes in the amounts of such costs which
would follow upon the adoption of any addition or amendment to the plan
recommended to or under consideration by the City Council.
§ 252-9. Designation of District Management Corporation.
Trenton Downtown Association, Inc. shall be designated to be the District
Management Corporation for the Special Improvement District herein
created.
§ 252-10. Powers of District Management Corporation.
A. The District Management Corporation shall exercise the following
powers:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in
connection with the performance of its functions and duties.
(2) Employ such persons as may be required, and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the corporation.
§ 252-7 TRENTON CODE § 252-10
248:626
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money.
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
corporation, including contracts with any person, firm, corporation,
governmental agency or other entity.
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations.
(6) Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180
days and from governmental entities for that or longer periods.
(7) Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of the properties
in the district through grants and loans.
(8) Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the district.
(9) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the district.
(10) Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
corporation.
(11) Provide security, sanitation and other services to the district
supplemental to those provided normally by the City.
(12) Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to
locate there or to visitors to the district, including, but not limited
to, litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and
facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities and those
improvements generally permitted for pedestrian malls under
N.J.S.A. 40:56-66, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the City
Council.
(13) Publicize the district and the business included within the district
boundaries.
(14) Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in, and to balance the
business mix of, the district.
(15) Organize special events in the district.
(16) Provide special parking arrangements for the district.
(17) Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district.
B. The corporation shall not engage in the construction of parks or parking
facilities, except by means of funding which is obtained for such
purposes via federal or state grants or funds other than the
assessments provided for herein.
§ 252-10 SOLID WASTE § 252-11
248:627
§ 252-11. Annual budget.
The District Management Corporation shall be responsible to submit
annually a reasonably detailed budget for approval by City Council, with a
report explaining the goals and objectives of the district. Such budget shall
be processed and adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq.
§ 252-12. Approval of facades and signs required.
The construction or alteration of any building or structure's facade or sign
within an area of the district known as the "Trenton Commons" is subject to
the corporation's prior review and approval to assure compliance with the
criteria and procedures hereafter to be adopted upon the recommendation
of the corporation.
§ 252-13. Street vendors.80
A. Findings.
(1) The City Council finds that vending, hawking or peddling of any
foods, beverages, confections, goods, wares, merchandise or
commodities of any nature or description within the Special
Improvement District will undermine the economic growth and
employment within the Special Improvement District and will
inhibit the safe, convenient and effective movement of persons and
detract from the function and appearance of the Special
Improvement District.
(2) The City Council finds that vending, hawking or peddling of any
foods, beverages, confections, goods, wares, merchandise or
commodities of any nature or description within the Special
Improvement District should be prohibited unless specifically
authorized by the Council pursuant to rules and regulations
formally adopted by the Council in accordance with the standards
enunciated in N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq.
B. Prohibitions. No person shall engage in hawking, peddling or vending
of any foods, beverages, confections, goods, wares, merchandise or
commodities of any nature or description on the streets and sidewalks
within the Special Improvement District unless such use, and the
location thereof, has been specifically authorized by the Council
pursuant to rules and regulations formally adopted by the Council in
accordance with the standards enunciated in N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq.
This subsection shall not prohibit sales activities conducted by a person
holding a license to operate a restaurant from operating a pushcart on a
sidewalk immediately adjacent to a licensed premises, provided that all
health permits and other regulations established hereby are obtained
and complied with, and shall not prohibit the hawking of newspapers.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 206, Peddling and Soliciting, Art. III, Street Vendors, Veterans and
Fire Fighters.
§ 252-11 TRENTON CODE § 252-14
248:628
§ 252-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 252-14 SOLID WASTE § 252-14
248:629

ARTICLE II
Downtown Business Improvement Zone
[Adopted 3-17-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
§ 252-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 252-16. Review and approval of loan fund requests.
§ 252-17. Creation of improvement zone.
There is hereby created and designated within the City of Trenton a
Downtown Business Improvement Zone that shall be coextensive with the
Special Improvement District previously established by the City Council of
the City of Trenton.
A. Promote economic growth and employment within the business district
and in particular the Special Improvement District; and
B. Authorize, permit, and facilitate application for the purpose of
accepting funds or loans from the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, for public improvements as contemplated and
defined by P.L. 1998, c. 115.81
A. Any loan fund request(s) must first be submitted for review and
approval to the Director of the Department of Housing and Economic
Development prior to the submission to City Council for final approval.
B. The City Council and the Board of Directors of the District Management
Corporation must approve by resolution any requested loan prior to
application to the State of New Jersey, Department of Community
Affairs, for public improvements as contemplated and defined by P.L.
1998, c. 115.82
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:56-71.1 et seq.
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:56-71.1 et seq.
§ 252-15 SOLID WASTE § 252-17
248:631
Chapter 254
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 38.
Flood control — See Ch. 109.
Hazardous materials cleanup — See Ch. 127.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 309.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 252-17 TRENTON CODE § 252-17
248:632
ARTICLE I
Measures and Controls
[Adopted 9-7-2006 by Ord. No. 06-64]
§ 254-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 254-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Trenton.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, except
that where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
§ 254-1 SOLID WASTE § 254-1
248:633
§ 254-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances. The county review agency may either be:
a county planning agency; or a county water resource association created
under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 254-1 TRENTON CODE § 254-2
248:634
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the City of Trenton, or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
§ 254-2 SOLID WASTE § 254-2
248:635
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or to
a domestic treatment works. Pollutant includes both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 254-2 TRENTON CODE § 254-2
248:636
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 254-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
§ 254-4. Requirements for major development.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 254-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules. Alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge,
stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major development
projects as would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
§ 254-2 SOLID WASTE § 254-4
248:637
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 254-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
§ 254-4 TRENTON CODE § 254-4
248:638
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this subsection into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
§ 254-4 SOLID WASTE § 254-4
248:639
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use eco inlet grates whenever they use
a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface
water body under that grate. Any exceptions to the eco inlet
grate granted by the Planning Board must comply with the
standards below:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[3] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
(b) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
§ 254-4 TRENTON CODE § 254-4
248:640
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 254-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
(5) An "Operation and Maintenance Manual" is required for any
stormwater facilities located in private developments. This manual
must contain costs for maintaining the facilities on a yearly basis.
For any privately owned stormwater facilities, a fund must be
established to ensure ongoing maintenance of the stormwater
facility. The calculation of the maintenance payment is included as
Attachment A to this chapter.83
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards
to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater
recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major
development.
83.Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file in the City offices.
§ 254-4 SOLID WASTE § 254-4
248:641
(1) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
(2) The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater
recharge are as follows:
(a) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations
at § 254-5, either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from
preconstruction to postconstruction for the two-year storm
is infiltrated.
(b) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects planned for previously developed sites, or to projects
subject to Subsection F(2)(c) below.
(c) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[1] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or
stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to
be present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge
would be inconsistent with a Department-approved
remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan; and
areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as
gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[2] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material. "Source
material" means any material(s) or machinery, located at
an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to
process, manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source materials
include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products;
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents,
and detergents that are related to process, manufacturing,
§ 254-4 TRENTON CODE § 254-4
248:642
or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
(d) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts
include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or
seasonally high water table so as to cause surficial ponding,
flooding of basements, or interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the
groundwater recharge area.
(3) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater
runoff calculations at § 254-5, complete one of the following:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundred-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the same storm events;
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the
site for the two-, ten- and one-hundred-year storm events and
that the increased volume or change in timing of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of
existing land uses and projected land uses assuming full
development under existing zoning and land use ordinances in
the drainage area;
(c) Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction stormwater
runoff that is attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damages
below the point of discharge; or
(d) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis
in accordance with Subsection F(3)(a), (b) and (c) above shall
only be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
§ 254-4 SOLID WASTE § 254-4
248:643
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 254-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 254-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
§ 254-4 TRENTON CODE § 254-4
248:644
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 254-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converges on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
§ 254-4 SOLID WASTE § 254-4
248:645
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 254-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of “FW1” at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
§ 254-4 TRENTON CODE § 254-4
248:646
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
§ 254-4 SOLID WASTE § 254-4
248:647
§ 254-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(3) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(4) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: the New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
§ 254-4 TRENTON CODE § 254-5
248:648
§ 254-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 254-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 254-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
§ 254-5 SOLID WASTE § 254-6
248:649
§ 254-7. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 254-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 254-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 254-4 this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified
by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified
by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
§ 254-6 TRENTON CODE § 254-8
248:650
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
be removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 254-8 SOLID WASTE § 254-8
248:651
§ 254-9. Site development stormwater plan required.
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
(2) In the event that a waiver for slopes steeper than 3:1 is granted by
the City, the basin must be fenced.
D. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
§ 254-8 TRENTON CODE § 254-9
248:652
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements.
(1) The following information shall be required:
(a) Topographic base map: The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
§ 254-9 SOLID WASTE § 254-9
248:653
(c) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan: This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
§§ 254-3 through 254-6 are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map: The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations:
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in § 254-4 of this
chapter.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
§ 254-9 TRENTON CODE § 254-9
248:654
§ 254-10. Maintenance and repair.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan: The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 254-10.
(2) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1)(a) through (f) when it can
be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 254-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
§ 254-9 SOLID WASTE § 254-10
248:655
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above, if that person is not a governmental entity,
is required to post a two-year maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. Attachment A presents the
calculation to be used to determine the amount of maintenance
guarantee required.84
(11) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
84.Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file in the City offices.
§ 254-10 TRENTON CODE § 254-10
248:656
§ 254-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to the following penalties:
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. The violator shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation.
B. The violator has 30 days from the date the violation is identified to
correct the issue.
C. After 30 days, if the violation has not been corrected, the violator shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $100 per day for each violation for
as long as the violator remains out of compliance.
§ 254-10 SOLID WASTE § 254-11
248:657

ARTICLE II
Retrofitting of Storm Drain Outlets
[Adopted 9-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-56]
§ 254-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system operated by the City of Trenton so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 254-13. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Trenton or other public body
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s
do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are
designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport
stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of the State of New Jersey subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 254-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen) reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 254-12 SOLID WASTE § 254-14
248:659
§ 254-15. Design standard; exceptions.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 254-15 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Storm drain inlets identified in § 254-14 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than seven square inches or be no greater than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
B. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solids and floatable materials that could not pass through one of
the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide;
or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
§ 254-14 TRENTON CODE § 254-16
248:660
§ 254-16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the City of Trenton Police Department.
§ 254-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, as stated in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty, § 1-17.
§ 254-16 SOLID WASTE § 254-17
248:661

ARTICLE III
Outdoor Application of Fertilizer
[Adopted 9-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-57]
§ 254-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer
so as to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering waterways,
thereby helping to protect and improve surface water quality. This article
does not apply to fertilizer application at commercial farms.
§ 254-19. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 10 feet in width, adjacent to any waterbody.
COMMERICAL FARM — A farm management unit producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for
sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5 with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATERBODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 254-20. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do any of the following:
§ 254-18 SOLID WASTE § 254-20
248:663
§ 254-21. Phosphorus fertilizer application; exceptions.
§ 254-22. Enforcement.
§ 254-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, as stated in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty, § 1-17.
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off-site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any waterbody.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time
after the end of the recognized growing season.
A. No person shall apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as
demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation
in accordance with a soils test and the associated annual fertilizer
recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and
Extension.
B. Exceptions:
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(b) Reestablished or repairing a turf area.
(2) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soil's surface, directly to the feeder roots.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
A. This article shall be enforced by the City of Trenton Police Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation shall be ordered to cease the
prohibited activity immediately.
§ 254-20 TRENTON CODE § 254-23
248:664
ARTICLE IV
Covering of Dumpsters and Other Refuse Containers
[Adopted 9-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-58]
§ 254-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at
all times and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise
discharging of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Trenton and
the waters of the State of New Jersey so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 254-25. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Trenton or other public body
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s
do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are
designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport
stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of the State of New Jersey subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 254-26. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 254-24 SOLID WASTE § 254-26
248:665
§ 254-27. Exceptions to prohibitions.
Exceptions to prohibitions are:
§ 254-28. Enforcement.
§ 254-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, as stated in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty, § 1-17.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm system operated by the City of Trenton.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, and white
goods) placed curbside for pickup.
A. This article shall be enforced by the City of Trenton Police Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation shall be ordered to cease the
prohibited activity immediately.
§ 254-26 TRENTON CODE § 254-29
248:666
ARTICLE V
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 5-3-2018 by Ord. No. 18-21]
§ 254-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Trenton, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 254-31. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
B. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
C. The definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding
definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-l.2
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of
Trenton, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but
are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307 (a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act [(33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
City of Trenton or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined
sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry
sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater
from streets and other sources.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
§ 254-30 SOLID WASTE § 254-31
248:667
§ 254-32. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
City of Trenton any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 254-33. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the City of Trenton Police Department.
§ 254-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, as stated in Chapter 1,
Article III (General Penalty), § 1-17, and such other penalties as prescribed
thereunder.
§ 254-35. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, clause and phrase,
and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or
finished product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain
algaecides or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of the State of New Jersey subject
to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater includes,
but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact
cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 254-31 TRENTON CODE § 254-35
248:668
ARTICLE VI
Spilling, Dumping or Disposal of Materials Other Than Stormwater
[Adopted 5-3-2018 by Ord. No. 18-23]
§ 254-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm system
(MS4) operated by the City of Trenton, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 254-37. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Trenton or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of the State of New Jersey subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 254-38. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Trenton
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
storm water in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 254-39. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
§ 254-36 SOLID WASTE § 254-39
248:669
§ 254-40. Enforcement
§ 254-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, as stated in Chapter 1,
Article III (General Penalty), § 1-17, and such other penalties as prescribed
thereunder.
§ 254-42. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, clause and phrase,
and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
C. Air-conditioning condensate (including landscape and lawn watering
runoff).
D. Irrigation water (excluding contact and noncontact cooling water).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car-washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from firefighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications.
(a) Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing
materials must be removed from the equipment and vehicles to
the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods
(e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be
returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(b) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is
limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does
not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
A. This article shall be enforced by the City of Trenton Police Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation shall be ordered to cease the
prohibited activity immediately.
§ 254-39 TRENTON CODE § 254-42
248:670
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 254-42 SOLID WASTE § 254-42
248:671
Chapter 257
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pay telephones on streets — See Ch. 277.
§ 254-42 TRENTON CODE § 254-42
248:672
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 257-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT — Any person that has obtained a permit to engage in a
business activity.
DIVISION — The Division of Streets of the Department of Public Works of
the City of Trenton.
FRANCHISE — A license which permits a person to sell a product or service
and/or conduct a business activity.
PROPERTY — All private property and public property.
PROPERTY, PRIVATE — Property affecting or belonging to a person. 85
PROPERTY, PUBLIC — Property belonging to the City, or the aggregate of
the citizens of the City. 86
SIDEWALK — Includes such surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks and air space above such surfaces.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Division of Streets.
THREAT TO THE HEALTH AND WELFARE OF THE COMMUNITY —
Includes, without limitation, a condition which:
§ 257-2. Administration and enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Division of Streets of the Department of Public Works.
A. Endangers the safety of persons or property.
Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles.
B.
Unreasonably interferes with ingress or egress from any residence or
place of business.
C.
Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or mailboxes
permitted at or near a licensed pay telephone.
D.
Creates or contributes to criminal, disorderly persons or petty
disorderly offenses and/or is in violation of City ordinances.
E.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 257-1 SOLID WASTE § 257-3
248:673
§ 257-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 257-3 TRENTON CODE § 257-3
248:674
ARTICLE II
Excavations
§ 257-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms or phrases shall
be deemed and construed to have the following meanings:
IMPROVED ROAD, CLASS A — Any road surfaced with a pavement such as
asphalt, concrete, bituminous concrete, brick or similar pavement and any
road having a concrete base.
IMPROVED ROAD, CLASS B — Any road surfaced with stone or slag
uniformly deposited in layers, with a total thickness of not less than four
inches, where the stone or slag has been compacted by the use of a power
roller and bound together by the application of bituminous binder tar or
asphaltic binder.
IMPROVED ROAD, Class C — Any macadam or other road surfaced with
a light coat of stone or oil or any water-bound macadam road without
treatment and any gravel or cinder road with oil treatment.
UNIMPROVED ROAD — Any cinder, dirt or gravel road without oil
treatment and all other roads under the jurisdiction of the City.
§ 257-5. Permit required.
No person shall make any opening or excavations in any street, highway,
sidewalks, curb, public alleyway or other public right-of-way under the
jurisdiction of the City without having obtained a permit to do so in the
manner hereafter provided; nor shall any person deface, damage or destroy
the surface of any street, highway, sidewalk, curb, public alleyway or other
public right-of-way.
§ 257-6. Application for permit.
A. Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Division
of Streets and shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number, if any, of the abutting property.
(3) The City Tax Map block and lot number of the property for the
service of which the opening is to be made.
(4) Nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
(5) Character and purpose of the work proposed.
(6) Time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
§ 257-4 SOLID WASTE § 257-6
248:675
§ 257-7. Issuance of permit.
Permits shall be issued under the authority of the Superintendent of the
Division of Streets in accordance with the provisions of this article and such
regulations as (s)he may from time to time establish. With respect to each
application, the Superintendent or such person as (s)he may designate shall
determine the initial time limit during which the permit shall be valid.
§ 257-8. Contents of permit; filing.
§ 257-9. Fees. [Amended 11-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-50]
§ 257-10. Additional fee requirements.
In the event that the Division determines that any excavation for which a
permit has been issued is of greater dimensions than those stated in the
permit, it shall so notify the permittee who shall pay any additional fee
required immediately and before continuing any further work in connection
with such excavation or construction.
§ 257-11. Permit issued within five years of paving.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by a set of plans clearly showing
the exact location, and dimensions of all openings.
A. Each permit shall state the identity and address of the applicant, the
name of the street and the location where the opening is to be made,
the dimensions of the opening and the period during which the permit
shall be valid. The original of each permit shall remain on file with the
Division.
B. All road opening permits shall specify the quantity of materials to be
recycled, where they will be taken and how they will be handled.
A. The fees for excavating in a public street shall be as follows:
(1) For each opening in the right-of-way under 20 linear feet: $250.
(2) For each additional foot over 20 feet: $10.
(3) For each additional day: $100.
B. All utility companies or individuals issued a street opening permit shall
restore the pavement, including replacement of any traffic control
devices and road striping, to a proper condition and appearance. If the
permittee shall fail to restore the pavement, then the Director of the
Department of Public Works shall cause such pavement to be restored
and shall charge such cost to the permittee.
A. Additional charges. No permit shall be issued for the excavation of any
street within five years after the same has been paved or repaired,
unless the Director of the Department of Public Works is satisfied that
§ 257-6 TRENTON CODE § 257-11
248:676
§ 257-12. Bonds.
an emergency exists which necessitates such excavation. In such event,
the applicant shall be charged an additional fee, not less than $1,000,
in an amount sufficient to compensate for the depreciation of the
pavement resulting from the excavation.
B. Notice of restriction on disturbing completed pavement. When the
Director of the Division of Engineering and Operations shall determine
to construct or reconstruct a roadway, (s)he shall serve upon the owner
and tenants of the lands abutting the roadway and upon any public
utility using it, prior to the advertisement of such construction or
reconstruction, a notice to the effect that subsequent to the
construction of the surface pavement thereon, no openings will be
permitted in the roadway for a period of five years thereafter, except in
the case of an emergency and upon payment of an additional fee, not
less than $1,000.
C. Service of notice; posting. The notice required by Subsection B above
shall be served upon the owner, tenant or public utility prior to the
advertisement for the construction or reconstruction. If personal
service upon the owner or tenant cannot be obtained, notice may be
given by attaching a copy thereof to the premises, and, in the case of a
public utility, by service of a copy thereof upon an officer or employee of
the public utility, and further by posting signs at both ends of the
proposed construction or reconstruction in the following manner:
"Notice is hereby given that the Director of the Department of Public
Works for the City of Trenton will on or about . . . . . . begin
improvement with a permanent surface that portion of roadway . . . . .
. . . . from . . . . . . to . . . . . . ."
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have filed a bond in
an amount determined to be sufficient by the Division of Streets. The
bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and a surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey as surety
and shall be upon the following conditions:
(1) To indemnify and hold harmless the City from all loss, damage,
claim or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense of any
litigation arising out of injury to any person or property resulting
from any work done by the applicant under the permit.
(2) To indemnify the City for any expense incurred in enforcing any of
the provisions of this article.
(3) To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or
damage to his/her property as a result of any act or omission of the
applicant, his/her agents, employees or subcontractors done in the
course of any work under the permit.
§ 257-11 SOLID WASTE § 257-12
248:677
§ 257-13. Rules and regulations.
All permits issued under this section shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
(4) The bond may also be conditioned upon the applicant's restoring
the surface and foundation of the street for which the permit is
granted in a manner acceptable to the Division of Streets, in which
case it shall be in lieu of all fees required by § 257-9. In that case,
however, a fee of $10 shall be charged the applicant.
B. One bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the
same applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period to be
determined by the Division of Streets. In the event that the applicant
exhibits satisfactory proof that (s)he is insured against any of the
occurrences specified in this section, then the existence of such
insurance coverage shall be taken into consideration in determining the
amount of the bond.
A. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and during
the hours of darkness shall be provided with proper warning lights. This
regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any other
reasonably necessary precaution for the protection of persons or
property.
B. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
to traffic, unless permission has been specifically granted by the
Superintendent and unless the approval of the Division of Traffic and
Lighting has also been secured. The Police Department shall be
informed of all such street closings at least 24 hours in advance.
C. The Superintendent, upon application by the permittee, may extend the
time limit during which the permit shall be valid.
D. No work shall be done in such a manner as to interfere with any water
main or sewer line or any connection with either of the same from any
building, unless that is the purpose of the excavation or unless
permission has been obtained in advance from the Division of Water or
the Division of Sewers. No work shall be carried on in such a manner as
to result in destruction or damage of any property of the City unless this
is necessary for completion of the work and unless permission has been
obtained in advance from the head of the City department or agency
having jurisdiction over such property.
E. All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee, and as
much as possible of the material excavated shall be replaced. Such
material shall be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in a
manner prescribed by the Division of Streets. Where the Division of
Streets determines that the excavated material is unsuitable for
backfill, the permittee shall backfill the excavation with sand, soft coal,
§ 257-12 TRENTON CODE § 257-13
248:678
§ 257-14. Restoration of surface by City.
In all cases where the fees required under this article are paid, the Division
of Streets shall restore the surface of the street upon the completion of the
work by the permittee in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 257-15. Restoration of surface by permittee.
In all cases where permits are issued hereunder wherein the permittee is
to restore the surface of the street, the following rules, regulations and
requirements shall apply:
cinders or other suitable material which shall be placed in layers not
exceeding six inches in depth and thoroughly compacted in the manner
prescribed by the Division. Upon completion of the work, the permittee
shall remove any excess material and leave the premises in a clear
condition. If the Division determines that any backfilled excavation has
settled or caved in, it shall so notify the permittee, who shall promptly
continue backfilling until the Division determines that settlement is
complete.
F. All openings in paved streets shall be immediately paved with
temporary pavement upon completion of the backfill. The temporary
pavement shall be maintained in a smooth and safe condition until the
permanent paving is placed. Temporary pavement shall be equivalent to
New Jersey State Highway Department specifications for Class B cold
patch mixture.
G. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
H. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall
be done in strict compliance with all applicable state laws and
regulations. Any rock or other substance within five feet of any water
main, sewer line or other facility which may be damaged by blasting
shall be removed without blasting.
I. If any work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or
any extension thereof or is not performed in accordance with the
foregoing regulations and such other regulations as may from time to
time be promulgated by the Division of Streets, then the Division may
complete such work in a proper manner and restore the surface of the
street. The cost of so doing shall be charged to the permittee and may
be recovered by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation
or surface until the Division of Streets has deemed that settlement of
the subsurface is complete and the area properly prepared for
restoration.
§ 257-13 SOLID WASTE § 257-15
248:679
§ 257-16. Modification of permit conditions.
In any special case the Superintendent may, by resolution, impose special
conditions to which the issuance of the permit will be subject, or the
Superintendent may in any such case deem, by resolution, that any
provision of this article shall not apply or shall be altered.
B. All foundations shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than the
width of the excavation and to a length of six inches longer than the
length of the excavation.
C. The street surface shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than
the width of the restored foundation and to a length of six inches longer
than the length of the restored foundation.
D. When any foundation is restored by the use of cement concrete, the
same shall consist of a mixture by volume of one part of portland
cement, two parts of sand and four parts of gravel or stone.
E. All foundations and surfaces of Class A improved roads shall be
restored with the same type of material and to the same depths as
existed prior to the making of the excavation.
F. The foundations and surfaces of Class B and Class C improved roads or
unimproved roads shall be made with such materials and in such
manner as shall be directed in each particular case by the
Superintendent of the Division of Streets.
G. All excavation permits issued to utility companies shall require that the
utility company restore and maintain all right-of-way openings at the
utility company's cost and expense.
§ 257-15 TRENTON CODE § 257-16
248:680
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Construction
§ 257-17. Duties of owners.
§ 257-18. Sidewalks.
A. Duties. The owners of real estate bordering upon any public street shall
construct, maintain and repair the sidewalks, curbs and gutters
abutting their property.
B. Shade tree policy. Where sidewalk, curb or gutter damage was caused
by roots from street tree(s), and property owners ask to have the tree(s)
removed so as to prevent damage to the new or existing sidewalks, but
the City, in following its policy on shade trees, declines to remove the
tree(s), the City will assume the cost of replacing that portion of
sidewalk, curb or gutter damaged by the roots.87
C. Exceptions.
(1) Where sidewalk, curb or gutter damage was caused by the roots
from street trees which were previously removed or may still be in
place, the City may assume the cost of replacing that portion of
sidewalk, curb or gutter damaged by the roots, but only as site and
financial conditions may warrant.
(2) Where the City is doing complete street reconstruction, the City
may assume the cost of repairing or replacing curbs, gutters and
the sidewalks, but only as site and financial condition may warrant.
A. Concrete used in the construction of sidewalks shall be in accordance
with current New Jersey State Highway Specifications Class C and shall
be air-entrained. Preformed bituminous-type joint filler shall be 1/2 inch
thick.
B. All sidewalks shall be laid in conformity to the grade of the street
established by the City.
C. In all streets where the width of the sidewalk is not fixed by ordinance
the width shall be 1/5 part of the total width of the street, from the
property line to the outside of the curbs on each side.
D. The minimum width of the paved portion of any sidewalk shall not be
less than five feet on any street, and the sidewalk shall be paved to its
full width when required by the Division of Streets.
E. If the sidewalk is not immediately paved to its full width, the space
remaining unpaved must be maintained at the same grade as the
pavement.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 287, Trees.
§ 257-17 SOLID WASTE § 257-18
248:681
F. In general, the pavement must be so constructed that the middle line of
the paved portion of all sidewalks shall coincide with an imaginary line
drawn parallel with the outside line of the curb at a distance equal to 1/
2 the total width of the sidewalk. No sidewalk shall be laid otherwise,
except upon written approval issued by the Superintendent.
G. All sidewalks must have a pitch or slope from the curbline toward the
building ascending at a rate of 1/4 of an inch to the foot. No sidewalk
shall be constructed otherwise, except upon written approval of the
Superintendent of the Division of Streets.
H. Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete, except
under special circumstances where permission is granted in writing by
the Department of Public Works for the use of other materials. When
permission is granted for the use of other materials the work shall be
done in strict conformity with any special requirements imposed by the
Department.
I. Concrete sidewalks shall be five inches thick, except where driveways
cross the sidewalks, in which case they shall be seven inches thick
within the limits of the driveway.
J. The application of cement to the surface of the concrete to hasten the
hardening and to permit finishing is prohibited. The concrete shall be
cured with clear or translucent liquid curing compound which shall be
applied as soon as the concrete has been finished.
K. In general, sidewalks shall be constructed in slabs or independently
divided sections. No section shall have an area of more than 100 square
feet, nor shall any section be more than 10 feet on any side or have a
length greater than 1 1/2 times its width. Where it is desired to
construct larger slabs, they shall be reinforced with a steel mesh in a
manner satisfactory to the Department of Public Works. The method of
placing the various sections shall be such as to produce a straight,
clean-cut joint between them extending the full depth of the pavement
so as to make each section an independent unit.
L. A one-half-inch joint shall be provided at least once every 20 feet in the
length of the walk which shall be filled with an approved joint filler. A
similar joint shall be provided at each junction of sidewalk and street
curb and between the sidewalk and abutting buildings.
M. Where the subbase upon which the sidewalk is to be laid is of an
unstable nature, it shall be removed to a depth of at least four inches
and replaced with well-compacted select material.
N. No driveway across any sidewalk shall be wider than 40 feet. Multiple
driveways shall be separated by a minimum twenty-foot safety island.
No driveways shall be located closer than 10 feet to the corner of any
two intersecting streets. No driveway exceeding 15 feet in width shall
be located closer than five feet to any property line. The width of the
§ 257-18 TRENTON CODE § 257-18
248:682
§ 257-19. Curbs.
§ 257-20. Gutters.
driveway shall be determined by the linear measurement of curb
removed or depressed below the established curb elevation.
A. Curbs shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with New Jersey
State Highway Specifications Class B or granite free from seams or
other imperfections. The granite curb shall be not less than four feet in
length, five inches thick and 16 inches in depth throughout. The tops
shall be dressed to a smooth and even surface, and the sides shall be
dressed to a smooth, even surface to a depth of at least eight inches,
with the ends cut and squared so as to form close and even joints. The
top shall also be cut to a bevel to meet the pitch of the pavement.
B. Where one curbline intersects another curbline, the curblines shall be
connected with circular curbing of a radius not less than five feet. The
circular curbing shall be set to a true tangent with intersecting
curblines in all cases. Where an angle occurs in a curbline, the lines
forming the angle shall be connected by a curve of a radius approved by
the Superintendent of the Division of Streets.
C. Concrete curbs shall be six inches thick at the top and eight inches at
the bottom and 18 inches deep. The top corner on face of the curb shall
be rounded to a radius of one inch.
D. Concrete curbs shall be cured in the same manner as sidewalks.
E. Forms for concrete curbs shall be made of substantial materials,
preferably steel forms. They shall be braced or staked so as to insure
perfect alignment and grade.
F. After pouring concrete into the forms, it shall be puddled and spaded so
as to insure a thorough mixture, eliminate air pockets and create
uniform and smooth sides. Before the concrete has thoroughly set and
while it is still green, the forms shall be removed and the front and top
sides shall be finished with a float or steel trowel to make a uniform
finished surface. No plastering of the top or face of the curb shall be
permitted.
G. All curbs shall be cut clear through by the use of steel template or other
approved means so that they will consist of independent sections not
more than 10 feet long.
H. Expansion joints 1/2 inch in thickness shall be placed between sections
of curbs at intervals of not more than 50 feet. These joints shall be filled
with an approved premolded bituminous material. Similar expansion
joints shall be placed at street intersections where the straight curb
meets the curved section of curb.
§ 257-18 SOLID WASTE § 257-20
248:683
§ 257-21. Notice to construct or repair.
Whenever an owner shall fail to construct the sidewalks, curbs and gutters
abutting his/her property or shall permit them to deteriorate into such
a condition that the safety or convenience of the public is impaired, the
Superintendent shall give notice to that owner to carry out the necessary
construction or repairs.
§ 257-22. Contents of notice; service.
The notice shall contain a description of the property sufficient to identify
it, but need not necessarily contain a legal description. It shall contain a
general description of the work required to be performed and shall state
that if the owner does not perform the work within 30 days from the date
of the notice, then the City shall carry out the necessary construction or
repairs at the cost to the owner. Notices shall be served either personally or
by mailing a copy to the owner at his/her last known address. If the owner's
address is unknown, the notice may be served by posting it in a conspicuous
place on the property affected and by publishing it once in a newspaper
circulating in the City.
§ 257-23. Improvement by City; violation by owner.
It shall be a violation of this article for the owner or owners of the real
estate abutting the public street and sidewalk to maintain the sidewalk,
curb or gutter in an unsafe condition or state of disrepair as prohibited
specifically by this chapter. Violations shall be prosecuted by the issuance
of notice in the manner set forth in §§ 257-21 and 257-22. If, after the
service of notice, the owner fails to carry out the required construction or
repairs, in compliance with the notice issued, the owner or owners shall be
in violation of this article and subject to the procedures and penalties for the
enforcement thereof as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty,
provided that the provisions of this article shall not be construed in such
a manner as to relieve the owner of responsibility or liability for violating
conditions existing prior to the issuance of notice or process. Additionally,
subject to the availability of resources, the work may be performed by the
City. The cost of the work shall be recovered by an assessment against the
property affected as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:65-8 et seq. The assessment
A. Concrete gutters shall be 14 inches in width and shall be nine inches
thick. The surface of the gutter shall have a descending slope of one
inch from the outer edge toward the curb. Concrete for gutters shall be
the same as specified for concrete curbs. Gutters shall be divided into
independent sections not greater than 10 feet in length and expansion
joints 1/2 inch thick shall be provided for concrete gutters at intervals
of not more than 50 feet.
B. The distance from the top of the curb to the surface of the gutter shall
be fixed in each case by the Superintendent of the Division of Streets.
§ 257-20 TRENTON CODE § 257-23
248:684
shall be in addition to any penalty which may be imposed for a violation of
this chapter.
§ 257-24. Additional standards.
In all cases not specifically provided for in this article, the work of
constructing, repairing and maintaining sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall
be performed in accordance with New Jersey State Highway Department
Standards for Road and Bridge Construction, 1961, and all amendments
thereto adopted prior to March 31, 1967.
§ 257-25. Permits.
Before commencing the construction, reconstruction or substantial repair
of any sidewalk, curb or gutter, a written permit shall be obtained by the
person for whom the work is to be done or by the contractor who is to do
the work. Application for permits shall be made to the Department of Public
Works and shall state the name of the person who is to do the work or
who is to be in charge of the work. Work shall not be done by any other
person unless notification has been given, in writing, to the Department of
Public Works, and has been approved by the Department. The Department
of Public Works may suspend or revoke a permit, or deny an application
for a permit, when the person performing or in charge of the work has
been guilty of flagrant, repeated or continued violations of this article.
Suspension or revocation of a permit shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation.
§ 257-26. Fees.
A. The Director of Public Works shall receive the following fees for permits
granted by him/her in accordance with the provisions of this article:
[Amended 11-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-50]
(1) For each permit issued for the repair of an existing sidewalk, curb
or gutter: $20.
(2) For each permit issued for the construction of a new sidewalk,
driveway, curb or gutter: $20.
(3) For each permit issued for the construction of a sidewalk opening:
$20.
B. A separate permit for the doing of any work under the provisions of this
article shall be issued for each property in front of which the work is to
be done, provided that where two or more properties actually adjoin
and are owned by the same person a single permit may be issued.
§ 257-23 SOLID WASTE § 257-26
248:685

ARTICLE IV
Protection of Pavement
§ 257-27. Newly laid pavement.
No person shall walk upon, drive a vehicle over or otherwise damage any
newly laid pavement or pavement in the course of construction or repair.
§ 257-28. Injurious materials.
A. No person shall place or mix any material on any pavement which has a
tendency to adhere to, discolor or otherwise injure the same.
B. The following are declared to be examples of material injurious to
pavements: This enumeration is intended only to provide typical
illustrations and shall not be deemed exclusive.
(1) Lime, plaster, mortar or concrete.
(2) Salt and salt solutions.
(3) Carbon bisulphide and carbon tetrachloride.
(4) Ether.
(5) Alcohol.
(6) Petroleum products, especially benzine, gasoline, kerosene and
lubricating oils.
(7) Alkalies, especially ammonia, sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate
and potassium carbonate.
(8) Acids, especially sulphuric, hydrochloric and nitric, and chloride of
lime.
(9) Water fluids.
C. Where construction or other work necessitates the use of such
materials, they shall be kept in a container of such construction as to
prevent them from escaping onto the pavement.
§ 257-27 SOLID WASTE § 257-28
248:687

ARTICLE V
Dumpsters
§ 257-29. Permit required.
No person shall place or leave any dumpster on any public street, sidewalk
or alley without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Public
Works.
§ 257-30. Application for permit.
A person applying for a permit to place or leave a dumpster on any public
street, sidewalk or alley shall provide the following information:
§ 257-31. Responsibility for damage.
A person applying for a dumpster permit shall agree, in writing, to pay for
any damage caused to public property as a result of the use of the dumpster.
§ 257-32. Fee for permit. [Amended 11-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-50]
The fee for issuance of a dumpster permit shall be $20.
§ 257-33. Duration of permit.
No dumpster permit shall be valid for more than 30 days.
A. The address where the dumpster is to be placed or left.
B. The name, address and daytime telephone number of the owner of the
premises.
C. The name, address and daytime telephone number of the person with
custody or control of the dumpster.
D. The date the dumpster will be placed or left and the date the dumpster
will be removed.
§ 257-29 SOLID WASTE § 257-33
248:689

ARTICLE VI
Obstructions
§ 257-34. Obstruction prohibited.
No person shall obstruct the free and lawful passage of pedestrians on
the sidewalks of the City and the free and lawful passage and/or parking
of vehicles on the streets or alleys of the City by placing thereon any
snow removed from private property and/or sidewalks, or any wares,
merchandise or other articles in any manner whatsoever.
§ 257-35. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply:
§ 257-36. Police powers.
The Police Department is given full power and authority to prevent
obstructions in violation of this article and to remove any such obstruction
after giving to the owner of the premises abutting the area so obstructed a
reasonable notice to remove the obstruction.
A. Where the obstruction is caused by the loading or unloading of goods,
wares or merchandise to and from vehicles in such a manner as to
cause a minimum of obstruction which is necessary and unavoidable.
B. To receptacles for garbage, ashes or refuse lawfully placed on or in
sidewalk areas for collection.
C. To space within three feet of the front line of any dwelling, home, shop
or other building if such space is appropriated and used by the
occupant or owner thereof; and further provided that the
aforementioned three-foot limit may be waived by City Council by
resolution following a public hearing if it shall be determined that a
reasonable extension of such limitation would not be substantially
detrimental to the aesthetics of the neighborhood and that there would
be sufficient sidewalk width remaining for the free flow of pedestrian
traffic and that such waiver will be in the best interests of the City.
§ 257-34 SOLID WASTE § 257-36
248:691

ARTICLE VII
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 257-37. Removal or treatment required.
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of premises
abutting or bordering upon any street in the City shall remove all snow and
ice from the abutting sidewalks of such streets or, in the case of ice which
may be so frozen as to make removal impracticable, shall cause the same
to be thoroughly covered with sand or ashes, within 12 daylight hours after
the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 257-38. Placement of removed snow.
It shall be unlawful to shovel, plow or blow snow from the sidewalk into the
abutting street or public alley and/or beyond the curbline. Snow removed
from the sidewalk must be piled up at the curbline on the sidewalk, effecting
a suitable and safe path for pedestrian crossing.
§ 257-39. Term defined.
The term "owner" as used in this article shall not apply to the City of
Trenton with respect to property obtained by the City through foreclosure.
§ 257-37 SOLID WASTE § 257-39
248:693
Chapter 264
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 42. Zoning and land development — See Ch. 315.
§ 264-1. Findings.
§ 264-2. Adoption of standards by reference.
The City Council does hereby adopt by reference the attached Swimming
Pool Code of New Jersey, 1970, which shall take effect after final passage
and publication in accordance with the law.88
§ 264-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 268
TAXATION
A. The code entitled, "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey - 1970," was
approved by the State Department of Health.
B. It may be adopted by reference by local boards of health in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6 and not enforceable until so
adopted.
C. It may be adopted without alteration or, if so desired, any numbered
section or paragraph may be deleted therefrom, but no substitute
section or paragraph may be added as part of the code being adopted
by reference under N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
D. The City Council has reviewed the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey,
1970, and has determined that it is in the furtherance of the general
welfare and in the best interest of the City of Trenton to adopt by
reference the aforesaid code.
88.Editor's Note: The Swimming Pool Code is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 257-39 TRENTON CODE § 264-3
264:694
ARTICLE I
Tangible Personal Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 20-1 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 268-1. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to Chapter 51, Laws of 1960 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-9.2) all tangible
household personal property and personal effects located within the City of
Trenton shall not be assessed and taxed for the year 1966 and thereafter.
§ 268-2. Obligation for prior years not affected.
This article shall not affect the obligation, lien or duty to pay any taxes
interest or penalties which have accrued or may accrue by virtue of any
assessment made or which may be made with respect to taxes levied for any
year prior to the year 1966; nor shall this article affect the legal authority to
assess and collect taxes which may be or have been due and payable prior
to January 1, 1966, together with such interest and penalties as would have
accrued thereon under any provisions of law amended or repealed hereby;
nor shall this article invalidate any assessments or affect any proceedings
for the enforcement thereof pending upon the effective date of January 1,
1966.
§ 268-3. Filing of copies with state and county.
A certified copy of this article has been filed with the Division of Taxation
in the Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey and with the
County Board of Taxation of Mercer County.
§ 268-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-3
264:695

ARTICLE II
Five-Year Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 20-2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 268-4. Statement of intention; statutory authority.
The City hereby authorizes the utilization of tax exemption in accordance
with Article VIII, Section I, Paragraph 6, of the New Jersey Constitution and
establishes the eligibility of residential and multiple dwellings, commercial
and industrial structures for five-year tax exemptions to the maximum
degree permitted by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., throughout the entire City.
§ 268-5. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3.
§ 268-6. Improvements to dwellings more than 25 years old.
Improvements to dwellings more than 25 years old are eligible for tax
exemption for a period of five years. If approved, the City, in determining
the value of the real estate, shall regard the first $25,000 in the Assessor's
full and true value of improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and
directly affected by the improvements as not increasing the value of the
property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the
property to which the improvements are made is increased thereby. During
the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than
the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements,
unless there is damage to the dwelling through the action of the elements
sufficient to warrant a reduction.
§ 268-7. Construction of new dwelling or conversions to dwelling
use.
Construction of new dwellings or the conversions of the buildings and
structures to dwelling use, including unutilized public buildings, are eligible
for tax exemption for a period of five years. If approved, the City, in
determining value, shall regard 30% of the Assessor's full and true value of
the dwelling constructed or conversion alterations made, as not increasing
the value of the property for a total up to five years, notwithstanding that
the value of the property upon which the construction or conversion occurs
is increased thereby.
§ 268-8. Improvement to multiple dwellings or conversions to
multiple dwelling use.
Improvements to multiple dwellings or conversion of other buildings and
structures to multiple dwelling use, including unused public buildings, are
eligible for tax exemption for a period of five years. If approved, the City,
in determining value, shall regard up to the Assessor's full and true value
§ 268-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-8
264:697
of the improvements or conversion alterations as not increasing the value
of the property, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which
the improvements or conversion alterations are made is increased thereby.
During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not
be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements, unless there is damage to the dwellings sufficient to warrant
a reduction.
§ 268-9. Improvements to commercial and industrial structures.
Improvements to commercial and industrial structures are eligible for tax
exemption for a period of five years. If approved, the City, in determining
value, shall regard up to the Assessor's full and true value of the
improvements as not increasing the value of the property, notwithstanding
that the value of the property to which the improvements is made is
increased thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment on the
property shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately
prior to the improvements unless there is damage to the dwellings sufficient
to warrant a reduction.
§ 268-10. New commercial or industrial structures and multiple
dwellings and new dwellings and conversions in Urban Enterprise
Zone.89
New construction of commercial and industrial structures and multiple
dwellings and new dwellings or conversions to dwelling use in an Urban
Enterprise Zone are eligible for tax exemption for a period of five years. The
owner shall enter into a written agreement with the City to pay a tax on
the improvement in an amount equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due
according to the following schedule:
A. In the first full tax year after completion, no payment in lieu of taxes
otherwise due.
B. In the second full tax year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due.
C. In the third full tax year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due.
D. In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes otherwise
due.
E. In the fifth full tax year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes otherwise
due.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 268-8 TRENTON CODE § 268-11
264:698
§ 268-11. Payment in quarterly installments; failure to make
payments.
All tax exemption agreements shall provide that the tax shall be billed and
collected in the same manner as any conventional taxes and any arrearages
shall accrue at that rate of interest charged for delinquent real estate taxes
and shall be subject to foreclosure. Further, if any payments due under a
tax exemption agreement shall be delinquent for a period of 30 days, the
tax exemption shall terminate as of the date such payments first became
delinquent.
§ 268-12. Filing of applications.
Applications for tax exemption shall be filed with the Tax Assessor. Every
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of the Division
of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, and shall be filed with the
Assessor within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the
completion of the improvement, conversion alteration or construction, and
shall provide the following information:
A. A general description of the project for which exemption is sought.
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the City
Council to demonstrate the structure and design of the project.
D. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project.
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the project,
and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if a tax
agreement is granted.
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
G. A statement showing:
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site.
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of the agreement.
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made the applicant on the
project during the first full year following termination of the
agreement.
H. If the project is a commercial or industrial structure, a description of
any lease agreements between the applicant and proposed users of the
project, and a history and description of the users' business.
I. If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the number and
types of dwelling units to be provided, a description of the common
§ 268-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-12
264:699
§ 268-13. Approval of applications.
Every application for exemption which is filed within the time specified shall
be approved and allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the applications
consistent with the provisions of this article and the tax agreement,
provided that the improvement, conversion alteration or construction for
which the applications made qualifies as an improvement, a conversion
alteration or construction pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et
seq., and the tax agreement, if any. The granting of an exemption or tax
agreement shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax
records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a notice of the
termination date thereof.
§ 268-14. Exemption applicable to property taxes levied for all
purposes.
The exemption of real property taxes provided by the City pursuant to this
article shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal, school and county
government purposes, and for the purpose of funding any other property
tax exemptions and abatements.
§ 268-15. Tax exemptions and agreements for particular projects.
§ 268-16. Duration of tax agreements.
All tax agreements entered into pursuant to this article shall be in effect for
no more than five full tax years next following the date of completion of the
project.
§ 268-17. Conformance with statutory and regulatory requirements.
All projects subject to tax agreement as provided herein shall be subject
to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on pollution
elements or general common elements, and a statement of the
proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the dwelling units according
to type and any rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the
dwellings' units with respect to low- and moderate-income housing.
J. Such other pertinent information as the City Council may require.
A. The Tax Assessor is authorized to grant exemptions and enter into tax
agreements for newly constructed and improved dwellings without
review and approval by the City Council.
B. The Tax Assessor is authorized to grant exemptions and enter into tax
agreements for multiple dwellings, commercial and industrial
structures without review and approval by the City Council if the value
of the improvements is determined to be less than $25,000. If the value
of the improvements equals or exceeds $25,000, then tax exemptions
and tax agreements shall be granted by resolution of the City Council.
§ 268-12 TRENTON CODE § 268-17
264:700
control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing provision,
zoning, planning and building code requirements.
§ 268-18. Copy of agreement to Division of Local Government
Services.
Within 30 days after the execution of a tax agreement, the Tax Assessor
shall forward a copy of the agreement to the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 268-19. Administration of agreement.
The Tax Collector shall administer the terms of the agreement during the
period of the exemption.
§ 268-20. Prohibition against added assessment.
The added assessment provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-63.3 and the omitted
assessment provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-63.20 and 54:63-33 shall not be
applicable to any property for which the owner has been granted a tax
exemption under this article.
§ 268-21. Termination of agreement.
§ 268-22. Additional improvements eligible for tax exemption.
An additional improvement, conversion alteration or construction
completed to a property already granted an exemption during the period in
which the exemption is in effect shall be eligible for an additional exemption
just as if such property had not received a previous exemption. The
additional improvement, conversion alteration or construction shall be
A. If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate, disposes of the property or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would otherwise
have been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable from
the property owner as if no exemption had been granted. The Tax
Assessor, on behalf of the City Council, shall notify the property owner
and the Tax Collector forthwith, and the Tax Collector shall notify the
property owner within 15 days of the date of disqualification of the
amount of taxes due. However, with respect to the disposal of property,
where it is determined that the new owner of the property will continue
to use the property pursuant to the qualifying conditions, no tax shall be
due, the exemption shall continue and the agreement shall remain in
effect.
B. At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be subject to all
applicable real property taxes as provided by state law and regulation
and local ordinances, but nothing herein shall prohibit a project, at the
termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the
benefits of any other tax preference provided by law.
§ 268-17 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-22
264:701
considered as separate for purposes of calculating the exemption, except
that the assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion alteration
or construction shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to
that improvement, conversion alteration or construction, for the purpose
determining the assessed value of the property from which any additional
exemption is to be subtracted.
§ 268-23. Ineligibility.
No exemption shall be granted for any property for which property taxes
or other municipal charges are delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which
penalties for nonpayment are due.
§ 268-24. Notice.
The Tax Collector shall include an appropriate notice in the mailing of the
annual property tax bills to each owner of a dwelling located in an area in
which exemption may be allowed under this article.
§ 268-25. Report of real property taxes.
A. The Tax Assessor, on behalf of the City, shall report on or before
October 1 of each year to the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs and to
the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the
Treasury the total amount of real property taxes exempted within the
City in the current tax year for each of the following:
(1) Improvement of dwellings.
(2) Construction of dwellings.
(3) Improvements and conversions of multiple dwellings.
(4) Improvements of commercial or industrial structures.
(5) Construction of multiple dwellings under tax agreements.
(6) Construction of commercial or industrial structures under tax
agreements.
B. In the case of Subsection A(5) and (6) above, the report shall state
instead the total amount of payments made in lieu of taxes according to
each formula utilized by the City, and the difference between that total
amount and the total amount or real property taxes which would have
been paid on the project had the tax agreement not been in effect for
the current year.
§ 268-22 TRENTON CODE § 268-25
264:702
ARTICLE III
Interest on Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 9-7-1967 as § 20-3 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 268-26. Rate established for taxes and sewer and street
assessments.
Interest on delinquent taxes and delinquent sewer and street assessments
for local improvements shall be charged at the rate of 7% per annum
through December 31, 1970. Effective May 1, 1980, interest on delinquent
taxes and delinquent sewer and street assessments for local improvements
shall be charged at the rate of 8% per annum on the first $1,500 of the
delinquency and 18% per annum on any amount in excess of $1,500. The
interest shall be computed from the date the taxes or assessments become
delinquent, except that no interest shall be charged if payment of any
installment is made within 10 days after the date upon which the same
becomes payable.
§ 268-27. Interest on redemption of certificates of tax sale.
Effective May 1, 1980, and pursuant to enactment by the Legislature of
the State of New Jersey (amendment to N.J.S.A. 54:5-32 and 54:5-34, being
Chapter 435, Laws of New Jersey 1979, approved February 14, 1980, such
act to take effect immediately) interest on redemption of any certificate of
tax sale sold by the City to any person or to the City shall be at the rate of
18% per annum and such rate of interest shall be incorporated in the tax
sale advertisement and in each and every certificate of tax sale issued to
any purchaser and to the City.
§ 268-26 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-27
264:703

ARTICLE IV
Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 9-4-2003 by Ord. No. 03-100]
§ 268-28. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c.
114 (N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq.), which authorizes the governing body of a
municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage
rate not to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after
July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of
rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in
a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L.
1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any other tax
or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any
governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 268-29. Tax rate established.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
City of Trenton which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of 1% on
charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the City of
Trenton on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and 3% on charges
of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the City of Trenton
on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3
(sales tax).
§ 268-30. Tax considered additional.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 268-31. Absorption of tax by vendor prohibited.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114 (N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1
et seq.):
A. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
§ 268-28 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-31
264:705
§ 268-32. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the City by the
person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each person
required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable for
the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any such
person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time,
provided that the chief financial officer of the City shall be joined as a party
in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 268-33. Transmission of copies of article.
A copy of this article shall be transmitted to the State Treasurer and to each
hotel or motel located within the City of Trenton.
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be $500 for
each offense.
§ 268-31 TRENTON CODE § 268-33
264:706
ARTICLE V
Tax on Parking of Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 9-7-2006 by Ord. No. 06-71]
§ 268-34. Tax imposed; exceptions; payment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48C-6, there is hereby imposed, and shall be paid,
a municipal tax of 7% upon receipts from the parking, storing or garaging
of motor vehicles, excluding the charges for residential parking, employee
parking when provided by an employer or at a facility owned or operated
by the employer and municipal metered parking. Said tax is to be collected
and forwarded to the City monthly by the operator of the parking facility.
§ 268-34 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-34
264:707

ARTICLE VI
Tax Exemption Pursuant to New Jersey Economic Opportunity Act of
2013
[Adopted 12-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-58]
§ 268-35. Exemptions for improvements to real property.
Pursuant to the authorization contained in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-489s, the City
Tax Assessor shall be authorized to grant exemptions for improvements to
real property in the City that are made after the effective date of this article.
The owner of eligible property must obtain a final certificate of occupancy
on or before September 18, 2023.
§ 268-36. Implementation of exemption.
Upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or temporary certificate of
occupancy, in determining the value of real property, the City Tax Assessor
shall regard up to the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements
constructed after September 18, 2013, as not increasing the value of the
property for 10 years when the property is owned by a Garden State Growth
Zone Development Entity, and for five years for all other property owners.
A Garden State Growth Zone Development Entity shall provide to the City
Tax Assessor proof that it qualifies as such entity prior to the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy.
§ 268-37. Payment of taxes.
§ 268-38. Expiration of exemption.
Upon the expiration of the tax exemption authorized pursuant to this article,
the project shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes, as provided
by New Jersey laws and regulations and local ordinances, provided that
nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the project or improvement at
A. The required payments shall be made in quarterly installments
according to the same schedule as real property taxes are due and
payable.
B. In addition to the payments required in lieu of taxes, the owner of the
property granted an exemption pursuant to this article shall be liable
for all real property taxes assessed and levied against the land on which
the improvement is situated, as well as the value of the improvements
on the property in the last full tax years prior to the issuance of the
temporary certificate of occupancy.
C. Failure to make the payments set forth in Subsection A or B of this
section shall result in the termination of the exemption. In addition to
the remedy set forth herein, the requirements imposed shall be
enforced in the same manner as is provided for real property taxes
pursuant to Title 54 of the Revised States of the State of New Jersey.
§ 268-35 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-38
264:709
the termination of the agreement for tax exemption from qualifying for and
receiving the full benefits of any other tax preference provided by law.
§ 268-39. Applicability of exemption.
The exemption of real property taxes provided by the City pursuant to this
article shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal purposes, school
purposes, county government purposes and for the purpose of funding any
other property tax exemptions.
§ 268-38 TRENTON CODE § 268-39
264:710
Chapter 272
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 14.
§ 268-39 SWIMMING POOLS § 268-39
264:711

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 272-1. Authority and scope.
§ 272-2. Definitions.
The words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CRUISING — The driving of an empty taxicab along a public street at a slow
rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting passengers.
DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTIONS — The Director or the
designee of the Director.
DIRECTOR OF POLICE — The Director or the designee of the Director.
MEDALLION — A decal or metal disk that is affixed to the rear passenger
door of the vehicle which signifies a current registration and passing
inspection.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Transporting for hire one or more persons
from a point of departure within the municipality to a destination within or
outside the municipality. The operation of a taxicab by one other than the
owner shall be deemed operation by the owner as well as by the person
actually driving the taxi. The transportation of any person other than the
owner or operator in any motor vehicle bearing a sign using the word "taxi,"
"taxicab," "cab" or "hack" shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered with
the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, or who appears in the Division's
records to be a conditional vendee or lessee or has any other proprietary
interest in a taxicab or limousine.
PUBLIC TAXICAB STANDS — A section of a public street or of a public
place set apart for the exclusive use of a taxicab or a limited number of
taxicabs, when such section is distinctly marked as such by an appropriate
sign attached to a stanchion on the curb or other conspicuous place or by
clearly visible marks upon the surface of a street or public place.
A. Authority. The authority to license and regulate taxicabs is set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
B. Scope. This chapter shall apply to all businesses commonly known as
taxicabs which are located in the City of Trenton. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to regulate limousines, hotel buses, buses
employed solely in transporting school children or teachers, autobuses
which are subject to the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation, or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law
to carry insurance against loss from liability imposed by law on account
of bodily injury or death.
§ 272-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-2
264:713
TAXICAB and TAXI — Any full size, four-door sedan, station wagon or van,
with a carrying capacity of not less than four passengers, not including
the operator, used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, and
particularly accepts and discharges such persons from points or places to
points or places within or outside the municipality.
§ 272-3. License required.
§ 272-4. Owner's license requirements.
A. Taxicab operator's license. No person shall operate a taxicab in the City
of Trenton unless that person holds a valid taxicab operator's license
issued by the Director of the Department of Inspections. Any and all
violators would be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the City of Trenton.
B. Taxicab owner's license. No person owning or leasing a vehicle shall
use that vehicle or permit that vehicle to be used as a taxicab unless
there is a current taxicab owner's license in effect for such vehicle.
C. Any individual granted a license to operate a taxi in the City of Trenton
may not be permitted to own or be employed by a taxi company which is
not licensed by the City of Trenton; furthermore, any licensed taxicab
operator shall not be employed by more than one licensed company.
[Added 10-6-2011 by Ord. No. 11-45]
A. General. No taxicab owner's license shall be granted unless the
applicant meets the requirements set forth in this section:
(1) Citizenship or visa. The applicant must be a citizen of the United
States or a legal resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership or
corporation then each partner or officer must be a citizen of the
United States or a legal resident alien.
(2) Authorization to do business. If the applicant is a corporation, the
corporation must either be incorporated in the State of New Jersey
or authorized to do business in this state.
(3) Convictions. The applicant shall not have been convicted of any
crime and/or disorderly persons offense involving moral turpitude,
including but not limited to conviction for possession and/or
distribution of pornography, conviction for possession and
distribution of controlled dangerous substances, all elements
included under the New Jersey statute prohibiting prostitution,
sexual offenses of physical violence against persons or property
within 10 years next preceding the date of application for license,
unless the Police Director, for good cause shown, shall waive any
disqualification based on such conviction. If the applicant is a
partnership, then no partner may have such record. If the applicant
is a corporation, then neither the corporation nor any officer or
director may have such record.
§ 272-2 TRENTON CODE § 272-4
264:714
§ 272-5. Applications for owner's license.
(4) Prior license revocations. The applicant must have no record of
prior revocation by any jurisdiction of a license related to the
taxicab business. If the applicant is a partnership, then no partner
may have such record. If the applicant is a corporation, then
neither the corporation nor any officer or director may have such
record.
(5) Insurance. The applicant must have complied with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 et seq., and the acts amendatory thereof or
supplemental thereto and § 272-5B of this Code. In the event of the
cancellation of licensee's insurance the license shall terminate
upon the effective date of the cancellation, unless prior thereto the
insurance has been reinstated by withdrawal of the cancellation or
a new policy of insurance is delivered to the Director of the
Department of Inspections for the remainder of the license year.
(6) Child support. The applicant must certify that all child support
obligations are current pursuant to the standard set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2A:17-56.41.
B. Number of taxicab owners' licenses. The number of taxicab owners'
licenses shall not exceed 82. The Director of the Department of
Inspections shall reduce the number of taxicab owners' licenses issued
to 82 by retiring licenses revoked for violation of taxicab rules and
regulations or failure to renew.
A. Forms. Applications for an owner's license under this chapter shall be
made by the owner or lessee thereof upon blank forms to be furnished
by the Director of the Department of Inspections. The application shall
require the applicant to provide all of the information necessary to
determine whether the applicant is entitled to an owner's license. Each
individual applicant, copartner or officer of a corporation shall have his
or her fingerprints taken and filed with the Director of the Department
of Inspections.
B. Insurance. Effective with the 2004 renewal, the applicant for a taxicab
license shall file an insurance policy issued by a company duly licensed
to transact business under the laws of this state in the sum of $50,000
against loss by reason of liability imposed by law for damages on
account of bodily injury or death as a result of ownership, maintenance
or use of the taxicab upon any public street. No owner of any vehicle for
hire shall be issued a license until (s)he has executed and delivered to
the Director of the Department of Inspections, concurrent with the
filing of an insurance policy, a power of attorney wherein and whereby
(s)he shall appoint the Business Administrator of the municipality his/
her true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service
of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served
against the insured.
§ 272-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-5
264:715
§ 272-6. Taxicab operator's license required; qualifications of
applicants.
C. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement in any
license application or in any record or certificate that (s)he is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
D. Fees. All fees as set forth in § 272-11 must be paid with the application.
If the application is withdrawn or denied, then the fees shall be
refunded, with the exception of the application fee of $25.
E. The applicant must be tested for the presence of illegal drugs and
controlled substances at a City of Trenton approved drug testing
facility. A urine sample is required for testing. The applicant shall
assume the cost of all testing.
F. At the time of application, the applicant shall have his/her fingerprints
taken by the police and filed with the Director of the Department of
Inspections. No license shall be issued to an applicant who has been
convicted of a DWI (driving while intoxicated) violation, as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 through 39:4-51, within the previous two years.
Conviction of a DWI offense while a license holder shall result in
immediate revocation of the license. No license shall be issued to an
applicant who has been convicted of a crime and/or disorderly person
offense involving moral turpitude, including but not limited to
pornography offenses, possession or distribution of a controlled
dangerous substance, prostitution, sexual offenses or physical violence,
within the previous 10 years. Conviction of an offense while a license
holder shall result in immediate revocation of the license.
G. Child support. The applicant must certify that all child support
obligations are current pursuant to the standard set forth in N.J.S.A.
2A:17-56.41.
A. Required. No person shall drive a taxicab for the purpose of accepting
therein or discharging therefrom any person without first having
obtained a license to do so.
B. Qualifications of applicants. Generally, each applicant for a license to
drive a taxicab must:
(1) Have a valid New Jersey driver's license with no suspensions or
revocations of license in any jurisdiction for the preceding two
years, except for suspensions and revocations purely
administrative in nature.
(2) State the name of the licensee of the taxicab by whom or which
(s)he will be employed.
§ 272-5 TRENTON CODE § 272-6
264:716
§ 272-7. Applications for taxicab operator's license.
(3) Be at least 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States or a
legal resident alien.
(4) Be able to speak, read and write the English language.
(5) At the time of making the initial application, have his/her
fingerprints taken by the police and filed with the Director of the
Department of Inspections.
C. The applicant must file with the Director of the Department of
Inspections a certificate from a licensed physician, setting forth that
(s)he has been examined by a physician within 30 days prior to the date
of the application. The applicant must have no disability or illness which
poses a significant risk of substantial harm to the applicant or others.
D. The applicant must be tested for the presence of illegal drugs and
controlled substances at a City of Trenton approved drug testing
facility, after filing of application; a urine sample is required for testing.
The applicant shall assume the cost of all testing.
E. At the time of application, the applicant shall have his/her fingerprints
taken by the police and filed with Director of the Department of
Inspections. No license shall be issued to an applicant who has been
convicted of a DWI (driving while intoxicated) violation, as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 through 39:4-51, within the previous two years.
Conviction of a DWI offense while a license holder shall result in
immediate revocation of the license. No license shall be issued to an
applicant who has been convicted of a crime and/or disorderly person
offense involving moral turpitude, including but not limited to
pornography offenses, possession or distribution of a controlled
dangerous substance, prostitution, sexual offenses or physical violence,
within the previous 10 years. Conviction of an offense while a license
holder shall result in immediate revocation of the license.
F. Child support. The applicant must certify that all child support
obligations are current pursuant to the standard set forth in N.J.S.A.
2A:17-56.41.
A. Forms. Applications for taxicab operator's licenses under this chapter
shall be made by the applicant upon forms furnished by the Director of
the Department of Inspections. The form shall require the applicant to
provide all of the information necessary to determine whether the
applicant is entitled to an operator's license.
B. Proof of driver's license. The applicant must provide the Director of the
Department of Inspections with proof that (s)he holds a valid driver's
license issued by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 272-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-7
264:717
§ 272-8. Review of applications.
C. Convictions. The applicant shall provide the Police Director with
authorization to review any records of criminal convictions for that
individual or the individual partners.
D. Convictions and driving violations. The applicant shall provide the
Police Director or his designee with authorization to review any records
of criminal convictions or motor vehicle infractions for that individual
or the individual partners.
E. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement on any
license application or on any record or certificate that (s)he is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including the
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Court.
F. Fees. A non-refundable application/processing fee of $25 (cash or
money order) shall be submitted with all license applications.
G. Photographs. Each applicant for an operator's license shall file with his/
her application three unmounted, unretouched, passport quality
photographs of himself/herself. The photographs shall have been taken
within 30 days preceding the filing of the application. One of the
photographs shall be attached to the operator's license. The remaining
photographs shall be filed with the application by the Director of the
Department of Inspections. Each licensed operator shall exhibit his/her
license with the photograph attached for inspection. In case an
application for an operator's license is denied, two of the photographs
shall be returned to the applicant.
A. Review by the Director of the Department of Inspections. Each
application shall be reviewed for completeness. If the application is not
complete, the Director of the Department of Inspections shall advise the
applicant, and no further action shall be taken until the application is
complete.
B. Inspection of vehicle.
(1) Vehicles must be inspected at a state-operated inspection station
only.
(2) The initial license and the annual renewal thereof shall be
contingent upon the careful inspection of the vehicle by the
Director of the Department of Inspections and found to be in a
thoroughly safe, clean and fit condition for transportation of
passengers. Municipal inspection stickers will be affixed to the
vehicle by the Director of the Department of Inspections or his/ her
designee.
§ 272-7 TRENTON CODE § 272-8
264:718
§ 272-9. Issuance of owner's license.
§ 272-10. Badges.
§ 272-11. License fees.
C. Examination and certification of applicant as to knowledge of laws. As
part of his/her review, each applicant may be examined as to the
applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the Motor
Vehicle Act, the Traffic Act and other ordinances and regulations having
to do with traffic and the geography of the municipality, and, if the
result of the examination is unsatisfactory, (s)he shall be refused a
license.
A. If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be in a safe condition for
transportation of passengers and conforms to the rules and regulations
established under this chapter, the Director of the Department of
Inspections shall authorize the issuance of a license to the applicant.
The license shall set forth the name of the owner of the vehicle, the
trade name, and the official license number thereof. The license shall be
signed by the Director of the Department of Inspections or his/her
designee and shall be conspicuously displayed within the taxicab.
B. The Director of the Department of Inspections shall also furnish a small
card indicating the maximum fares and the telephone number for
complaints. The card shall be conspicuously displayed within the
vehicle.
A. Display on clothing. A badge shall be issued to each licensee under this
chapter bearing the license number of the operator and the word
“operator” thereon. The badge must be conspicuously displayed on the
left breast of the operator’s outer garment when (s)he is engaged in his/
her employment. If any badge becomes lost or destroyed, a new badge
shall be furnished by the Director of the Department of Inspections
upon payment of the sum of $35. [Amended 10-6-2011 by Ord. No.
11-45]
B. Sale or loan of badge or license prohibited. No person shall sell, loan or
otherwise dispose of any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, or of any badge delivered by the Director of the Department of
Inspections with any license.
A. Purpose; term of license. The license fees are fixed for the purpose of
regulation and control and shall be paid annually, in the manner and
amounts set forth below to the City, for conducting or engaging in the
business aforementioned. The term of each license issued shall expire
on the last day of February of the following year of issue.
B. Taxicab owner's license. The annual fee for a taxicab owner's license
shall be $250 per vehicle per year, up to a maximum of 15 vehicles,
after which the fee shall be $50 per vehicle to cover the cost of the
§ 272-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-11
264:719
§ 272-12. Renewal of owners' and operators' licenses.
medallion. The fee for any license granted after September 1 and
expiring the last day of February of the following year shall be $150.
Any license issued for a particular vehicle may be transferred to a
different vehicle upon a full inspection and the payment of a transfer
fee of $25. [Amended 6-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
C. Taxicab operator’s license. For each original taxicab operator’s license
or for each renewal thereof the fee shall be $175. A fee of $25 shall be
paid to the Director of the Department of Inspections for a badge for
each licensed operator. [Amended 10-6-2011 by Ord. No. 11-45]
D. Replacement fee. If any license becomes lost or destroyed, a duplicate
license shall be furnished by the Director of the Department of
Inspections upon payment of the sum of $35. [Amended 10-6-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-45]
E. Exemptions. Each person honorably discharged from the United States
Armed Services upon furnishing satisfactory proof of service and
discharge and complying with the terms and conditions of this chapter
shall be exempt from payment of fee for an operator's license. However,
no fee shall be waived for the purchase of a badge.
A. Vehicle inspection. Taxicab owners' licenses may be renewed from year
to year contingent upon a passing vehicle inspection by the Director of
the Department of Inspections or his/her designee.
B. Form. An application for renewal of a taxicab owner's or operator's
license shall be made upon a form to be furnished by the Director of the
Department of Inspections.
C. Time for filing. The renewal application shall be filed no later than
February 1 of the year of issue, which requirement may be waived or
the period extended for good cause by the Director of the Department
of Inspections.
D. Failure to file. Failure of an owner or operator to renew a license will
result in the termination of the license upon the expiration date. The
license may be extended, upon written request made to the Director of
the Department of Inspections prior to the expiration date, if good
cause is shown for the failure to make timely renewal application.
E. Late fees. In the event any holder of an owner's license seeks to renew a
license that shall have expired, there shall be an additional fee of $25.
F. Extension of license. In the event it is determined that an inspection of
the vehicle will not be completed for the timely renewal of an owner's
license, the Director of the Department of Inspections or other designee
of the municipality who may perform inspections may authorize the
extension of a license for a fourteen-day period.
§ 272-11 TRENTON CODE § 272-13
264:720
§ 272-13. Regulations for taxicabs.
In addition to carrying out the provisions of this chapter, all licensees
hereunder shall abide by the following regulations applicable to the license
or licenses held:
A. Posting of license identification. There shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the inside of each taxicab the name and business address of
the owner and the name, business address and photograph of the
operator, together with the license number of the vehicle and the
number of the operator's license. Such identification shall be provided
by the owner in a manner to be approved by the Director of the
Department of Inspections.
B. Street map. In addition to all other working knowledge of geography, a
street map of Mercer County which shall be purchased in the office of
the Director of the Department of Inspections is required to be kept in
all cabs at all times.
C. Change of address; loss of records; change in company of employment.
Any change of address of any owner or operator licensed under the
provisions of this chapter must be reported, in writing, to the City Clerk
within 72 hours of such change. The loss of the license badge or any
other book or document required to be kept by any licensed owner or
operator must be reported to the City Clerk, in writing, within 72 hours
of such loss. The City Clerk shall charge any licensee a fee of $10 to
replace any lost badge, book or document. Any change in company for
which a driver is employed must be reported to the Director of the
Department of Inspections within 72 hours of such change. [Amended
4-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12]
D. Record of trips. Each and every licensed operator shall legibly record
on a trip form, kept solely for the purpose of recording the departure
from the garage or stand, the name and address of the operator thereof,
his/her license number and the license number of the vehicle and the
time of the return to the garage or stand of each such vehicle, locations
of pickup, time of pickup, destination, time destination is reached, the
number of passengers conveyed and the fee charged. All owners and
operators shall keep the record of trips open for inspection by any
police officer or taxi inspector. Records shall be maintained for a period
of six months. Failure of an operator or owner to produce a record of
trips for the six-month period preceding a police officer's or taxi
inspector's demand shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
E. Identification of taxicabs. Each taxicab shall have a dome displaying the
trade name of the company or the word "taxi" affixed to its roof, and
shall have the trade name of the taxicab lettered in no less than threeinch
letters in contrasting color to body paint on the front passenger
and driver's side doors. Each taxicab shall also conspicuously display
the medallion certifying that an annual inspection has been completed,
next to the painted three-inch numbers assigned by the City Clerk on
§ 272-13 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-13
264:721
the front panels and on the left rear section of the trunk of the taxicab.
No taxi shall be painted in a black-and-white color scheme that could
reasonably be mistaken for a police vehicle. [Amended 4-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-12]
F. Imitation of insignia used by other taxicab. No licensee of any taxicab
shall use thereon or thereabout any imitation of any color scheme,
monogram or insignia previously adopted or used by any other licensee
of a taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
G. Giving false or misleading information to passengers; operators to use
most direct route. No operator of a taxicab shall induce any person to
employ him/her by knowingly misinforming or misleading such person
either as to the time or place of the arrival or departure of any train,
omnibus, boat, aircraft or other means of public transportation or as to
the location of any hotel, airfield, airdome, public place or private
residence or place; nor shall any operator deceive any person or make
any false representation to him/her in respect to the transportation or
prospective transportation of any passenger, or convey any passenger
to any other place or over any other route than that to which or over
which such passenger may have instructed the operator to go. Unless
otherwise ordered, operators shall convey passengers by the most
practical direct routes to their destinations.
H. Multiple passengers are only permitted from the point of origin to the
same destination. No taxicab driver shall solicit additional passengers
at the point of origin, and no additional passengers may be picked up en
route.
I. Riding in operator's compartment. No person other than the licensed
operator of the taxicab, excepting a fare occupying the auxiliary seat,
shall ride or sit in the compartment of a taxicab reserved for the
operator.
J. Lost or misplaced items; disposition of property left in taxicab. Every
operator of a taxicab shall, immediately after termination of
employment, carefully search the taxicab for any property lost or left
therein, and shall, immediately after finding any property, deliver the
property to police headquarters.
K. Response of taxicab service. All taxicab licensees or their
representatives shall answer all calls received for taxi service inside the
municipality limits without unreasonable delay. If such service cannot
be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective
passenger as to how long it will be before the call can be answered and
give the reason.
L. Insurance identification card. The insurance identification card shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the vehicle.
M. Cooperation with law enforcement officers. All licensees under this
chapter shall cooperate with law enforcement officers in the
§ 272-13 TRENTON CODE § 272-13
264:722
performance of their duty. No licensee shall conceal evidence of a crime
or voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. A licensee shall report
immediately to the police any attempt to use his/her vehicle to commit
a crime or escape from the scene of a crime.
N. Conduct of operators.
(1) Licensed operators, while engaged in the operation of a taxicab,
shall behave in a civil and orderly manner and shall not use any
indecent, profane or abusive language.
(2) Operators shall be clean and neat and shall wear the following
items of dress:
(a) A long- or short-sleeved shirt or blouse with a collar.
(b) A pair of zippered trousers or skirt.
(c) Other items of clothing, e.g., headgear, jackets, sweaters or
shoes, as well as jewelry, shall be appropriate and tasteful.
Operators shall not wear excessive cologne, perfume or
aftershave.
(3) Operators shall not be under the influence of, or impaired by, any
intoxicant.
O. Smoking. No operator or passenger shall smoke or possess lighted
tobacco products in a licensed vehicle.
P. Storage and parking of vehicles. No taxicab shall be stored or parked on
any street of the municipality, other than when the vehicle or operator
is on duty.
Q. Operation of vehicles. No operator of a taxicab shall operate his/her
vehicle in a manner to endanger a passenger or any other person.
R. Maintenance of vehicles. The owner and operator of a taxicab shall
maintain such vehicle in a safe and clean condition and shall maintain
such vehicle in a good appearance, including proper painting and the
prompt repair of dents.
S. Accidents; reporting and repair. Every owner of a licensed taxicab
which is involved in an automobile accident shall provide the Director
of the Department of Inspections with a copy of the accident report
within five working days of the accident. Any taxicab, which has
sustained damage to the vehicle, such as dents, or is in need of painting
shall be repaired within eight weeks of the date of the accident. The
Director of the Department of Inspections shall inform the taxicab
owner of any and all repairs that are necessary. Any taxicab owner who
fails to comply with the terms of this section shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to suspension of taxicab license.
§ 272-13 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-13
264:723
T. Inspection of vehicles. All taxicabs, owners and operators shall be
subject to regular random unannounced inspections of the vehicles to
insure compliance with all regulations and reporting requirements
contained herein.
U. Obstruction of vision. No licensee under this chapter shall display any
advertising on his/her vehicle which obstructs the vision of the
operator, including the operator's vision to the rear.
V. Taxicab overcharges. No person shall charge or attempt to charge any
taxicab passenger a greater rate of fare than that to which the operator
is entitled under the provisions of this chapter.
W. Refusal of service. No taxicab operator licensed by the municipality, and
who is on duty, shall unreasonably refuse to carry any orderly person
applying for a taxicab who agrees and, upon reasonable request,
demonstrates ability to pay the proper rate of fare. A refusal to carry an
orderly passenger shall be presumptively unreasonable where the
refusal is based on the amount of money the operator expects to receive
or is based upon the race, sex, religion or ethnic background of the
passenger.
X. Age of vehicle. When a taxicab owner or operator first becomes licensed
in the municipality, his/her taxicab shall not be more than 84 months
(seven years) old. A vehicle owned by a currently licensed operator
which is in excess of 84 months as of the effective date of this chapter
shall be licensed hereunder if it otherwise satisfies all inspection
criteria required of vehicles less than 84 months and thereafter, such
vehicle in excess of 84 months can receive a waiver of this requirement
based upon the inspection of the vehicle by the Director of the
Department of Inspections or other authorized inspection designee of
the municipality who shall find that the vehicle is able to satisfy all
safety, repair, operational and passenger requirements provided
hereunder, and otherwise satisfies all requirements provided for
vehicles of less than 84 months.
Y. Receipts. The operator of any taxicab shall, upon demand by any
passenger, render to such passenger a City of Trenton-issued receipt
for the amount charged, on which shall be the name of the owner of the
taxicab, the name of the operator, the date and time of the transaction
and the amount of the fare. The cost of said receipt book shall be $5.
[Amended 4-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12; 10-6-2011 by Ord. No.
11-45]
Z. Safety equipment. No taxicab shall be operated in violation of federal or
state regulations with regard to transportation of children.
AA. Improper use of horn. Licensed drivers shall not use the horn of their
vehicle to alert customers of their arrival. Violation of this provision
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and a violation of N.J.S.A.
39:3-69.
§ 272-13 TRENTON CODE § 272-13
264:724
§ 272-14. Enforcement; license registry.
§ 272-15. Designated taxicab stands.
The governing body may, by ordinance, designate taxicab stands within
its jurisdiction if and when it shall deem such action necessary for the
convenience of the public. When a taxicab stand has been designated, fixed
or established, the following regulations shall apply:
BB. Receiving and discharging passengers. Licensed drivers shall not
receive or discharge passengers in the roadway without pulling their
vehicles as close as possible to the righthand sidewalk or, in the
absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme righthand side of the road and
there receive or discharge passengers. On one-way streets, passengers
may be discharged at either the right or left hand sidewalk or side of
roadway where no sidewalk exists.
A. General. The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be
under the control of the Director of the Department of Inspections and
the police. All licenses for vehicles and operators shall be issued by the
Director of the Department of Inspections.
B. License registry. The Director of the Department of Inspections shall
keep a register of the name of each person owning or operating a
vehicle or vehicles licensed under this chapter, together with the
license number and the description, make and dimensions of such
vehicles, with the date and completed record or inspections made of
them. All applications for license shall be filed by Director of the
Department of Inspections and carefully preserved for reference. All
such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all
reasonable times and shall be deemed the official records of the office
of the Director of the Department of Inspections.
A. All designated taxicab stands shall be open to all taxicabs for which an
owner's license has been issued.
B. Only taxicabs in such numbers as shall be set forth on the sign
designating any taxicab stand shall remain at any such stand while
waiting for employment, and taxicabs shall remain in single file.
C. No operator of a taxicab standing at the head of any line shall refuse to
transport any orderly person applying for a taxicab who agrees to pay
the proper rate of fare; provided, however, that this provision shall not
prevent any prospective passenger from selecting a taxicab at any
stand, whether or not it shall be at the head of the line. As a taxicab
shall leave the line or move forward, the taxicab behind it shall be
moved forward, and the operator of a taxicab seeking a space at the
stand shall approach from the rear of the stand and shall stop as near as
possible to the last taxicab then in line. No taxicab shall stand at any
place in or upon any of the streets or highways or any other public place
§ 272-13 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-15
264:725
§ 272-16. Disciplinary action.
within the municipality awaiting employment for hire excepting at
designated taxicab stands.
D. No taxicab shall stand within 25 feet of the nearest crosswalk or
sideline of a street or intersecting highway except at alleys, or within 50
feet of a stop sign, or within 50 feet of the near right-hand corner of any
street upon which any autobus route is established and approved by the
Board of Public Utility Commissioners, or within 20 feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station, or within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
E. No taxicab operator shall stand in front of the entrance to any building
within any prohibited space after his/her passengers desiring to alight
have done so, or stand in the prohibited space waiting for passengers.
Drivers shall remain in their vehicles or within the immediate vicinity of
their vehicle (one car length) until they reach the head of the line.
F. No taxicab operator shall, while engaged in employment, engage in
conversation with persons upon any street, highway or public place
except in the course of his/her business, or suffer or permit any person
to loiter in or about the taxicab of which (s)he is the operator.
G. No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall stop at any public taxicab
stand except while loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise
or receiving or discharging passengers.
H. Each taxicab stand shall be marked with a suitable stanchion which
shall bear the statement that the stand is a stand reserved for licensees
only, and shall designate the number of taxicabs which may occupy the
stand.
I. All duly licensed taxicabs may stand at any designated taxi stand in the
City.
J. No taxicab operator shall engage in the practice of cruising, as defined
in § 272-2. [Added 9-2-2010 by Ord. No. 10-37]
A. General. Any licensee who violates a provision of this chapter or is in
violation of any rule or regulation governing the operation or conduct of
any activity licensed hereunder shall be subject to reasonable license
disciplinary action, including the imposition of monetary sanctions as
per Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the City of
Trenton, license suspension and revocation, in addition to such civil or
criminal prosecution as may be appropriate.
B. Notice of revocation hearing. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be given in writing by the Director of the
Department of Inspections. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee
§ 272-15 TRENTON CODE § 272-16
264:726
§ 272-17. Appeal process.
Any person who shall be aggrieved by any decision shall be entitled to
appeal to the City Council within 30 days of the receipt of the decision by
filing a written request for review by the governing body with the Director
of the Department of Inspections within the thirty-day period.
§ 272-18. Meters, rates and charges. [Amended 9-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-49]
at his/her last known address by regular mail and certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Procedure for revocation hearing. Hearings for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be conducted before the Director of the
Department of Inspections or a designee thereof. At the hearing, the
licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to be represented
by an attorney, to present witnesses in his/her own behalf, to cross
examine opposing witnesses, and to have a permanent record made of
the proceedings at his/her own expense. The Director of the
Department of Inspections or a designee thereof shall order the
revocation or suspension of the license if (s)he is satisfied by a
preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts
charged. If the license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may
appeal to the governing body.
D. Other powers. Nothing herein contained shall limit the power of the
Director of the Department of Inspections or the police to immediately
suspend such license for a period not exceeding five days, pending the
giving of notice and holding of a hearing, whenever necessary, in the
opinion and discretion of the Director of the Department of Inspections
or police. In the event of temporary suspension, if notice and hearing of
alleged violations or charges is not given and held prior to the
expiration of the five-day period unless extended by the owner or
operator, the proposed charges and violations shall be deemed
dismissed.
E. Suspension or revocation of license. Owners' licenses and operators'
licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at any
time. Any suspension shall be noted upon the license suspended,
together with the reason therefor. No operator whose license has been
revoked shall again be licensed as an operator of a taxicab. The
Director of the Department of Inspections shall notify the police
whenever a license shall be deemed suspended or revoked.
A. Meters. Effective September 1, 2004, all taxicabs licensed with the City
of Trenton shall be equipped with a Pulsor 2020R taximeter, or the
equivalent, as approved by the Taxi Inspector. Meters shall be installed
by a City-licensed installation shop. Meters shall be mounted on, or in
front of, the vehicle dashboard so as to be clearly visible to the
passengers and not obstructed in any way. The meters shall be
§ 272-16 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-18
264:727
§ 272-19. Taxi stands.
connected into the dome light so that when the meter is on the dome
light is off. The meters shall issue a receipt that must be presented
to the passenger at the end of each trip. The receipt shall list the
City’s taxi office phone number as the contact for customer complaints.
The meters are to be inspected and calibrated annually by the City’s
Weights and Measures Inspector, at which time the meter shall be
sealed and tagged. In addition, all meters are subject to random
inspection at any time by the City’s Taxi Inspector. A provisional license
will be issued on February 1, 2004, to be replaced by a permanent
license upon installation of the meters by September 1, 2004.
[Amended 10-6-2011 by Ord. No. 11-45]
B. Rates and charges. [Amended 6-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
(1) The charges for transportation of passengers and other services
incidental thereto, originating within the City of Trenton, are
hereby fixed as follows:
(a) The basic fare shall be $4 and shall increase at the rate of
$0.15 per 1/10 mile to a maximum fare of $9.50 for trips
entirely within the City limits. A charge of $1.50 is permitted
per each additional passenger.
(b) Waiting time, defined as “time spent waiting for a passenger
who has exited the taxi for some reason,” shall be charged at
the rate of $0.50 per minute and shall be in addition to the fare
described above.
(c) The fare for trips originating within the City of Trenton and
terminating outside the City shall be a flat rate negotiated
prior to the start of the trip.
(2) The rates herein fixed shall be posted conspicuously in each taxicab
in the rear of the taxicab in full view of the passenger.
(3) The driver has the option of collecting a fare deposit in the amount
of $4 at the point of origin.
A. The following described locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
(1) South Broad Street (Stand #15), east side, from 35 feet south of
East State Street to 85 feet south thereof.
(2) Perry Street (Stand #20), north side, from 130 feet east of Broad
Street to 75 feet east thereof.
(3) South Warren Street, east side, from 35 feet south of East State
Street to 83 feet south thereof. Taxi Stand #6 is hereby designated
also as an exclusive loading zone only from the hours 8:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m. Monday through Friday; all other times it shall be a taxi
stand. [Amended 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
§ 272-18 TRENTON CODE § 272-19
264:728
§ 272-20. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
(4) Trenton Train Station and Hotel District.
B. The following stands shall be subject to a request for proposals at twoyear
intervals, submitted to the Municipal Clerk for review, with the
emphasis on types of services that will be provided for the following
locations:
(1) New Jersey Transit Train Station (Stand #1), driveway off South
Clinton Avenue. Westerly side of Trenton Train Station (discharge
of passengers only).
(2) Walnut Avenue (Stand #33), westerly side, from 350 feet north of
Greenwood Avenue to 90 feet north thereof.
(3) Walnut Avenue Extension (Stand #33-A), westerly side, from 35
feet south of Hollywood Avenue to 520 feet south thereof.90
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), Lafayette Street, which immediately followed, was
repealed 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-66.
§ 272-19 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-20
264:729

ARTICLE II
Limousines
§ 272-21. Authority and scope.
§ 272-22. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meaning given herein:
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car with a carrying capacity of not
more than nine passengers, not including the operator, commonly called a
limousine, used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is
held out, announced or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated
or run, over any of the streets or public highways of this City, and which is
hired by charter; for a particular contract; by the day, hour or other fixed
period; to transport passengers to a specified place or places; or which
charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and
the passenger.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Includes the business of carrying passengers for
hire by limousines.
§ 272-23. Licenses required.
§ 272-24. Requirements for limousine owner's licenses.
No limousine owner's license shall be granted unless the applicant meets
the requirements set forth in this section:
A. Authority. The authority to license and regulate limousines is set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
B. Scope. This chapter shall apply to all businesses commonly known as
"limousine services" which are located in the City of Trenton. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to regulate hotel buses, buses
employed solely in transporting school children or teachers, autobuses
which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law
to carry insurance against loss from liability imposed by law on account
of bodily injury or death.
A. Limousine operator's license. No person shall operate a limousine in
the City unless that person holds a valid limousine operator's license.
B. Limousine owner's license. No person owning or leasing a vehicle shall
use or permit that vehicle to be used as a limousine unless there is a
current limousine owner's license in effect for such vehicle.
C. Violations. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code
of the City of Trenton.
§ 272-21 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-24
264:731
§ 272-25. Requirements for limousine operator's license.
No limousine operator's license shall be granted unless the applicant meets
the requirements set forth in this section:
A. Citizenship or visa. The applicant must be a citizen of the United States
or a legal resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership then each
partner must be a citizen of the United States or a legal resident alien.
B. Convictions. The applicant shall not have been convicted of any crime
and/or disorderly persons offense involving moral turpitude, including,
but not limited to, conviction for possession and/or distribution of
pornography, conviction for possession and/or distribution of controlled
dangerous substances, all elements included under the New Jersey
statute prohibiting prostitution, sexual offenses or physical violence
against persons or property within 10 years next preceding the date of
application for license, unless the police, for good cause shown, shall
waive any disqualification based on such conviction. If the applicant is a
partnership, then no partner may have such record. If the applicant is a
corporation, then neither the corporation nor any officer or director
may have such record.
C. Prior license revocations. The applicant must have no record or prior
revocation by any jurisdiction of a license related to the taxicab or
limousine business. If the applicant is a partnership, then no partner
may have such record. If the applicant is a corporation, then neither the
corporation not any officer or director may have such record.
D. Insurance. The applicant must have complied with the provision of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq., and the acts amendatory thereof or
supplemental thereto relating insurance.
E. Child support. The applicant must certify that all child support
obligations are current pursuant to the standard set forth in N.J.S.A.
2A:17-56.41.
A. Age. The applicant must be of the age of 21 years or over.
B. New Jersey driver's license. The applicant must have a valid driver's
license issued by the State of New Jersey.
C. Motor vehicle infractions. The applicant may not have been convicted of
reckless driving, driving while intoxicated or under the influence of
drugs, or leaving the scene of an accident within three years of the
application.
D. Disability or illness. The applicant must have no disability or illness of
any type which poses a significant risk of substantial harm to the
applicant or others if (s)he is granted a license to drive a limousine.
E. English language. The applicant must be able to speak, read and write
the English language.
§ 272-24 TRENTON CODE § 272-25
264:732
§ 272-26. Applications for limousine owner's license.
§ 272-27. Applications for limousine operator's licenses.
F. Knowledge of law, regulations and geography of City. The applicant
must have a thorough knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the
Motor Vehicle Act, the Traffic Act and other ordinances and regulations
having to do with traffic, and the geography of the City.
A. Forms. Applications for a limousine owner's license under this chapter
shall be made by the owner or lessee thereof upon blank forms to be
furnished by the Director of the Department of Inspections. The
application shall require the applicant to provide all of the information
necessary to determine whether the applicant is entitled to an owner's
license.
B. Authorization to do business. If the applicant is a corporation, that
applicant shall provide the Director of the Department of Inspections
with proof that the corporation is either incorporated in the State of
New Jersey or authorized to do business in this state.
C. Vehicles. Every application shall contain a statement as to whether the
applicant is the owner or lessee of the vehicle sought to be licensed, the
state license plate number of the vehicle, the year, make, model and
manufacturer's (VIN) number and the number of persons it is capable of
carrying.
D. Affidavit. All applications shall be duly verified by the affidavit of the
individual, partner of the copartnership or an officer of the corporation
seeking the license, as the case may be.
E. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement in any
license application or in any record or certificate that (s)he is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
F. The applicant must be tested for the presence of illegal drugs and
controlled substances at a City of Trenton approved drug testing
facility, after filing of application; a urine sample is required for testing.
The applicant shall assume the cost of all testing.
G. Fees. All fees must be paid with the application. If the application is
withdrawn or denied, then the fees shall be refunded, with the
exception of application fee of $25.
A. Forms. Applications for limousine operator's licenses under this chapter
shall be made by the applicant upon blank forms to be furnished by the
Director of the Department of Inspections. The form shall require the
applicant to provide all of the information necessary to determine
whether the applicant is entitled to an operator's license.
§ 272-25 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-27
264:733
§ 272-28. License fees.
B. Proof of driver's licenses. The applicant must provide the Director of
the Department of Inspections with proof that (s)he holds a valid
driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey.
C. Photographs. Each applicant for an operator's license shall file with his/
her application three unmounted, unretouched, passport quality
photographs of himself/herself. The photographs shall have been taken
within 30 days preceding the filing of the application. One of the
photographs shall be attached to the operator's license. The remaining
photographs shall be filed with the application by the Director of the
Department of Inspections. Each licensed operator shall exhibit his/her
license with the photograph attached for inspection. In case an
application for an operator's license is denied, two of the photographs
shall be returned to the applicant.
D. Convictions. The applicant shall provide the Director of the Department
of Inspections with authorization to review any records of criminal
convictions for that individual or the individual partners.
E. Affidavit. All applications shall be duly verified by the affidavit of the
applicant seeking the license.
F. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement in any
license application or in any record or certificate that (s)he is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including the
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
G. Fees. All fees must be paid with the application. If the application is
withdrawn or denied, then the fees shall be refunded, with the
exception of $25.
A. Limousine service owner’s license. The annual fee for a limousine
service owner’s license shall be $50, plus $10 for each vehicle.
[Amended 9-2-2010 by Ord. No. 10-37]
B. Limousine operator's license. For each original limousine operator's
license or for each renewal thereof, the fee shall be $30. A fee of $10
shall be paid to the Director of the Department of Inspections for a
badge for each licensed operator.
C. Replacement fee. If any license becomes lost or destroyed, a new
license shall be furnished by the Director of the Department of
Inspections upon payment of the sum of $30.
D. Exemptions. Each person honorably discharged from the United States
Armed Services upon furnishing satisfactory proof of service and
discharge and complying with the terms and conditions of this chapter
§ 272-27 TRENTON CODE § 272-28
264:734
§ 272-29. Maintenance of vehicles.
§ 272-30. Renewal of owner's and operator's licenses.
shall be exempt from payment of fee for an operator's license. However,
no fee shall be waived for the purchase of a badge.
A. Maintenance of vehicles. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
maintain such vehicle in a safe and clean condition and shall maintain
such vehicle in a good appearance, including proper painting and the
prompt repair of dents. Every owner of a licensed limousine which is
involved in an automobile accident shall provide the Director of the
Department of Inspections with a copy of the accident report within five
working days of the accident. Any limousine which has sustained
damage to the vehicle, such as dents, or is in need of painting, shall be
repaired within eight weeks of the date of the accident. The Director of
the Department of Inspections or his/her designee shall inform the
limousine owner of any and all repairs that are necessary. Any
limousine owner who fails to comply with the terms of this section shall
be in violation of this chapter and subject to suspension of the limousine
license.
B. Inspection of vehicles. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
permit the police or any other law enforcement officer to inspect such
vehicle at any and all times.
C. Inspection of records. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
permit the police or any other law enforcement officer to inspect any
records required to be kept by this chapter at any and all times.
D. Limousine fares. No limousine operator or owner shall carry or permit
the carrying of any passenger unless the fare or price has been agreed
upon in advance.
E. Operation of limousines. Neither the owner or operator of a limousine
shall:
(1) Operate the limousine as a taxicab.
(2) Park or stop the vehicle on any street for the purpose of soliciting
or accepting passengers for hire.
(3) Drive the vehicle on any street in search of prospective passengers
for hire or for the purpose of soliciting or accepting passengers for
hire.
(4) Display any sign on or near the vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
passengers for hire.
(5) Utilize any on-street parking area as a taxi stand or place to solicit
passengers for hire.
§ 272-28 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-30
264:735
§ 272-31. Regulations for limousines.
In addition to carrying out the provisions of this chapter, all licensees
hereunder shall abide by the following regulations applicable to the license
or licenses held.
A. General. Limousine owners' licenses may be renewed from year to year
by Director of the Department of Inspections upon certification of a
State of New Jersey motor vehicle inspection. Limousine operators'
license may be renewed from year to year by the Director of the
Department of Inspections.
B. Form. An application for renewal of a limousine owner's or operator's
license shall be made upon a form to be furnished by the Director of the
Department of Inspections.
C. Time for filing. The renewal application shall be filed no later than
February 1 of the year of issue, which requirement may be waived or
the period extended for good cause by the Director of the Department
of Inspections.
D. Failure to file. Failure of an owner or operator to renew a license will
result in the termination of the license upon the expiration date. The
license may be extended, upon written request made to the Director of
the Department of Inspections prior to the expiration date, if good
cause is shown for the failure to make timely renewal application.
E. Late fees. In the event any holder of an owner's license seeks to renew a
license that shall have expired, there shall be an additional fee of $25.
F. Extension of license. In the event it is determined that an inspection of
the vehicle will not be completed for the timely renewal of an owner's
license, the Director of the Department of Inspections or other designee
of the municipality who may perform inspections may authorize the
extension of a license for a fourteen-day period.
A. Posting of license identification. There shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the inside of each limousine the name and address of the
owner and the name, address and photograph of the operator, together
with the license number of the vehicle and the number of the operator's
license. Such identification shall be provided by the owner in a manner
to be approved by the Director of the Department of Inspections.
B. Change of address; loss of records. Any change of address of any owner
or operator licensed under the provisions of this chapter must be
reported, in writing, to the Director of the Department of Inspections
within 72 hours of such change. The loss of the license badge or any
other book or document required to be kept by any licensed owner or
operator must be reported to the Director of the Department of
Inspections, in writing, within 72 hours of such loss. The Director of the
Department of Inspections shall charge any licensee a fee of $10 to
replace any lost badge, book or document.
§ 272-30 TRENTON CODE § 272-31
264:736
C. Record of trips. Each and every licensed operator shall legibly record
on a trip form, kept solely for the purpose of recording the departure
from the garage or stand, the name and address of the operator thereof,
his/her license number and the license number of the vehicle and the
time of the return to the garage or stand of each such vehicle, locations
of pickup, time of pickup, destination, time destination is reached, the
number of passengers conveyed and the fee charged. All owners and
operators shall keep open for inspection by any police officer his/her
record of trips. Records shall be maintained for a period of six months.
Failure of an operator or owner to produce a record of trips for the sixmonth
period preceding a police officer's demand shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. This form shall record the acceptance and
discharge of passengers.
D. Lost or misplaced items, disposition of property left in limousine. Every
operator of a limousine shall, immediately after termination of
employment, carefully search the limousine for any property lost or left
therein, and shall, immediately after finding any property, deliver the
property to police headquarters.
E. Insurance identification card. The insurance identification card shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the vehicle.
F. Cooperation with law enforcement officers. All licensees under this
chapter shall cooperate with law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duty. No licensee shall conceal evidence of a crime
or voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. A licensee shall report
immediately to the police any attempt to use his/her vehicle to commit a
crime or escape from the scene of a crime.
G. Conduct of operators.
(1) Licensed operators, while engaged in the operation of a limousine,
shall behave in a civil and orderly manner and shall not use any
indecent, profane or abusive language.
(2) Operators shall be clean and neat and shall wear the following
items of dress:
(a) A long- or short-sleeved shirt or blouse with a collar.
(b) A pair of zippered trousers or skirt.
(c) Other items of clothing, e.g., headgear, jackets, sweaters or
shoes, as well as jewelry, shall be appropriate and tasteful.
Operators shall not be under the influence of, or impaired by,
any intoxicant.
H. Smoking.
(1) No operator shall smoke or possess lighted tobacco products in his/
her licensed vehicle without first requesting and obtaining
permission from all passengers riding therein.
§ 272-31 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-31
264:737
(2) No passenger shall smoke or possess lighted tobacco products in
any licensed vehicle in which vehicle the operator or owner has
prominently displayed a sign, readily visible to passengers, with the
words "No Smoking" or the equivalent language in block letters at
least two inches high. A licensed operator shall not refuse a
passenger because such passenger objects to the operator smoking
tobacco. Each licensed operator who objects to the smoking of
tobacco by passengers shall have conspicuously posted a notice of
such prohibition as required by N.J.S.A. 20:33-13.
I. Storage and parking of vehicles. No limousine shall be stored or parked
on any street of the municipality, other than when the vehicle or
operator is on duty.
J. Operation of vehicles. No operator of a limousine shall operate his/her
vehicle in a manner to endanger a passenger or any other person.
K. Maintenance of vehicles. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
maintain such vehicle in a safe and clean condition and shall maintain
such vehicle in a good appearance, including proper painting and the
prompt repair of dents.
L. Accidents, reporting and repair. Every owner of a licensed limousine
which is involved in an automobile accident shall provide the Director
of the Department of Inspections with a copy of the accident report
within five working days after the accident. Any limousine which has
sustained damage to the vehicle, such as dents, or is in need of painting
shall be repaired within eight weeks after the date of the accident. The
Director of the Department of Inspections shall inform the limousine
owner of any and all repairs that are necessary. Any limousine owner
who fails to comply with the terms of this section shall be in violation of
this chapter and subject to suspension of the limousine license.
M. Inspection of vehicles. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
permit the Director of the Department of Inspections or any law
enforcement officer to inspect such vehicle at any and all times.
N. Obstruction of vision. No licensee under this chapter shall display any
advertising on his/her vehicle which obstructs the vision of the
operator, including the operator's vision to the rear.
O. Age of vehicle. When a limousine owner or operator first becomes
licensed in the municipality, his/her limousine shall not be more than 84
months (seven years). A vehicle owned by a currently licensed operator
which is in excess of 84 months as of the effective date of this chapter
shall be licensed hereunder if it otherwise satisfies all inspection
criteria required of vehicles less than 84 months and thereafter, such
vehicle in excess of 84 months can receive a waiver of this requirement
based upon the inspection of the vehicle by the Director of the
Department of Inspections or other authorized inspection designee of
the municipality who shall find that the vehicle is able to satisfy all
safety, repair, operational and passenger requirements provided
§ 272-31 TRENTON CODE § 272-31
264:738
§ 272-32. Enforcement; license registry.
§ 272-33. Disciplinary action.
hereunder, and otherwise satisfies all requirements provided for
vehicles of less than 84 months.
P. Receipts. The operator of any limousine shall, upon demand by any
passenger, render to such passenger a receipt of the amount charged,
on which shall be the name of the owner of the limousine, the name of
the operator, the date and time of the transaction and the amount of the
fare.
Q. Safety equipment. Every limousine is required to have approved child
safety seats appropriate to the age of the child prior to transporting the
child and is required to have all children secured as defined in Title 39
before transporting them from point of pickup.
A. General. The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be
under the control of the Director of the Department of Inspections and
the police. All licenses for vehicles and operators shall be issued by the
Director of the Department of Inspections.
B. License registry. The Director of the Department of Inspections shall
keep a register of the name of each person owning or operating a
vehicle or vehicles licensed under this chapter, together with the
license number and the description, make and dimensions of such
vehicles, with the date and completed record or inspections made of
them. All applications for license shall be filed by the Director of the
Department of Inspections and carefully preserved for reference. All
such records shall be opened to the inspection of the public at all
reasonable times and shall be deemed the official records of the office
of the Director of the Department of Inspections of the municipality.
A. General. Any licensee who violates a provision of this chapter or is in
violation of any rule or regulation governing the operation or conduct of
any activity licensed hereunder shall be subject to reasonable license
disciplinary action, including the imposition of monetary sanctions as
per Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the City of
Trenton, license suspension and revocation, in addition to such civil or
criminal prosecution as may be appropriate.
B. Notice of revocation hearing. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be given in writing by the Director of the
Department of Inspections. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee
at his/her last known address by regular mail and certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 272-31 SWIMMING POOLS § 272-33
264:739
§ 272-34. Appeal process.
Any person who shall be aggrieved by any decision shall be entitled to
appeal to the City Council within 30 days of the receipt of the decision by
filing a written request for review by the governing body with the Director
of the Department of Inspections within the thirty-day period.
§ 272-35. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
C. Procedure for revocation hearing. Hearings for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be conducted before the Director of the
Department of Inspections or a designee thereof. At the hearing, the
licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to be represented
by an attorney, to present witnesses in his/her own behalf, to cross
examine opposing witnesses, and to have a permanent record made of
the proceedings at his/her own expense. The Director of the
Department of Inspections or a designee thereof shall revoke or
suspend the license if (s)he is satisfied by a preponderance of the
evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts charged. If the license is
suspended or revoked, the licensee may appeal to the governing body of
the municipality in which the offense occurred.
D. Other powers. Nothing herein contained shall limit the power of the
Director of the Department of Inspections or the police to immediately
suspend such license for a period not exceeding five days, pending the
giving of notice and holding of a hearing, whenever, in the opinion and
discretion of the Director of the Department of Inspections or the
police, it is necessary. In the event of temporary suspension, if notice
and hearing of alleged violations or charges is not given and held prior
to the expiration of the five-day period unless extended by the owner or
operator, the proposed charges and violations shall be deemed
dismissed.
E. Suspension or revocation of license. Owners' licenses and operators'
licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at any
time. Any suspension shall be noted upon the license suspended,
together with the reason thereof. No operator whose license has been
revoked shall again be licensed as an operator of a limousine. The
Director of the Department of Inspections shall notify the Police
Director whenever a license shall be deemed suspended or revoked.
§ 272-33 TRENTON CODE § 272-35
264:740
Chapter 277
TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY
§ 277-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT — Any person that has obtained a permit to engage in a
business activity.
DISTRIBUTOR — The owner of a public telephone and/or its equipment.
A distributor shall be the person responsible for placing or maintaining a
public pay telephone in a public or private way hereinafter defined.
FRANCHISE — A license which permits a person to sell a product or service
and/or conduct a business activity.
PAY TELEPHONE, PUBLIC — Any self-service or coin-operated telephone
which is freestanding and/or attached to the exterior of property.
PROPERTY — All private property and public property.
SIDEWALK — Includes such surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks and air space above such surfaces.
TELEPHONE BANK — Two or more public pay telephones which are
adjoined.
§ 277-2. Application for permit.
A. Permit required; location on or above sidewalk. A distributor shall not
place or maintain any public pay telephone on or above any public
street or sidewalk without having first obtained a permit as provided in
this chapter. Permits shall be issued by the Department of Inspections
subject to approval of the location and means of installation of the pay
telephone by the Director of Public Safety, or his/her designee. A copy
of the permit number shall be affixed to the pay telephone. The permit
required by this chapter shall be in addition to any and/or all permits
which may be required pursuant to the Code of the City of Trenton.
B. Permit required; location on exterior of any property. A distributor shall
not maintain or attach any public telephone on the exterior of any
property without first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter.
C. Annual renewal. Permits shall be renewable annually and must be
current by January 1 of each year.
D. Agreement to be provided. Every applicant shall provide a photostatic
copy of an executed agreement between the distributor and proper
owner to the Department of Inspections.
§ 272-35 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 277-2
277:741
§ 277-3. Fees.
E. Plan or sketch to be provided. Before installation, an original and three
copies of a plan or sketch of the public pay telephone shall be furnished
to the Department of Inspections in sufficient detail to describe the size,
location, equipment and location in relation to existing structures and
curblines within 400 feet.
F. Permit before dial tone service. Before dial tone service can be provided
to any pay telephone located on or above any public street or sidewalk a
permit must be obtained for the public pay telephone by the distributor.
G. Removal or relocation of telephone. The Department of Inspections
shall be informed of the intent of any person to remove or relocate a
public pay telephone. Relocation of a public pay telephone shall
necessitate obtaining a new permit; provided, however, that relocation
of a telephone within the extended side lot lines of the same property
will require only an amendment to the original application detailing the
change. In either case, no change of location shall be undertaken until
approval is obtained from the Director of the Department of
Inspections.
H. Indemnification agreement. Each applicant shall execute an
indemnification agreement substantially as follows:
(1) The property owner and any other persons on whose behalf the
application is made agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the City against liability for all claims for damage to property,
bodily injury or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the
issuance of the permit or the control, maintenance, ownership or
use of each pay telephone.
(2) The distributor shall file with the Department of Inspections a
general liability insurance policy of $1,000,000 for bodily injury
and $50,000 for property damage per occurrence, naming the City
as additionally insured against any injury, loss or damage that may
result from placing or maintaining the public pay telephone or
public pay telephone equipment on or above the sidewalk.
(3) The property owner shall submit an affidavit attesting to the fact
that, at least five days prior to the submission of the application for
a permit (s)he has informed the public of the proposed location of
the public pay telephone through publication in two local
newspapers for a period of three business days. The publication
shall state that any person who resides, owns property or operates
a business within 200 feet of the proposed telephone location may
submit any objections thereto, in writing, to the Department of
Inspections within 10 days of receipt of publication. The procedure
for publication shall be prescribed by the Director of the
Department of Inspections.
§ 277-2 TRENTON CODE § 277-3
277:742
§ 277-4. Denial of application or renewal.
Any property owner aggrieved by the denial of any application for a public
pay telephone permit, or the refusal to renew the same under the terms and
provisions of this chapter may appeal the denial as provided in Chapter 146,
Licensing. Such appeal shall be accompanied by a payment in the amount
of $100.
§ 277-5. Information and emergency requirements.
§ 277-6. Location and placement of public telephones.
A. Application fee. The application fee to install a public pay telephone
shall be $100.
B. Permit fees.
(1) Initial fee. The initial fee for a permit shall be $50 per year or any
part of a year.
(2) Renewal fee. The fee for a renewal permit shall be $25 per year;
provided, however, that no fee shall be charged for a pay telephone
furnished by or under contract to the City as an accommodation to
the public, or for permits issued to any person or entity which pays
a franchise fee or tax for the use of facilities. Such person or entity
shall not, however, be exempt from the remaining provisions of this
chapter.
A. All public pay telephones shall possess 911 emergency number access.
B. All public pay telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed
without charge:
(1) Calls to the 911 emergency number.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police
and Fire Departments.
C. Current public pay telephone rates for a local coin call shall be posted
on the public pay telephone.
D. Toll rate quotations must be available from the operator upon request.
E. Every public pay telephone provider shall provide to its customers a
local director or information assistance without charge.
F. Every public pay telephone which poses a threat to the health and
welfare of the community, as defined in § 277-1, shall be restricted to
outgoing calls only when a written request from the Police Director is
made to the Department of Inspections which delineates the threat to
the health and welfare of the community.
§ 277-3 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 277-6
277:743
§ 277-7. Variance.
§ 277-8. Standards for maintenance and installation.
A. No public pay telephone shall be permitted to rest upon or in any public
street, sidewalk or right-of-way when such installation, use or
maintenance poses a threat to the health and welfare of the community.
B. No public pay telephone or telephone bank shall be placed, installed,
used or maintained:
(1) Within any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(3) Within five feet of any driveway.
(4) Within three feet of any public area improved with a lawn, flowers,
shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(5) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet.
(6) Within three feet of any building unless written permission is
secured from the property owner and filed with the application.
(7) Except as hereinafter provided in a Business B District, as defined
in Chapter 315, Zoning and Land Development, within 400 feet in
any direction from another telephone or telephone bank.
(8) Except as hereinafter provided in a Business B District, as defined
in Chapter 315, Zoning and Land Development, within 200 feet
from another telephone or telephone bank which is located on the
same side of the street and/or sidewalk.
C. No enclosed public pay telephone booth shall be permitted.
A. Application. In the event that a public pay telephone does not meet the
requirements of this chapter, an applicant may apply, in writing,
together with relevant documentation to the Department of Inspections
for a variance therefrom. A variance shall only be granted if, after a
hearing or other evidence accepted in lieu of a hearing, the Department
of Inspections finds that good cause exists for relieving the applicant
from strict compliance with this chapter and that the proposed
alternative will not be a threat to the community.
B. Notification of hearing. The applicant seeking a variance shall notify all
real property and business owners within 200 feet of the proposed
location of the time and place for the hearing or the date by which
written objections should be submitted in regard to the applications for
any variance from this chapter.
§ 277-6 TRENTON CODE § 277-8
277:744
§ 277-9. Revocation; hearing procedure.
A. Coin-return mechanism. Each coin-operated public pay telephone shall
be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the
machine to secure an immediate refund when a call cannot be placed.
The coin mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
B. Visibility of name and address of distributor. Each public pay telephone
shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to everyone using the public
pay telephone, the name and address of the distributor and the
telephone number of a working telephone service to report a
malfunction, secure a refund or give the notices provided for in this
chapter.
C. Maintenance. Every public pay telephone shall be maintained in a neat
and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Without limiting the
foregoing, every public pay telephone shall be serviced and maintained
so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably free of
cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
(6) The public pay telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
D. Failure to maintain; revocation of permit. Every applicant who fails to
maintain a public pay telephone as described herein shall be given a
ten-day written notice by the Department of Inspections to repair the
public pay telephone. If the public pay telephone is not in working
condition at the end of the ten-day period, the Department of
Inspections may revoke the permit unless the applicant provides
adequate assurance that the public pay telephone shall be repaired or
removed.
E. Notice of restriction to outgoing calls only. Every public pay telephone
which is restricted to outgoing calls shall have affixed to it, in a place
visible to everyone using the telephone, a notice informing users of the
public pay telephone's inability to accept incoming calls.
A. Notice of hearing. The Director of Public Safety, or his/her designee,
shall investigate complaints that a location and use of a public pay
telephone constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of a
community, as defined in § 277-1. When the Director, or his/her
§ 277-8 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 277-9
277:745
§ 277-10. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
Chapter 280
designee, determines that a public pay telephone does constitute such
a threat, the property owner shall be sent written notification to cease
operating the public pay telephone until after a hearing is conducted.
All interested parties shall be provided written notice of the hearing at
least 10 days in advance thereof. The Business Administrator, or his/
her designee, will be the hearing officer and shall inform all interested
parties of his/her determination within two days after the conclusion of
the hearing.
B. Revocation of permit; other restrictions. If the Business Administrator
finds by a preponderance of the evidence presented that the location
and the use of the public pay telephone poses a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of the community, the Business Administrator, or his/
her designee, shall revoke any permit issued for use of the public pay
telephone immediately thereafter. The Business Administrator, or his/
her designee, may order such other relief as (s)he deems fair under the
circumstances, including, but not limited to, requiring the telephone to
be restricted to outgoing calls only and/or removal or seizure of the
public pay telephone equipment.
A. Violations and penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall subject the
violator to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty. Each noncomplying pay telephone violation will constitute a
separate violation, and each day of such violation shall constitute a
separate violation.
B. Additional penalties; removal of telephone. In addition to other
remedies and penalties described herein, if a violation is not abated
within five days or if a permit has not been secured for a public pay
telephone, the City may have the public pay telephone and all
structures pertaining thereto removed and the cost of removal shall be
charged to the distributor. If equipment is removed by the City pursuant
to this chapter and is not claimed within six months of its removal, it
will be considered abandoned, and the City may dispose of same
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157. The City shall not be responsible for
any damages occurring to equipment during removal, nor shall the City
be responsible for storage fees and/or for disposing of abandoned
equipment. Before the City releases claimed equipment the distributor
shall pay in full all fines and costs associated therewith.
C. Legal action in Municipal Court. The City retains its rights to institute
legal actions in Municipal Court against the property owner and/or
distributor for any violation of this chapter. 91
91.Editor's Note: Original Section 17-8.10, Application of Section to Existing Pay Telephones,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 277-9 TRENTON CODE § 277-10
277:746
TOBACCO AND NICOTINE-DELIVERY PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking in parks, recreation facilities and
other public property — See Ch. 54, Art. II.
§ 280-1. Retail sale of tobacco products.
§ 280-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIVISION OF HEALTH — The City of Trenton Division of Health.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Director of the Division of Health and/or his or
her authorized representative.
NICOTINE-DELIVERY PRODUCT — Any product that is designed to deliver
nicotine, nicotine or non-nicotine vapor, or any other substances, including
but not limited to what are commonly known as "e-cigarettes" or other types
of electronic smoking devices, or any cartridge or other component of such
device, or related products, including but not limited to any substances used
in such devices, such as liquids, powders, gels or other forms of tobacco,
nicotine or other substances, but excluding United States Food and Drug
Administration-approved nicotine patches or nicotine chewing gum.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including but not
limited to cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, and cigarettes in any
form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person, or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession, or place at which sales of tobacco or nicotine-delivery
products are made to purchasers for consumption or use. The term shall
A. No person shall sell, distribute or give tobacco or nicotine-delivery
products in the City of Trenton unless the owner or an employee of the
establishment controls the sale of such products. A person may only
sell, furnish or give tobacco or nicotine-delivery products in a direct,
face-to-face exchange between the tobacco retailer and the consumer.
Self-service displays and vending machines of tobacco or nicotinedelivery
products shall be prohibited.
B. No person shall sell, distribute, or give tobacco or nicotine-delivery
products to any person under the age of 21 years.
§ 277-10 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 280-2
277:747
also mean any person or entity that owns, operates or uses a tobacco
vending machine.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or other forms of payment,
dispenses nicotine-delivery products, cigarettes, or other tobacco products.
§ 280-3. Enforcement.
§ 280-4. Violations and penalties.
A. The enforcement authority for this chapter shall be the City of Trenton
Health Officer or his/her designee, and/or the Trenton Police
Department.
B. The Health Officer may, after giving proper identification, inspect any
matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle, incident, or
event as necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner
prescribed by law.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer in his enforcement of
this chapter, and the Health Officer may request the assistance of the
Trenton Police Department or other police agency or peace officer
when necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner
prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter.
A. A person who violates the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to any employee of a retail dealer licensee under P.L. 1948, c.65
(N.J.S.A. 54:40A-1 et seq.), who actually sells, distributes or gives or
otherwise provides tobacco or nicotine-delivery products to a person
under 21 years of age, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than
$250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second violation,
and not less than $1,000 for the third and each subsequent violation.
Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the City of Trenton
or before such other judicial officer having authority under the laws of
the State of New Jersey. Fees collected as a result of penalties allowed
under this section shall be designated for use by the Division of Health.
B. Each sale, distribution, or giving of tobacco and/or a nicotine-delivery
product to any person under the age of 21 shall constitute a separate
violation.
C. In addition to the penalties set forth in § 280-4A above, the City of
Trenton Division of Health may suspend the retail food establishment
license of any person convicted of violation of this chapter, for a period
of not more than three days, pursuant to the authority of the Division of
Health to license and regulate food establishments as provided by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(c).
§ 280-2 TRENTON CODE § 280-4
277:748
Chapter 283
TOWING AND STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Traffic — See Ch. 14.
Public contracts — See Ch. 57.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 292.
Unattended vehicles — See Ch. 305.
§ 283-1. Purpose; authority; scope.
§ 283-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITIONAL LABOR — Charges for additional and/or temporary employees
enlisted by the tow vehicle operator to facilitate the unloading, relocation,
and/or removal of vehicles, their cargos, debris, or other obstructions
impeding traffic exceeding the labor required for a basic towing service as
defined by the chapter.
ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGES — Charges for post-towing services
including, but not limited to, services such as physical inspection,
mechanical inspection, etc. These charges shall not be applied to vehicle
owners or their agents, but to the City and only upon the specific request
and authorization of the service by the designated Police Department
supervisor.
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile. (For purpose of this
chapter, this definition shall include light pickup trucks, vans, and sport
utility vehicles.)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for motor vehicle
towing and storage contracts with the City on a rotating basis, and to
set terms and conditions of such contracts, in order to ensure that the
City has a method of removing motor vehicles, while protecting the
owners of said vehicle from unreasonable cost of loss.
B. Authority. The authority of the City to regulate motor vehicle towing
and storage contracts is generally set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49. The
authority of the City to enter into motor vehicle and towing storage
contracts on a rotating basis is set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(u).
C. Scope. The provisions of this section apply to all persons who provide
towing and storage charges for motor vehicles under contracts with the
City.
§ 280-4 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 283-2
277:749
BASIC TOWING SERVICES — The removal and transportation of a motor
vehicle from a highway, street, other public or private road or parking area,
or from a storage facility, and other services normally incidental thereto.
"Basic towing services" does not include recovery of an automobile from a
position beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any
other object within the right-of-way or berm, or from an overturned position.
BUS — Any motor vehicle designated, constructed, and used for the
transportation of passengers, except passenger automobiles and station
wagons.
CITY — City of Trenton.
DIRECTOR — Police Director of the City of Trenton.
GARAGE — A building where motor vehicles are sheltered, stored, repaired,
and made ready for use, and it is specifically not intended to include, within
the meaning of this definition, a gasoline service station used principally
for furnishing gasoline, oil-lubrication service, and minor service for motor
vehicles.
INSIDE SECURED — A motor vehicle storage facility that is completely
indoors, having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal
of motor vehicles and is secured by a locking device on each opening. To
qualify in the context of this chapter, the inside secured facility must have
all governmental approvals and must have a capacity for a minimum of five
automobiles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — Any occurrence in which a motor vehicle
comes in contact with another object for which the motor vehicle must
be towed or removed for placement in a storage facility. This includes all
situations that are accidental to the vehicle owner even if they are caused
by the intentional acts of a perpetrator, where the perpetrator was not the
vehicle owner or not otherwise involved with the owner.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Any vehicle propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks, and motorized
bicycles under 49 cc.
OUTSIDE SECURED — A motor vehicle storage facility that is outdoors and
is secured by a fence, wall, or other man-made barrier that is at least six feet
high and is protected by security measures approved by the Director. These
security measures should include motion sensors monitored on a twentyfour-
hour basis, recording video cameras capable of monitoring the entire
storage facility and lighting at night for the facility. To qualify as an outdoorsecured
facility, in the context of this chapter, the outside-secure facility
must have all necessary government approvals and must have capacity for
a minimum of 700 automobiles.
RECOVERY WINCHING — Recovery winching includes, but is not limited
to, the recovery of a motor vehicle that is overturned, over an embankment,
off the roadway and not recoverable by basic winching, in water, impaled on
an object, crashed into a building, or otherwise not accessible to immediate
hook-up by conventional towing equipment.
§ 283-2 TRENTON CODE § 283-2
277:750
STORAGE CHARGES FOR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twenty-fourhour
period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins at
12:01 a.m. with the exception of the first twenty-four-hour period of storage,
where only one day's storage can be charged for the first twenty-four-hour
period of storage. Storage is charged on a per calendar day.
TOW VEHICLE — Those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms, winches,
slings, flat beds, wheel lifts, or under-reach equipment specifically designed
by its manufacturer for removal or transport of motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business, where the tow vehicles are stationed when not in use.
TRUCK — Any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for the
transportation of property.
VEHICLE REMOVAL CHARGE (YARD FEE) — Charge for a motor vehicle
towed into a storage facility of the primary tower that is not movable
and must be towed out of the primary tower's storage facility to a public
street for towing by a secondary tower. In the context of this chapter, a
motor vehicle that is not movable is defined as motor vehicle without keys,
mechanically disabled, or unable to be moved under its own power.
VEHICLES SUBJECT TO TOWING — When used in this chapter to describe
a motor vehicle, shall mean any motor vehicle that requires removal by
a tow vehicle including, but not limited to, motor vehicles damaged in an
accident, motor vehicles recovered after theft, abandoned motor vehicles,
confiscated motor vehicles, and vehicles that require towing service by
order of the Police Department due to being unregistered, uninsured,
illegally parked, or whose operators are unable to safely operate the motor
vehicle without being in violation of the law of any federal, state, or local
statutes or ordinances.
WINCHING — The process of moving a motor vehicle by use of a cable from
a position that is not accessible for direct hookup by conventional means for
loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching is not pulling a vehicle onto the bed of
a carrier, nor lifting a motor vehicle with a conventional tow sling.
§ 283-3. Towing and storage list.
§ 283-4. Initial and renewal application process.
A. List. The Director shall maintain a list of all tow vehicle operators
willing and able to enter into contracts to provide towing and storage
services for the City, consistent with the terms of this chapter.
B. Application fee. The application fee for tow truck operators shall be
$500 per year, which is the cost of administrating, investigating and
processing the annual towing contract.
A. Written application. A tow vehicle operator submitting an initial
application who seeks to be placed on the towing list and incumbent
§ 283-2 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 283-4
277:751
§ 283-5. Application review.
The Director shall review the application and conduct an investigation as
he/she deems necessary, including a police background check, to determine
whether the applicant meets the minimum standards and qualification as
defined in the general requirements section of this chapter.
§ 283-6. General requirements of tow vehicle operators.
tow vehicle operators seeking renewal to remain on the towing list may
pick up an application at the Trenton Police Department commencing
July 1 of each year, for the upcoming calendar year. The initial and
renewal application forms must be returned fully completed and with
the application fee by September 15 of that year. The Director shall
render a decision by December 15 as to the tow vehicle operators that
will be included on the towing list for the upcoming calendar year.
B. Information required. Applicants must provide information required in
the Trenton Police Department Towing Application and Agreement
Form, the Trenton Police Department General Order pertaining to
vehicle towing as issued by the Director, and any additional information
deemed appropriate by the Director.
A. A tow vehicle operator must be able to respond to any request for
assistance within 20 minutes, unless such response time is prevented
by extraordinary conditions of weather or circumstances resulting in
obstruction of general access to the scene.
B. A tow truck operator shall not remove any vehicle from a scene without
proper authorization from the police officer in charge.
C. Any towing service beyond a basic towing service that will invoke the
imposition of a specialized fee by the tow vehicle operator shall not be
performed without the authorization of an on-scene police supervisor
and documentation of the specialized service in the Trenton Police
Department Vehicle Report.
D. The tow vehicle operator must be able to provide twenty-four-hour
service seven days per week.
E. For light-duty towing, the tow vehicle operator must have at least one
wheel-lift vehicle and one flatbed vehicle with a GVW of 10,000 pounds,
in good operating condition, and must be equipped with the following:
(1) A valid registration and, if required, a valid inspection sticker.
(Dealer registration plates are not permitted.)
(2) A valid amber light permit.
(3) Valid State of New Jersey tow truck sticker and certification.
(4) Speedy dry or similar liquid absorbent.
§ 283-4 TRENTON CODE § 283-6
277:752
(5) Broom, shovel, and debris container.
(6) A minimum of two three-eighths-inch safety chains.
(7) One fire extinguisher.
(8) Proof of ownership or lease by the authorized tow vehicle operator.
F. For heavy-duty towing, the tow vehicle operator must have at least one
heavy-duty tow vehicle that is hydraulic in nature, minimum of 25 tons,
twin cable, with under-reach capability that would have the capability
of towing an eighty-thousand-pound vehicle. The heavy-duty-towing
vehicle must have a MGVW of 33,000 pounds or better, be in good
operating condition, and must be equipped with the following:
(1) Valid registration, valid annual federal inspection, and all other
required permits.
(2) Valid amber light permit.
(3) Valid State of New Jersey tow truck sticker and certification.
(4) Speedy dry or similar liquid absorbent.
(5) Broom, shovel, and debris container.
(6) A minimum of two one-half-inch safety chains.
(7) One fire extinguisher.
(8) Proof of ownership or lease by the authorized tow truck operator.
(9) Air brakes.
(10) Connecting air lines to supply air to the towed vehicle.
(11) Detachable light bar with running, stop, and turn lights.
(12) In the event a recovery of a heavy-duty vehicle (rollover, accident,
etc.) is warranted, the responding tow company shall assign a
recovery supervisor, who must have received training in an
industry-recognized training course.
G. The tow vehicle operator must agree to remove all glass and other
debris from the tow-away area, to the satisfaction of the police officer in
charge, without any additional charge to the vehicle owner. Any
extensive cleanup leading to the imposition of a clean-up fee shall
require the authorization of the on-scene police supervisor.
H. The tow vehicle operator agrees to tow, flatbed, and provide any basic
service (tire change, battery charge, etc.) for the Trenton Police
Department at no charge for police vehicles with a weight of 10,000
pounds or less.
§ 283-6 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 283-6
277:753
I. The tow vehicle operator must have an inside secured storage facility
with a five-vehicle capacity and an outside storage facility with a sevenhundred-
vehicle capacity within a three-mile radius of Trenton Police
Department Headquarters (225 North Clinton Avenue) within the State
of New Jersey and County of Mercer. The storage facility must be
reasonably accessible to persons seeking to retrieve their vehicles by
use of public transportation. The tow vehicle operator must provide to
the Director proof of ownership or lease of the storage facility.
J. No satellite lots are permitted. All vehicles stored under the agreement
with the City must be stored at the tow vehicle operator's primary
business location.
K. The tow vehicle operator must agree to provide adequate security to
protect vehicles being towed and stored. The storage facility must be
lighted during the hours of darkness so that the entire storage area is
visible. The storage area must also be surrounded by a chain link,
stockade, or other such restrictive fencing, which is at least six feet in
height.
L. The tow vehicle operator must agree to keep accurate written and
electronic records of towing and storage services as set forth in this
chapter, the Trenton Police Department Towing Application and
Agreement, and any such directive issued by the Director. These
records are subject to inspection at any time by Trenton Police
Department personnel. The electronic record-keeping system
maintained by the tow vehicle operator should be compatible with the
Trenton Police Department records management system and all records
pertaining to vehicles towed under the authority of the Trenton Police
Department are subject to inspection.
M. The tow vehicle operator must agree that inaccurate recordkeeping
may result in termination of the towing contract.
N. The tow vehicle operator will not release a vehicle to an owner or the
owner's representative without a signed release form issued by the
Trenton Police Department. The tow vehicle operator must agree to
issue an itemized receipt for all services rendered to the owner or
owner's representative and provide a copy to the Trenton Police
Department.
O. The tow vehicle operator must agree that no person shall be liable for
towing or storage fees in excess of those permitted by the towing and
storage fee schedule set forth in this chapter.
P. The tow vehicle operator must agree that the City, its agents, officers,
and employees shall not be liable for any towing or storage charges,
unless the motor vehicle towed or stored is owned by the City, or the
motor vehicle is towed or stored for the convenience of the City and for
police investigation, or the motor vehicle is towed because of snow or
other emergency. The tow vehicle operator shall agree to seek payment
of towing and storage fees only from the owner of the motor vehicle.
§ 283-6 TRENTON CODE § 283-6
277:754
Q. The tow vehicle operator must obtain and maintain insurance as set
forth in § 283-9.
R. The tow vehicle operator must agree to defend and indemnify the City,
its agents, officers, and employees from any liability or claim arising out
of the tow vehicle operator's performance of the towing and storage
service contract.
S. A tow vehicle operator unable to respond to a request for towing or
requiring assistance for large scale towing/removal services shall
request the approval of a police supervisor to notify the Trenton
Communications Division to summon other authorized contracted City
tow vehicle operators prior to contacting any other towing contractor.
T. The tow vehicle operator and his/her employees that operate towing
vehicles must have no criminal convictions or motor vehicle infractions
that would adversely affect the safety and welfare of the public and/or
the owners of the vehicles towed pursuant to the contract for the City.
Convictions for violent crimes and/or crime involving moral turpitude
shall serve as an automatic disqualification in the application process or
if incurred during the contract period.
U. The tow vehicle operator must be open for business, at a minimum,
Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and Saturday, 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 p.m. The hours of operation must be prominently posted in a
conspicuous place at the operator's place of business and delivered to
the Director.
V. The entire fee schedule for towing and storage permitted under this
chapter shall be prominently posted in a conspicuous place in the tow
vehicle operator's place of business.
W. The tow vehicle operator shall provide the Director or his designee a list
of all unclaimed vehicles towed during the prior month on or before the
fifth day of the next month.
X. All towing vehicles must be equipped with communications equipment
(cellular telephone, public service band frequency radio, etc.) to
facilitate a prompt response.
Y. All tow vehicle operators must be readily available for contact by the
Police Department's Communications Division. Whenever the
Communications Division is unable to readily contact the authorized
tow vehicle operator on call, the next on-call tow vehicle operator shall
be notified.
Z. All tow vehicle operators must have a fax machine and computer with
modem capable of sharing electronic information with the Trenton
Police Department computer system.
§ 283-6 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 283-6
277:755
§ 283-7. Inclusion of list.
§ 283-8. Termination of contract and eligibility.
§ 283-9. Insurance.
AA. Tow vehicle operators must have a certification from the Zoning Officer
that the business location is permitted pursuant to that jurisdiction's
ordinances.
A. The Director shall include the tow vehicle operator on the towing list
after the Director determines that the tow vehicle operator meets the
qualifications set forth in this chapter and in the Trenton Police
Department's Towing Application and Agreement, and provided the
application fee is paid. The list shall remain in effect for one year,
beginning on January 1 of each year, and shall rotate on a monthly basis
among authorized and contracted tow vehicle operators,
B. The placement of the tow vehicle operator on the towing list shall be
nontransferable.
A. The Director may terminate any contract and a tow vehicle operator's
eligibility to remain on the towing list if the Director determines that
the tow vehicle operator willfully or persistently violated either the
terms of this chapter, the Trenton Police Department Towing
Application and Agreement, directives issued by the Police Director
pertaining to towing, other laws concerning the towing and storage of
vehicles, or based upon evidence that the tow vehicle operator engaged
in deceptive or unlawful practices. Such tow vehicle operator shall
remain ineligible for the period of time the Director deems appropriate.
B. The tow vehicle operator shall remain on the towing list for a one-year
period commencing January 1 or until his/her eligibility is terminated
by the Director as set forth in this chapter.
A. The tow vehicle operator must carry automobile liability insurance in an
amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single limits.
B. The tow vehicle operator must carry workmen's compensation
insurance as required by law.
C. The tow vehicle operator must carry a garage keeper's policy in the
amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit. This policy must include
on-hook coverage of at least $60,000.
D. The tow vehicle operator must carry complete protection to the City
against any and all risks of loss or liability, including comprehensive
general liability insurance in an amount not less that $1,000,000
combined single limit, naming the City as an additional insured.
§ 283-6 TRENTON CODE § 283-9
277:756
§ 283-10. Contracts with tow vehicle operators.
§ 283-11. Records of towing and storage services.
The tow vehicle operator must maintain the following records in written and
electronic form for each vehicle towed and/or stored.
E. Each policy required shall contain an endorsement providing that 10
days' notice shall be given to the Director in the event of cancellation
for any cause.
F. Each policy required shall be with an insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey.
A. The Director shall enter into a written contract with eligible tow vehicle
operators that have submitted a written application and application fee
to enter into such contract with the City and have been determined to
meet the minimum standards and requirements set forth in this chapter
and the Trenton Police Department Towing Application and Agreement.
B. Each contract shall be for one year beginning on January 1 and shall
rotate monthly between eligible tow vehicle operators.
C. Each contract shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in this
chapter, the Trenton Police Department Towing Application and
Agreement, and may contain any additional terms and conditions as the
Director deems necessary to protect the City from liability and to
protect the public from unreasonable charges/loss and to protect the
public safety.
A. Day, month, year, and time of service.
B. The year, make, and model of vehicle.
C. The registration plate number and state of registration.
D. The full vehicle identification number (VIN).
E. The Trenton Police Department's report number for the incident
involving the tow.
F. The location from which the vehicle was towed.
G. The place to which the vehicle is towed and stored.
H. The authority for the towing.
I. An accurate description of the visible damage to the vehicle prior to
towing.
J. The distance of towing, if applicable.
K. The operator of the towing vehicle.
§ 283-9 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 283-11
277:757
§ 283-12. Towing fee schedule.
§ 283-13. Storage fee schedule.
L. Any and all charges to the vehicle owner to include basic tow service,
storage, and any additional fees for special services as defined in this
chapter.
A. Basic towing services.
(1) Standard/flatbed under 10,000 pounds: $85.
(2) Standard/flatbed 10,000 to 26,000 pounds: $175.
(3) Standard/flatbed in excess of 26,000 pounds: $300 per hour.
(4) Vehicle removal charge (yard fee): $25.
B. Special services. An on-scene Trenton Police Department supervisor
shall authorize all special services located herein, and those services
shall be documented on the Trenton Police Department vehicle report
pertaining to that towed vehicle.
(1) Extensive cleanup: $25.
(2) Disposable materials used for cleanup (example: speedy dry):
current market value.
(3) Administrative charges (to only be charged to the City based upon
authorization from designated police officer): $25.
(4) Winching: $150 per hour.
(5) Recovery winching: $300 per hour per vehicle.
(6) Additional labor: $75 per hour/per employee/ to include additional
equipment as required.
C. Towing fees during snow removal or other emergencies. When towing
services are required during snow removal, for parades or special
events or during flooding or other emergencies, the towing contractor
shall be paid $125 per hour per vehicle in lieu of the fees set forth in the
towing and storage schedule.
A. Fees.
(1) Passenger vehicle: $25 per day.
(2) Large truck: $70 per day.
(3) Tractor-trailer: $140 per day.
B. Only one day's storage shall be charged for the initial twenty-four-hour
period the vehicle is in storage.
§ 283-11 TRENTON CODE § 283-13
277:758
§ 283-14. Police Department administrative fees.
The tow vehicle operator agrees to reimburse the City $5 per vehicle for the
clerical and administrative costs associated with authorizing the release of
towed vehicles.
§ 283-15. Application for acquisition of clear and junk titles.
The tow vehicle operator agrees to provide the City Police Department with
a partially completed copy of the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission
form titled Report of Possession of Abandoned Vehicle by Public Agency
for any vehicle in its possession for which it is requesting a clear or junk
title. This form shall contain the following information for each vehicle:
the make, year, body type, vehicle identification number, model, weight
class and present odometer reading for each vehicle. Failure to provide this
information shall result in an administrative fee of $50 that shall be paid
to the City Police Department by the tow operator for each application for
the acquisition of a clear of junk title that is not accompanied by a partially
completed form.
§ 283-16. Resolution of disputes.
The Director shall develop a complaint-hearing procedure that will allow
any citizen to file a complaint against a tow vehicle operator, alleging
violations of this chapter, any revised ordinance of the City of Trenton,
the Trenton Police Department Towing Application and Agreement. The
Director shall designate personnel within the Police Department to
investigate the complaint, or cause the complaint to be investigated, render
a decision with regard to the complaint received of the tower's business
practices, and take the required action to address the complaint. The
Director shall be empowered to render a final decision, and that decision
shall be binding on both the tower and the owner of the vehicle.
§ 283-17. Gifts or remuneration.
No reward, gratuity, gift, or any type of remuneration or consideration
shall be offered to any member of the Trenton Police Department, any
City Official, and/or any employee of the City of Trenton by any authorized
C. There shall be a cap on storage fees for privately owned vehicles equal
to the cost of 90 days of storage for that vehicle. There shall be no cap
on storage fees being paid for by corporations and/or insurance
carriers. There shall be a cap of $400 for storage fees charged to the
City for vehicles converted via clear titles or vehicles converted to bids
via City auctions regardless of the duration of the storage, except that a
waiver may be granted for good cause upon the request of the
municipality by the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs. Vehicles converted to the ownership
of the tow vehicle operator via clear or junk title shall have the storage
fees waived.
§ 283-13 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC PAY § 283-17
277:759
tow vehicle operator or its representatives/affiliates, prior to or during the
application process and/or during the life of the contract.
Chapter 287
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 21.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 38.
Nuisances — See Ch. 171.
§ 287-1. Jurisdiction.
The Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture shall have
complete power and authority over any and all trees or plants planted and
growing or hereafter to be planted and grown in any park, parking strip,
green or grounds in the public way, or any public highway or other property
of the City.
§ 287-2. Permits required.
A. No person shall cut, climb, break, trim, remove or in any way injure,
deface or destroy the vegetation, tree posts or tree guards in any park,
parking strip, green or grounds in the public right-of-way or any public
highway or other property or in the City without first having obtained a
permit from the Department or without complying with its terms.
B. No person, without a written permit from the Department, shall attach
or keep attached to a tree or plant in a public highway, or to the guard
or stake intended for its protection, a rope, wire, sign, placard, thing,
object or any other device.
C. No person, without a written permit of the Department, shall place or
maintain on the ground of a public highway in the City any sidewalk,
stone, cement or other substance which shall impede or prevent the
free access of water or air to the roots of any tree or plant in any such
highway.
D. No person shall plant or set out any shade tree or plant in any part of
any public highway of the City without first having obtained a written
permit therefor from the Department, which permit shall set forth the
kinds of trees or plants which may be set out and the conditions under
which they may be planted or located, and any other terms and
conditions deemed necessary by the Department.
E. No person, without the written permit of the Department, shall attach
to any tree growing or planted in any park or parking strip or upon any
§ 283-17 TRENTON CODE § 287-2
287:760
§ 287-3. Tree trimming at City's direction.
§ 287-4. Removal or pruning of trees endangering safety.
public highway in the City any electric wire or insulator or any device
for holding any electrical wire or bracing the poles carrying the wire.
A. Whenever the limbs, branches or other parts of trees extend over or
into any public thoroughfare so as to interfere with its free and
uninterrupted use, the Department may give notice to the owner or
other person in control of the property to trim such trees within the
time specified in the notice which shall not be less than 10 days.
B. If the owner or person in control served with notice as set forth in
Subsection A above fails to comply with the terms of the notice within
the time prescribed, it shall be the duty of the Department to trim or
detach any limbs, branches or other parts of such tree or trees. Upon
completion of the work required to be done under the terms of this
section, the owner(s) of the premises upon which such work was done
shall be billed for the amount of money so expended by the City. Unless
reimbursement is received from the owner billed for the services within
30 days from the date of billing, suit shall be brought in the name of the
City for the amount due in any court of competent jurisdiction, and all
sums realized either by suit or payment shall be placed in the municipal
funds to the credit of the appropriation from which the cost of doing
such work shall have been expended.
C. If such limbs or branches of any tree or trees so extending are required
to be cut off or detached for any other purpose than for ordinary travel
on the surface of the thoroughfare, the expense of detaching or cutting
off such projecting limbs or branches on any tree or trees shall be
defrayed by the person whose use of such thoroughfare shall require
the detaching or trimming of such limbs as project into the
thoroughfare. The detaching or trimming of such limbs or branches of
any tree or trees projecting into a highway shall be done under the
direction and supervision of the Department, and no limbs or branches
of any tree or trees so projecting into a highway shall be detached or
trimmed by persons without the written permission of the Department.
A. Private property.
(1) Whenever the Department determines that any tree in or upon any
private premises in the City is in danger of falling in or across any
public thoroughfare, or is a danger to public safety because of
decay or lack of proper support, it shall be the duty of the
Department to notify the owner or other person in control of the
property on or in front of which any such tree may be located that a
hearing shall be held by the Department to consider the removal,
pruning or cutting down in whole or in part any such dangerous,
decayed or improperly supported tree. The notice shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing, at which the affected owner
§ 287-2 TREES § 287-4
287:761
shall be given an opportunity to appear in person or be represented
by an attorney. If after hearing and investigation the Director, or
his/her designee, determines that any such tree shall be removed,
pruned or cut down in whole or in part, it shall be the duty of the
owner of the premises affected to remove, prune or cut down such
tree or part of such tree in accordance with the determination of
the Department.
(2) If the affected owner does not comply with the determination of the
Department, the Director shall immediately cause the required
work to be done, thereafter rendering a bill to the affected owner
for costs of services and materials resulting from such work. Unless
reimbursement is received from the owner within 30 days of billing,
suit at law shall thereafter be instituted for the collection of the
amount so due for work done and money so expended in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
B. Public property.
(1) Notice. Except as provided in Subsection B(3) below, no tree shall
be removed prior to the posting of a notice that a public hearing
may be requested to determine whether removal of the tree is
necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the residents of
the City. Notice that such a hearing may be requested shall be
given by posting a placard affixed to the tree in question. The
notice shall advise interested parties that they may file a request
for a public hearing with the City Clerk within 14 days of the
posting of such notice. If a request for hearing is timely received by
the City Clerk within 14 days of the posting of the notice, then a
public hearing to determine the matter will be scheduled by the
City Clerk.
(2) Hearing. The hearing shall be called on notice to all those filing
requests or comments and shall be conducted by the Open Space
Advisory Board. At the public hearing the Department of the City or
members of the public seeking to have the tree removed shall
explain the reasons for such removal. Members of the public shall
then have an opportunity to present evidence and argument in
opposition to the removal of the tree. The Board shall make a
determination within 15 days of the date of the public hearing as to
whether the public health, safety and welfare require the removal
of the tree.
(3) Exception. Notwithstanding Subsection A(1) and (2) above, a tree
may be removed without the posting of a notice if in the discretion
of the Shade Tree Superintendent removal of the tree prior to a
public hearing is necessary to alleviate a hazardous or dangerous
situation and constitutes an imminent threat to public health,
safety and welfare; or, following posting, but without a public
hearing, in the event no request or comment is timely filed.
§ 287-4 TRENTON CODE § 287-4
287:762
§ 287-5. Open space around base of trees or plants.
Unless otherwise provided for in the written permit required by § 287-2C,
there must be maintained about the base of the trunk of each shade tree
or plant in the streets of the City 16 square feet of open ground for a tree
of up to six inches in diameter, and for every three inches of increase of
such diameter there must be an increase of at least one square foot of open
ground. Where any tree in or upon any public highway of or within the City
may now or hereafter be surrounded at the base of its trunk by ground
which is not open, or by open ground of less quantity of measurement than
that required by the subsection, it shall be the duty of the Department
of Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture to notify the owner of the
property on or in front of which any such tree may be to remove, within
a time fixed in the notice, so much of the cement, brick or other covering
as may be necessary to give the space of open ground required herein. If
the person notified shall not remove the covering by the time fixed, the
Department may do so or cause to have it done and charged to the person
notified for the work done and the money expended therefor, and if payment
shall not be made 30 days from the date of billing, suit at law shall be
instituted in the name of the City for the collection of the amount due in
any court of competent jurisdiction which, when realized, shall be placed in
the municipal fund to the credit of the appropriation from which the cost of
doing such work shall have been expended.
§ 287-6. Protection of trees during construction.
§ 287-7. Control of animals.
No person shall permit any animal owned by him/her, or under his/her
control, to damage or destroy any tree or plant on a public thoroughfare,
nor shall any person fasten any animal to any such tree or plant.92
C. Replacement trees. Whenever a tree is removed for any reason, the
person who removed the tree shall replace the removed tree with
another tree within one year and under the Director of the Department
of Recreation, Natural Resources and Culture.
A. In the erection or repair of a building or structure the owner, contractor
or other person in charge shall place such guards around all nearby
trees on the public highways as shall effectually prevent injury to them.
B. No person shall do any excavating or operate heavy equipment within
six feet of any tree without permission of the Department of Recreation,
Natural Resources and Culture.
C. No person shall use or operate any power shovels, bulldozers or any
other implement or tool in such a manner as to damage or destroy any
tree or tree roots.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Animals.
§ 287-4 TREES § 287-8
287:763
§ 287-8. Protection against electrical wiring.
Every person having control over any wire charged with electricity running
through a public thoroughfare in the City shall securely fasten such wire so
that it shall not come in contact with any tree or plant.
§ 287-9. Gas or other substance deleterious to tree life.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, using or having control of gas or
other substance deleterious to tree life to allow such gas or other substance
to come in contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree in any
public thoroughfare or of any tree or plant in any City park or parking strip
in the City in such manner as may injure or destroy the tree or plants.
§ 287-10. Brine water, oil, liquid dye or other deleterious liquid.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any brine water, oil, liquid dye
or other substance deleterious to tree life to flow into the soil about the base
of a tree in any public thoroughfare or City park or parking strip in the City
or onto a sidewalk, road or pavement at a point from which such substance
may seep into the soil or in any other manner injure such tree.
§ 287-11. Interference with official duties.
No person shall in any way interfere or cause or permit any interference
with the officer or employee of the City in the planting, mulching,
protection, care or removal of any tree or plant in the public highways of the
City or in removing any stone, cement sidewalk or other substance about
the trunk of any such tree or plant.
§ 287-12. Enforcement.
The Superintendent of Trees and the Superintendent of Parks are
responsible to protect trees and plants from vandalism and abuse. The
Superintendent of Trees and the Superintendent of Parks are charged with
the responsibility to serve summons and to issue citations for violation of
this chapter, subject to the jurisdiction of the Trenton Municipal Court.
§ 287-13. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 287-8 TRENTON CODE § 287-13
287:764
Chapter 292
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 14.
Junkyards — See Ch. 137, Art. II.
Towing — See Ch. 283.
Unattended vehicles — See Ch.305.
§ 292-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the City which is not a street or
highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, runners
or slides and shall include, without limitations, automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. It shall not include a trailer parked
or stored in accordance with the provisions of § 315-198.
§ 292-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the City, and no person shall
leave any vehicle at any place within the City for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been
abandoned.
§ 292-3. Vehicles in streets.
No person shall have, or cause to be left, any nonoperating, discarded,
dismantled, wrecked, junked or unlicensed vehicle on any street or highway
within the City.
§ 292-4. Vehicles on private property.
No person in charge or control of any property within the City, whether
as owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or otherwise, shall place, deposit, store,
leave or keep any discarded, wrecked, junked, dismantled or partially
dismantled vehicle, which is also unlicensed or nonoperating, on such
property or suffer, permit or allow any such vehicle to be placed, deposited,
§ 287-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-4
292:765
stored, left or kept on such property for a longer period of time than 15
days, except that the provisions hereof shall not apply with regard to such a
vehicle:
§ 292-5. Impounding.
The Police Director, or any member of the Police Department, is hereby
authorized to remove, or to cause to be removed, in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq., any vehicle left at any place within
the City which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter, or which
reasonably appears to have been lost, stolen or unclaimed, with respect to
vehicles on private property. The Police Director shall serve, or cause to
be served, a notice in writing, either personally or by certified mail, upon
the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the property, requiring such owner,
tenant, lessee or occupant, as the case may be, to remove such vehicle
within a certain period in time, not less than 48 hours after the date of
service, to be specified in the notice. In the event that such vehicle is not
removed within the time specified, the Police Director may impound the
vehicle or cause the same to be impounded and for that purpose may enter
upon private property upon which such vehicle may be located. Any vehicle
impounded pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter shall be held
until lawfully claimed or disposed of, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq.
§ 292-6. Expense of removal and impounding.
The owner of any private property from which a vehicle is removed and
impounded pursuant to the preceding section hereof shall be liable for the
cost and expense, including reasonable overhead charges, paid or incurred
by the City in effecting such removal and impounding, and shall be paid
by the person or persons liable therefor upon demand. In the event such
payment is not made, the amount due shall become a lien upon the lot or
tract of real estate from which such vehicle was removed and shall be added
to and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such
lands, to be collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes upon real
estate, or the same may be collected in a civil action or in such manner as
may be provided by law.
A. In an enclosed building, garage, barn or shed.
B. On the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and
manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise.
C. In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the City.
D. In a duly licensed junkyard.93
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 137, Junkyards and Scrap Metal Sales.
§ 292-4 TRENTON CODE § 292-7
292:766
§ 292-7. Parking in front yard prohibited; exception.
No person shall park or allow to be parked any automobile or truck upon
any front yard of any premises on other than a driveway or similar paved
surface except temporarily, when necessary to meet a snow emergency
or similar emergent circumstances. Each owner of the premises and the
registered owner of any vehicle so parked shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed in § 292-8. A separate violation shall be deemed to have occurred
for each twenty-four-hour period during which the automobile or truck
remains parked in violation of this chapter following the issuance of the
initial summons and complaint.
§ 292-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 300
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 14.
§ 300-1. Use of bikeway by motorized vehicles prohibited.
No person shall operate a motorized vehicle on any section of a bikeway
within the city.
§ 300-2. Police and City vehicles.
This chapter shall not apply to police vehicles on official duty and shall not
apply to maintenance and other vehicles of the City.
§ 300-3. Posting of notice on bikeways.
The Director of the Department of Recreation, Natural Resources and
Culture shall post all bikeways to give notice of this prohibition.
§ 300-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to the penalties in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 292-7 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 300-4
300:767
Chapter 305
VEHICLES, UNATTENDED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 14.
Parking lots — See Ch. 184.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 292.
§ 305-1. Removal of ignition key required.
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended in any public place, or on any used or new car lot, or parking
lot, without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the
ignition key from the vehicle.
§ 305-2. Removal of keys by police officer.94
Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended
with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this chapter, such police
officer is authorized to remove such key from such vehicle and secure that
key at the police station before the police officer's tour of duty is completed.
§ 305-3. Owner's responsibility.
The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this chapter shall be
held prima facie responsible for any such violation.
§ 305-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 309
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-4 TRENTON CODE § 305-4
305:768
ARTICLE I
General Water Regulations
§ 309-1. Enforcement authority. [Amended 2-19-2004 by Ord. No.
04-1495]
The provisions of this chapter and all other rules and regulations relating
to the water supply system of the City of Trenton shall be enforced by the
Division of Water and Sewer of the Department of Public Works.
§ 309-2. Access to premises.
The officers, agents and employees of the Division of Water and Sewer
shall have free access at all reasonable times, and in the event of an
emergency at any time, to any premises for the purpose of examining the
water service. They shall have the power to reject all pipes and fixtures
considered unsuitable for that purpose.
§ 309-3. Responsibility of consumers.
All persons who may be supplied with water from any City water main shall
be responsible for keeping their service pipes and all fixtures in good order
and repair and protected from frost, at their own expense.
A. Installations, removals and repairs at expense of property owners. Any
installations, removals or repairs of pipes between the curbline and the
water main shall be made by the Division of Water and Sewer without
unnecessary waste of water, at the expense of the owner of the property
served by the pipes on which they are made, and no claim shall be made
against the City by reason of breakage of any supply or service pipe or
cocks, or from damage arising from shutting off water to repair any
main or making connection with any such main.
B. Notice of discontinuance of water service. Should it become necessary
to shut off the water from any section of the City for the purpose of
making changes or repairs to the water system, the Division of Water
and Sewer shall endeavor to give timely notice to the consumer affected
and shall, so far as is practicable, prevent inconvenience and damage
arising from the making of such repairs, but failure to give notice shall
not render the Division of Water and Sewer responsible or liable for
damages that may result therefrom, or from any other cause.
C. Multiple services. Where water is supplied through one service to
several houses, families or persons, the City Council may, at its
discretion, either decline to furnish water until separate services are
95.Editor's Note: Said ordinance provided for the consolidation of the Divisions of Water and
Sewer, Sewer and Water Billing under the Department of Public Works and Sewer and
Water Billing under the Department of Public Works and amended the terms “Division of
Water and Sewer” and “Division of Sewer,” where used in this chapter, to be replaced with
“Division of Water and Sewer.”
§ 309-1 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-3
305:769
provided, or may continue the multiple supply on the condition that one
person shall pay for all consumers on the same service.
D. Fixtures. In all occupied premises supplied under the assessed or
fixture rate, all fixtures of whatever nature shall be considered as being
used and shall be charged for as long as the fixtures shall remain
connected with the water pipes.
E. Vacated premises. No claim for deduction because of a vacancy of the
whole or part of any premises shall be allowed for a period of less than
one month. In case of the temporary vacancy of any premises, the water
shall be turned off at the curb cock by the Division of Water and Sewer
upon request, in writing, by the owner of the premises or his/her
authorized agent.
F. Supply pipe and service pipe connections. Applications for the
introduction of any water supply or service or for the change of any
existing water supply or service shall be made at the office of the
Division of Water and Sewer by the owner of the premises or by his/her
authorized agent. The application must be made upon the blank form
furnished for that purpose, and the applicant must subscribe to the
conditions thereon, stating fully and truly the various uses to which the
water is to be applied. Upon the receipt of such application, the Division
shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises, and shall
proceed with work in accordance with the schedule of price hereinafter
mentioned for service work to the curbline.
G. Piping to curbline. Supply and service pipes between the main and
curb, including curb cock and box, shall be put in only by the Division of
Water and Sewer at the expense of the property owner.
H. Control of pipes. Supply and service pipes between main and curb are
under the exclusive control of the Division of Water and Sewer , and no
person other than authorized employees of the Division shall construct,
repair or otherwise change or interfere with them in any way except on
order of the Division.
I. Failure of owner. The refusal or neglect of the owner to equip the
premises with connections or fixtures of a character and quality
approved by the Division of Water and Sewer shall be sufficient grounds
for the refusal of the Division to connect the premises with City water
supply, or to turn on the City water supply after such connection has
been made.
J. Separate pipes required. Separate supply pipes must be laid from the
main for each building. No connection by which City water may pass
from a building located on one building lot to a separate building
located on another shall be made.
K. Maximum diameter of connection. No connection larger than one inch
shall be made to any main except by special permit authorized by
§ 309-3 TRENTON CODE § 309-3
305:770
§ 309-4. Plumbers.
application to the Division of Water and Sewer and at such cost in
accordance with schedule prices.
L. Repairs. The Division of Water and Sewer shall make all repairs to
supply and service pipes between curb and main. Upon notification or
discovery of any street leak in supply or service pipe or stop cocks, the
Division shall open the street and shut off the water. The Division shall
then make repairs to such pipes, including taking up and replacing
pavement, where necessary as promptly as practicable. The expense of
all such repairs shall be charged and collected from the owners of
premises supplied through such connections. When the cost of repairs
can be immediately computed, a bill shall be rendered to the owner of
the premises, and the water shall not be turned on until such bill shall
be paid in full; provided, however, if in the judgment of the Division
conditions demand the immediate resumption of the supply, the water
may be turned on, and such expense bill shall be paid without delay or
the water will be turned off.
M. Contractors and builders. Contractors, builders and like persons shall
obtain from the Division of Water and Sewer a written permit before
using any water for building purposes.
A. Permit required. No plumber or other persons shall be allowed to make
any increase or extension to service pipes or fixtures by which City
water is supplied to consumers, under assessed rate contract, without a
written permit from the Division of Water and Sewer.
B. Returns. Plumbers shall make full and complete returns to the Division
of Water and Sewer in writing, on a blank form furnished for that
purpose within 48 hours after the work shall be completed, describing
therein all new work placed and all additions, alterations, repairs or
connections made, giving in detail the total amount of fixtures found on
the premises. Every return must be full and complete in every
particular.
C. Rules and regulations. No plumber shall leave the stopcock at curbline
open nor allow the water to run on premises where new connections
have been made with service pipe or when any new extension or
attachment has been made in unoccupied premises. In cases where the
work is a simple extension or additional attachment in premises where
the water is then in use, the plumbers may leave the water on and the
owner shall be charged from the date of the completion of the work.
D. Failure to perform work properly. Plumbers failing to perform their
work, or improperly reporting the same, according to the established
rules and regulations, or executing their work unskillfully or to the
damage of the City water works, may be debarred from making
connections with the City mains.
§ 309-3 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-5
305:771
§ 309-5. Unauthorized use of water.
No person shall take or use City water from premises other than his/her
own, and no person shall sell or give away City water from his/her own
premises for any purpose, unless same shall have been measured through
a meter or by permission of the department first obtained. City water shall
not be used for filling cisterns, cesspools or surface ponds unless a written
permit is first obtained from the department for which a suitable charge
shall be made to be fixed by the Superintendent.
§ 309-6. Fire hydrants and fire pumps.
§ 309-7. Meters.
A. City fire hydrants. Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of
furnishing water for extinguishing fires and are to be opened and used
only by the Fire and Water Departments of the City or by such persons
as may be specially authorized by the Water Department.
B. Fire pump. When it is desired to supply fire pumps with City water, the
owners or occupants of the property shall provide a tank or other
receptacle into which the water shall be discharged, before going to the
pump, and no direct connection with the street mains for this purpose
shall be allowed.
A. Meters required.
(1) It shall be lawful for the Division of Water and Sewer to attach
water meters together with the necessary connections to any
service pipes wherever it may be deemed by the Superintendent to
be advisable to do so. Payment shall be made for the amount of
water consumed as indicated by the meter, in accordance with the
schedule hereinafter set forth.
(2) Only meters which have been furnished or approved by the Division
of Water and Sewer shall be installed. All meters shall be set by an
authorized employee of the Division of Water and Sewer and any
person or persons who shall cause to be removed, or in any way
interfere with any water meter or the valves or fittings connected
therewith, without permission of the Division shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter. Any damage which any meter may sustain
by reason of carelessness of the owner, his/her agents or tenants of
the premises, or from neglect of any of them to properly protect the
same, including any damage or injury that may result from allowing
the meter to become frozen or to be injured by hot water, shall be
paid to the Division of Water and Sewer by the owner of the
premises and in case such payment is not made, the water may be
shut off from such premises and shall not be turned on again until
all charges are paid.
§ 309-5 TRENTON CODE § 309-7
305:772
(3) All City water used on any premises where a meter is installed must
pass through the meter. No bypass or connection shall be made or
maintained unless covered by a meter.
(4) If a meter at any time fails to accurately record the amount of water
used, the quantity shall be determined and the charge made, based
on the average amount registered during such preceding period of
time prior to the date of failure as the Division of Water and Sewer
may elect.
(5) All meters, except such as are required to be purchased by water
users, shall be and remain the property of the City, and may be
removed whenever the Division may decide to do so.
B. Test of meters.
(1) The accuracy of the meter on any premises shall be tested by the
Division upon written request of the owner or occupant, who shall
pay in advance a fee of $2 to cover the cost of the test. If on such
test the meter shall be found to register over 3% more water than
actually passes through it, another meter shall be substituted
therefor and the fee of $2 shall be repaid to the owner or occupant
of the premises, and the Division of Water and Sewer may adjust
the water bills for the current quarter in such manner as may be
deemed equitable.
(2) No person shall interfere with or change location of or remove any
water meter. All such work must be done by the Division of Water
and Sewer. In case of any irregularity in the operation of a meter,
notice must be given at once to the Division of Water and Sewer.
C. Properties to be metered. Meters shall be required for the following
users of water:
(1) All places using steam or hot water for power.
(2) Yard hydrants or outside fixtures.
(3) Swimming pools, whether public or private.
(4) Photography studios.
(5) Living stables and public garages.
(6) Laundries, including coin-operated laundromats.
(7) Soda fountains and drugstores.
(8) Hotels and office buildings.
(9) Saloons and taverns.
(10) Barbershops.
(11) Bottling places.
§ 309-7 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-7
305:773
(12) Bakeries and confectioneries.
(13) Markets.
(14) Coal yards.
(15) All premises served under schedule C, Suburban Rates, hereinafter
set forth.
D. Meter orders.
(1) When a meter is ordered or a replacement is requested inside of a
building, it is a requirement that shutoff valves be installed at each
side of the meters at the following distances apart:
(a) Three-fourths-inch meter: 18 inches.
(b) One-inch meter: 18 inches.
(c) One-and-one-half-inch meter: 24 inches.
(d) Two-inch meter: 24 inches.
(2) When the valves have been affixed, the meter shall be placed as
soon as possible after the water user has called the Meter
Department informing it of the installation of the valves.
[Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
§ 309-7 TRENTON CODE § 309-7
305:774
ARTICLE II
Water Rates and Charges
§ 309-8. Schedule of rates. [Amended 10-15-1998 by Ord. No.
98-79; 5-15-2003 by Ord. No. 03-60; 9-7-2006 by Ord. No. 06-70;
12-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-107; 9-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-46]
Charges for the use of City water shall be determined according to the
following schedules:
A. Schedule A: Consumption Rates for All Users.
(1) Bills are issued and due quarterly for general metered service and
fire protection charges. When meters are of one-and-one-half-inch
size or larger, the City reserves the right to tender monthly bills.
(2) Consumption rates will be $21.16 per 1,000 cubic feet.
(3) The State of New Jersey enacted Chapter 443 of the Laws of New
Jersey, 1983, concerning the periodic testing of public water
supplies, which established a water tax of $0.01 per 1,000 gallons
of water. This tax is reflected and included in the above rates.
(4) Veterans or spouses of veterans who are qualified for property tax
relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.10 et seq. and senior citizens,
disabled persons or surviving spouses of same who are qualified for
property tax relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40 et seq. are
granted a discount of 10% on consumption charges and fixed
service charged for bills paid on or before the due date. All arrears
must be paid in full before the current bills will be accepted and
discount allowed. The failure of the customer to receive the bill
does not entitle the customer to the discount allowance if the bill
becomes delinquent.
B. Schedule B: Fixed Service Rates for All Users. In addition to
consumption charges there will be the following fixed service charges:
Meter Size Charge Per Quarter
5/8" or 5/8" x 3/4" disc $46.24
3/4" disc $65.80
1" disc $104.82
1 1/2" disc $202.51
2" disc $319.65
2" turbine $514.92
3" disc $592.90
3" turbine $1,100.74
4" turbine $1,882.22
6" turbine $4,303.46
§ 309-8 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-8
305:775
Meter Size Charge Per Quarter
8" turbine $7,815.01
10" turbine $11,720.42
C. Schedule C: Private Fire Protection Rates for All Users.
Service Pipe Size Rate Per Quarter
Up to and including:
3" $125.19
4" $210.13
6" $473.49
8" $854.90
10" $1,280.68
12" $1,958.24
D. Schedule D: Public Fire Protection Rates for All Users. [Amended
11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 08-61]
(1) Quarterly charge per hydrant: $60.14.
(2) Quarterly charge per inch-foot: $28.78 per 1,000 inch feet for all
mains six-inch diameter and over.
E. Schedule E: Multiunit Dwelling for All Users.
(1) Fixed service charges for metered multiunit dwellings will be the
greater of (1) the fixed service charge for the installed meter or (2)
the number of units in the building times 0.70 times the fiveeighths-
inch meter fixed service charge.
(2) In a building housing both commercial and residential units, both
will be considered "units" for the purposes of establishing the fixed
service charge.
F. Schedule F: Unmetered Service for All Users.
(1) Where unmetered service is provided to single-unit dwellings, the
quarterly charge will be the fixed service charge applicable to a
meter equivalent in diameter to the service entering the building
plus a consumption charge for 3,000 cubic feet per quarter at
applicable rates.
(2) Where unmetered service is provided to multiunit dwellings, the
fixed service charge will be the greater of (1) the fixed service
charge applicable for the equivalent diameter or (2) the number of
units in the dwelling times 0.70 times the five-eighths-inch meter
fixed service charge. Consumption charges will be based on 3,000
cubic feet per quarter per unit and will be added to the fixed
service charge.
§ 309-8 TRENTON CODE § 309-8
305:776
§ 309-9. Collection of water charges.
All charges for water service, including all charges for the installation,
renewal or repair of water service, shall be a lien upon the property to
which the service is furnished pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:62-141.
(3) In a building housing both commercial and residential units, both
will be considered "units" for the purpose of establishing the fixed
service charge.
G. Schedule G: Miscellaneous Charges for All Users.
(1) Testing meters at request of customer more frequently than once in
each twelve-month period [N.J.A.C. 14:3-4.5(a)]: $84.
(2) Turn-on charge at request of customer (does not apply to new
customers): $84.
(3) Replacement of meter at request of customer and where meter in
use less than two years (N.J.A.C. 14:3-4.10): $84.
(4) Repair or replacement of frozen or broken meter due to customer
negligence: cost of meter of required size.
(5) Street opening charges: Customers must pay whatever street
opening costs are fixed by the local governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over the roadways.
(6) Bad check charge for all users: If a customer pays a bill, charge or
deposit due with a negotiable instrument, such as a check, bank
draft or the like, which is subsequently dishonored or uncollectible
for any reason, an additional charge of $35 per instrument will be
imposed.
§ 309-8 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-9
305:777

ARTICLE III
Renewal of Water Service
§ 309-10. Notice.
Prior to paving or repaving of any street service, the Division of Water and
Sewer shall give notice to all owners of adjacent property to renew their
water service or to have service installed prior to the date specified in the
notice. Notice shall be served at least 30 days prior to the specified date
by mailing a copy to the owner at his/her last known address. Failure of a
properly owner to actually receive such notice shall not relieve him/her from
complying with the provisions of this section.
§ 309-11. Failure to make application for renewal.
Whenever an adjoining property owner fails to make timely application for
renewal, the Division of Water and Sewer shall have discretion to decide
whether such renewal should be made. In event of an affirmative decision,
cost of the renewal including cost of a permit for a street excavation shall
be charged to the property owner, and shall be in addition to any penalty
which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
§ 309-12. Renewal after paving completed.
No water service shall be installed or renewed for five years subsequent to
the paving or repaving of a street except when City Council, by resolution,
shall determine it is necessary.
§ 309-13. Cost for repair of water main break.
When a water main break occurs where a street surface is undermined
due to a water leak involving a large area so that it becomes necessary
to make extensive repairs, the cost of such repairs, including the cost of
replacing the street surface, may be charged in whole or in part to the
owner or owners of adjoining property, as the City Council, by resolution,
shall determine.
§ 309-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-13
305:779

ARTICLE IV
General Sewer Regulations
§ 309-14. Sewer connection permit required; fee. [Amended
8-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
No sewer connection between curbline and sewer main shall hereafter be
laid, connected or covered up except under the supervision of and after
inspection by the Division of Water and Sewers. Every person, before laying
or making such sewer connection, shall obtain a sewer connection permit
to be issued by the Division of Water and Sewers and, before obtaining
the sewer connection permit, shall pay a fee of $200 to meet the cost of
supervision and inspection of the sewer connection to be made and to serve
as a connection fee for entering the system. Such fee shall be in addition to
any fee or fees heretofore or hereafter requested to be paid.
§ 309-15. Approval of connection required prior to use.
No sewage or waste of any kind shall be emptied into or through a sewer
connection prior to the approval and acceptance of the connection by the
Division of Water and Sewers, and the certification of such approval and
acceptance upon the sewer connection permit theretofore issued.
§ 309-16. Connection of surface runoff sources prohibited.
No roof drainspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or any
other source of surface runoff or groundwater may be connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 309-17. Excessive amounts of sewage.
In any case, where a large volume of sewage or waste is being emptied into
any sewer at such an excessive rate as to surcharge the sewer and cause
backing up of sewage to the detriment or injury of any user of such sewer,
or so as to cause or create a nuisance to any person, property or the City
of Trenton, the Division of Water and Sewers shall have the authority to
require that such excessive flow be regulated by the installation of some
proper device or means approved by the Division whereby the sewage or
waste may be retarded or impounded during the period of excessive flow
and discharged at a reduced rate over a sufficient period of time to insure
against overloading or of blocking the flow of the sewer into which such
sewage flows.
§ 309-18. Statement of quantity and nature of discharge into
sewers.
At the request of the Division of Water and Sewers the applicant for
permission to connect with the sewer system of the City shall furnish to
the Division a statement giving the quantity and chemical and physical
characteristics of the sewage which the applicant proposes to discharge
into the sewer system.
§ 309-14 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-19
305:781
§ 309-19. Responsibility for repairs and costs.
The Division of Water and Sewers shall make all repairs to service pipes
between the curb and the main, the expense of which shall be apportioned
chargeable in the manner provided by state law for sewer installations.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make all necessary
repairs to the service from the curbline to the building. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, at his/her own expense, to make on his/her own
property any necessary excavation that shall be necessary to determine the
existence of and location of any damage or obstruction to the sewer service
to the premises; provided, however, that in the event that it is determined
by such excavation that the primary cause of the trouble is situated between
the curbline and the street connection, the owner shall be reimbursed up
to a maximum of $250 for his/her actual costs of excavating. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner to present to the Department of Public
Works the receipt or other proof of payment verifying the actual excavation
expenditures.
§ 309-20. Conformity with other laws required.
All sewer house connections, collecting lines, interceptors, force mains,
pump stations and appurtenances shall be constructed in conformance with
all rules and regulations of the Trenton Sewer Utility, the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 309-21. Garbage disposal unit connections.
No garbage disposal unit shall be connected with the sanitary sewer system
of the City, nor shall the effluence of any such disposal unit be discharged
therein. This prohibition shall not apply to the use of any garbage disposal
unit connected with such sanitary sewer system of the City prior to
December 8, 1948, or to any public hospital incorporated under an act
for the incorporation of corporations and associations not for profit of the
State of New Jersey and which public hospital or hospitals are supported
in whole or in part by public funds; or to homes for the sick, aged and
infirm incorporated under an act for the incorporation of corporations and
associations not for profit of the State of New Jersey and which homes are
not conducted for profit.
§ 309-22. Inflammable liquids or vapors.
No connection with or opening into any sewer or drain in the City, either
public or private, shall be used for the conveyance or discharge directly
or indirectly into the sewer or drain of any volatile, inflammable liquid,
gas or vapor. A volatile, inflammable liquid is any liquid that will emit an
inflammable vapor at a temperature below 160º F.
§ 309-19 TRENTON CODE § 309-23
305:782
§ 309-23. Separators or traps.
Any occupant or owner of any premises connected with a sewer or drain,
public or private, who shall use, permit or allow to be used any such drain
or sewer for the discharge of any of the substances hereinabove specified,
which sewer or drain connection is not provided with a separator, trap
or similar apparatus attached thereto which is approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section.
§ 309-24. Interest on unpaid charges.
All sewer charges not paid when due shall bear interest and shall be lien
upon the premises to which sewer service is rendered in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14A-21.
§ 309-23 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-24
305:783

ARTICLE V
Discharge of Waters and Wastes Into Public Sewer System
§ 309-25. Definitions.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 466 et seq.
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C, expressed in milligrams per
liter.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
ENGINEER — The Sanitary Engineer of the City of Trenton or his/her
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
EPA — Denotes the United States Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A user of the sewage works discharging sewage
containing industrial wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INTERFERENCE —
Inhibiting or disrupting the operation of sewage works so as to
contribute to, cause or increase a violation of any requirements of
the sewage treatment plant's state or federal permit; or
(1)
Discharging industrial wastes at flow rates or with pollutants in
excess of that approved by the Engineer; or
(2)
Preventing the approved use or disposal of sludge produced by
the sewage treatment plant in accordance with § 405 of the Act
and regulations, criteria or guidelines developed pursuant to the
Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42
U.S.C. § 3251 et seq., the Federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401
et seq., the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act. 15 U.S.C. § 2501
et seq., Sections 2, 4 and 6 of the State Act, and to the extent
practicable, the New Jersey Guidelines for the Utilization and
Disposal of Municipal and Industrial Sludges and Septage.
(3)
§ 309-25 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-25
305:785
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to a
specific category of users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW JERSEY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NJPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to the State Act.
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the publication of proposed regulations prescribed in Section
307(c), 33 U.S.C. § 1317, Categorical Pretreatment Standards, which
will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter
promulgated within 120 days of the proposal in the Federal Register.
Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after such
proposal, a "new source" means any such source, the construction of
which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.
NJDEP — Denotes the State of New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
PASS-THROUGH — The passage of pollutants through the sewage
treatment plant into the receiving waters in quantities or
concentrations which are a cause of, significantly contribute to, or
increase a violation of any requirement of the sewage treatment plant's
NPDES and/or NJPDES permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group, or governmental entity, or their representatives,
agents or assignors.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT — The application of physical, chemical or biological
processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in, or alter the nature of
the polluting properties of, sewage prior to discharging such sewage
into the sewage works.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal, state or local
rules and regulations related to pretreatment, other than National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is controlled by a public authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Wash water, culinary wastes and liquid waste
containing human excreta, food residues and similar matter
(synonymous with "domestic waste" and "sanitary waste").
§ 309-25 TRENTON CODE § 309-25
305:786
§ 309-26. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into
any sanitary sewer.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground- , surface and stormwaters as may be present
(synonymous with "waste" and "wastewater").
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangements of devices and
structures used for treating sewage and owned by the City of Trenton.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities owned by the City of Trenton for
collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUDGE — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which
in connection of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD LABORATORY PROCEDURES — Analytical test procedures
approved under EPA Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants, 40
CFR Part 136, or as approved by the NJDEP or the Engineer.
STATE ACT — The New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1, et seq.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed storm sewer) — A sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering under standard laboratory procedure.
TOXIC OR TOXIC POLLUTANT — Includes but is not limited to those
pollutants designated under section 307 of the Act or section 44 of
the State Act, and such other pollutants as may be so designated
herein. (Synonymous with Toxic Substances and Toxic or Poisonous
Substances).
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. "Shall" is mandatory ; "may" is permissive.
§ 309-25 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-27
305:787
§ 309-27. Permitted discharges.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Engineer. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Engineer
to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
§ 309-28. Prohibited wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers.
§ 309-29. Wastes requiring Engineer's evaluation.
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two milligrams
per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and/or personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers and other like
materials, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substance,
materials, water or wastes which:
(1) Contain prohibited materials or substances as specified herein,
except upon approval of the Engineer.
(2) Are not in conformance with the Engineer's written authorization.
(3) Causes or would cause the influent at the sewage treatment plant
to exceed the limitations prescribed in § 309-29B(5).
B. The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º
C.) or having heat in an amount which will inhibit biological activity
§ 309-27 TRENTON CODE § 309-29
305:788
in the sewage treatment plant or cause the temperature of the
sewage treatment plant influent sewage to exceed 104º F. (40º C.).
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32º and 150º F. (0° and 65º C.).
(3) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing objectionable or toxic substances
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to result in pass-through, to cause interference with the
POTW treatment plant, to constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, to create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
POTW or to exceed the limitations set forth by EPA pursuant to
Section 307 of the Act, or the NJDEP pursuant to Section 4 of the
State Act, or as set forth in § 309-39B(5), or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to the degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Engineer for such
materials.
(5) Average quantities.
(a) Materials such as the following shall be limited to the following
average quantities in the sewage as it arrives at the treatment
plant:
Substance Milligrams per Liter
Arsenic 0.1
Barium 2.0
Cadmium 0.02
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.10
Chromium (total) 1.2
Copper 0.20
Iron 5.0
Lead 0.25
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 0.40
Phenol 0.90
Selenium 0.02
Silver 6.0
Zinc 0.80
§ 309-29 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-29
305:789
§ 309-30. Industrial discharges.
The disposal into the public sewer system of any pollutant by any person
shall comply with the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and
pretreatment standards applicable to the pollutant or to waste discharge.
§ 309-31. Interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand
(b) At no time shall the hourly concentration exceed three times
the average concentration, with contributions from individual
establishments subject to control in volume and concentration
by the Engineer.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenol or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Engineer as necessary after treatment of
the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state,
federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge
to the receiving waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Engineer in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(9) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids such as but
not limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or
of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate.
(b) Excessive discoloration such as but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
(c) Unusual BOD (chemical oxygen demand) or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
sludge, as defined herein.
(10)Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed or which are amenable to treatment only to the degree
that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge
to the receiving waters.
§ 309-29 TRENTON CODE § 309-31
305:790
or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Engineer and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 309-32. Pretreatment facilities.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his/her expense.
§ 309-33. Control manhole.
When required by the Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole located at a point on the sewer following all waste discharges
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Engineer. The installation shall be by the owner at his/her expense and shall
be maintained by him/her, so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 309-34. Analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in
accordance with standard laboratory procedures, and shall be determined
at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at the
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods
to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine
the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls
of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should
be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are
determined from periodic grab samples.
§ 309-35. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City of Trenton and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City of Trenton for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern.
§ 309-36. Industrial authorization for discharge.
§ 309-31 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-36
305:791
A. Authorization required. No industrial user shall discharge or modify the
discharge of industrial waste without first having obtained written
authorization from the Engineer. All applications for authorization shall
be submitted at least 90 days prior to the initiation of the new or
modified discharge.
B. Existing users. Existing industrial users subject to a promulgated or a
promulgated revision of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
shall submit an application for authorization within 90 days of the
promulgation or of adoption of this subsection or of NJDEP approval of
City's industrial pretreatment program, whichever is later.
C. Application for authorization.
(1) The application for authorization shall include:
(a) All information required by the Engineer.
(b) All information required to complete a questionnaire or other
form determined to be appropriate by the Engineer.
(c) All information necessary and appropriate to determine
compliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
and pretreatment standards, including information necessary
to determine classification under such standard.
(d) Current sampling and analysis data descriptive of each of the
industrial wastes to be discharged.
(e) All other information necessary to the determination of
compliance with this subsection.
(f) Plans, specifications, design data and other information
deemed pertinent by the Engineer.
(2) Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows to
discharge to the sewer works is required, plans, operating
procedures, specifications and other pertinent data or information
relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall be
submitted. Submission and/or approval of such information shall
not exempt the user from compliance with any applicable code,
ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority.
Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or
flow-control facilities or method of operation which could affect the
discharge shall not be made without due notice to and prior
approval by the Engineer.
D. Statement of compliance. Existing industrial users shall submit a
statement and supporting data regarding whether or not the required
pretreatment is being met and, if not, how it will be met by process
modification, additional operation and maintenance (O&M) or
additional pretreatment.
§ 309-36 TRENTON CODE § 309-36
305:792
E. Compliance with standards. If process modification, additional
pretreatment or additional O&M will be required to meet the applicable
standards, the user shall submit the shortest compliance schedule. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable standards. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of facilities required for
the user to meet the applicable standards (e.g., starting planning
and design, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
(2) No increment referred to in Subsection E(1) above shall exceed 270
days.
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the Engineer including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment or progress to be met on such date and, if not,
the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than 270 days elapse between such progress
reports to the Engineer.
F. Action on application by Engineer. Upon receipt of a complete
application, the Engineer, after review, may reject the discharge of the
waste, or may accept the discharge subject to conditions, such as, but
not be limited to:
(1) Limits on the average and peak wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including mass limitations where appropriate.
(2) Limits on average and peak flow rates and times of discharge and/
or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(3) Requirements for installation, maintenance and operation of
inspection, metering and sampling facilities.
(4) Specifications for user self-monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting contents and schedules.
(5) Compliance schedules.
(6) Requirements for submission of technical reports and/or discharge
reports.
§ 309-36 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-36
305:793
§ 309-37. Periodic compliance reports.
To assure continued compliance with this article, periodic compliance
reports shall be submitted to the Engineer. Any user subject to the
pretreatment standards or National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
after the compliance date of such standard or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge, shall submit to the Engineer during
the months of July and December, unless required more frequently in the
applicable standard or by Engineer, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all flows,
pollutant concentrations and mass, which during the reporting period
exceeded the flows and concentrations, mass or other conditions permitted.
At the discretion of the Engineer and in consideration of such factors as
seasonal operations, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Engineer may elect
or agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted by each user.
§ 309-38. Public information.
(7) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge, as specified by the Engineer, the NJDEP
or EPA, and affording access thereto.
(8) Requirements for notifying the Engineer of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in volume or
character of wastewater constituents being introduced into the
sewage works.
(9) Other conditions deemed appropriate by the Engineer to ensure
compliance with this article and other regulations.
(10) Payments, under the provisions of § 309-35 of this article, to cover
added cost of handling and treating the wastes, which costs are not
covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
G. Reapplication. Where the Engineer issued such authorization, (s)he
may require reapplication:
(1) On an annual basis; or
(2) At a specified time period, not to exceed five years. Such
application shall be submitted at least 90 days prior to expiration of
the existing authorization. The terms and conditions of the
authorization may be subject to modification by the Engineer as
limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists.
H. Changes in authorization. The user shall be informed of any proposed
changes in his/her authorization, and any changes or new conditions
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 309-36 TRENTON CODE § 309-38
305:794
§ 309-39. Damage to sewage works.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 309-40. Protection from accidental discharge.
A. Information to be available. Information and data on a user obtained
from reports, questionnaires, applications, permits, monitoring
programs and from inspection shall be available to the public or
governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that
release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the
user. However, information on wastewater volume, constituents and
character will not be recognized as confidential information.
B. Confidentially of trade secrets. When requested by the person
furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public. When information accepted by the City as confidential is
requested by the EPA, NJDEP or other governmental agencies for uses
related to this article, NPDES or NJPDES permits, federal pretreatment
programs, etc., the City shall refer these requests to the user who
furnished the information in question.
C. Inspection by public. Nonconfidential information will be made
available for inspection by the public at the office of the Engineer
during normal business hours of the office. Requests for such review
are to be made in writing in advance and appointments will be required.
There will be a charge for copies at a cost determined by the City.
A. Responsibility of user. Each industrial user shall provide protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or
industrial user's own cost and expense.
B. Submission of plans; time for compliance. Upon request of the
Engineer, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted with an implementation
schedule to the Engineer for review and approval prior to construction
of the facility. Existing industrial users, where required by the Engineer,
shall submit such a plan within 180 days after the effective date of this
article, and implementation shall be completed within the time
schedule approved by the Engineer.
§ 309-38 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-40
305:795
§ 309-41. Powers and duties of inspectors.
C. Time for compliance where plans not required. Industrial users not
required to submit detailed plans shall implement accidental discharge
prevention procedures within 120 days after the effective date of this
article. Absence of such requirement, request or notification by the
Engineer or review of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying his/her
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
D. Notification of accidental discharge or noncompliance; action required.
In the case of an accidental or noncompliance discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this article, or, if for any
reason an industrial user does not comply, or will be unable to comply,
with any prohibition or limitation in this article, the industrial user
responsible for such discharge shall immediately telephone and notify
the sewage treatment plant of the incident. Notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and any
corrective actions taken and to be taken. Furthermore, such industrial
user shall take immediate action to contain and minimize the accidental
or noncompliance discharge to the sewage works so as to prevent
interference with the treatment process and/or damage to the sewage
works.
E. Report on discharge; liability. Within five working days following an
accidental or noncomplying discharge, the industrial user shall submit
to the Engineer a detailed written report describing date, time and
cause of the discharge, quantity and characteristics of the discharge
and corrective action taken at the time of the discharge, and measures
to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense,
loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the sewage works, fish kills or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fine, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or
other applicable law.
F. Emergency notification procedures. All industrial users shall develop an
emergency notification procedure. A notice shall be permanently
posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees of the responsible individual to notify in event of an
accidental or noncompliance discharge. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause an accidental or noncompliance discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
A. Inspection. The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the
City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Engineer or his/her representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
§ 309-40 TRENTON CODE § 309-41
305:796
§ 309-42. Violations and penalties.
§ 309-43. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Chief Sanitary Engineer shall promulgate such rules, regulations,
guidelines and standards as may be necessary to assure proper
administration and effectuation of this article.
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that
point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
B. Safety rules. While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in Subsection A, the Engineer or duly authorized
employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company.
A. Notice of violation; corrections; severance of connection. Any person
found to be violating any provisions of this article, except §§ 309-39
and 309-40, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender, within the period of time
stated in such notice, shall permanently abate all violations. The
Engineer may order immediate suspension of a discharge or cause
immediate severance of the sewer connection, without such
notification, when such suspension or severance is necessary, in the
opinion of the Engineer, to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment,
or causes or may cause interference or pass-through. Violation of this
section may result in termination of the disposal authorization.
B. Fines. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in Subsection A shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, for each violation. Each day in
which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Liability for damages. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
article shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by the City by reason of such violation.
D. Publication of list of violators. The City shall annually publish in the
newspaper a list of the users which were significant violators, as
defined by 40 CFR 403.8(F)(2)(vii), of any pretreatment standards
during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize
any actions taken against such violators during the same 12 months. All
records relating to compliance with applicable standards shall be made
available to officials of the EPA or NJDEP upon request.
§ 309-41 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-43
305:797

ARTICLE VI
Sewerage System Rates and Charges
§ 309-44. (Reserved)96
§ 309-45. When due.
Charges for sewerage service shall be made quarterly on an as-used basis.
§ 309-46. Discount.
§ 309-47. Notice.
Upon the effective dates of this article, a copy thereof certified by the City
Clerk shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Mercer County and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate services by the City of Trenton
Sewer Utility of their liability for sewerage service supplied.
§ 309-48. Determination of sewer user charges.
The sewer user charges shall be determined in the following manner:
A. Veterans or spouses of veterans who are qualified for property tax relief
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.10 et seq. and senior citizens, disabled
persons or surviving spouses of same who are qualified for property tax
relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40 et seq. are granted a discount of
10% on current bills paid on or before the due date. All arrears must be
paid in full before the current bills will be accepted and discount
allowed. The failure of the customer to receive the bill does not entitle
the customer to the discount allowance if the bill becomes delinquent.97
A. The minimum charge for each customer will be $20 per quarter,
regardless of usage. [Amended 8-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
B. Rate structure. [Amended 8-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
(1) Rate structure effective on October 1, 2009. For customers being
supplied with water quarterly, the sewer usage rates shall be based
on the volume of water supplied and water connection size on the
dates indicated herein, as set forth below:
Water Meter Connection Size
(inches)
Rate
(per 100 cubic feet)
5/8 $3.12
5/8 x 3/4 $3.14
96.Editor's Note: Former § 309-44, Rates established, as amended, was repealed 8-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-35.
97.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the effective date of rates and charges,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35.
§ 309-44 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-48
305:799
3/4 $3.15
1 $3.36
1 1/2 $3.47
2 $3.59
3 $3.70
4 $3.81
6 $3.95
8 $4.03
(2) Rate structure effective on July 1, 2010. For customers being
supplied with water quarterly, the sewer usage rates shall be based
on the volume of water supplied and water connection size on the
dates indicated herein, as set forth below:
Water Meter Connection Size
(inches)
Rate
(per 100 cubic feet)
5/8 $3.15
5/8 x 3/4 $3.17
3/4 $3.18
1 $3.39
1 1/2 $3.50
2 $3.64
3 $3.75
4 $3.86
6 $4.00
8 $4.08
C. The minimum charge and unit charge described in Subsections A and B
shall include the cost of treating average concentrations of pollutants in
the wastes, i.e. suspended solids, concentrations of 200 mg/liter or less
and five-day BOD concentrations of 200 mg/liter or less.
D. Equitable surcharges shall be developed for application to those wastes
containing average suspended solids concentrations in excess of 200
mg/liter and average five-day BOD concentrations in excess of 200 mg/
liter. The surcharges will reflect the part of capital and operating costs
allocable to concentrations of suspended solids and five-day BOD above
the limits defined in Subsection C.
E. The total annual amount of water supplied to, or otherwise obtained by,
users of the sewer system shall be determined, and any water that can
be positively measured as being incorporated in a product, such as a
beverage, or used otherwise and not returned to the sewer system for
delivery to the sewage treatment plant shall be subtracted from that
§ 309-48 TRENTON CODE § 309-48
305:800
total. The amount of water so determined shall be used as the basis to
determine flow charges.
F. The total annual amount of five-day BOD received at the sewage
treatment plant shall be calculated and used as the basis to determine
surcharges for excessive five-day BOD concentrations.
G. The total annual amount of suspended solids received at the sewage
treatment plant shall be calculated and used as the basis to determine
surcharges for excessive suspended solids concentrations.
H. The amount of water determined under Subsection D shall be divided
into the annual amount of water supplied to or otherwise obtained by
customers.
I. The total annual pounds of five-day BOD, against which a surcharge
shall be applied, shall be determined as the number of pounds in those
wastes having average concentration in excess of 200 mg/liter that is in
excess of that concentration.
J. The total annual pounds of suspended solids against which a surcharge
shall be applied shall be determined as the number of pounds in those
wastes having average concentrations in excess of 200 mg/liter that is
in excess of that concentration.
K. The respective charges to industrial customers for excessive strength
discharges of five-day BOD and suspended solids shall be determined
by multiplying the number of pounds contributed by each user
determined under Subsections I and J above, respectively, by the
appropriate unit cost obtained by dividing the total cost allocable to
treatment of five-day BOD by the total pounds of five-day BOD received
at the treatment plant, and the total cost allocable to treatment of
suspended solids by the total pounds of suspended solids received at
the treatment plant.
L. The total annual costs shall be estimated for each year for five years
into the future and shall be computed as the sum of the annual debt
service, and the annual costs for operating and maintaining the sewer
utility at the level of performance for which it is designed. Estimates of
costs shall allow for inflation at an appropriate annual rate.
M. The total annual costs shall be attributed to flow, five-day BOD, and
suspended solids in the following proportions:
(1) For annual debt service:
(a) To flow: 77.2%.
(b) To five-day BOD: 19.3%.
(c) To suspended solids: 3.5%.
(2) For annual operation and maintenance:
§ 309-48 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-48
305:801
§ 309-49. Review of user charge system.
The user charge system shall be reviewed no less frequently than biannually
to insure sufficient funds are derived from this system for operation and
maintenance of the sewer utility at the level of performance for which it is
designed.
(a) To flow: 56.9%.
(b) To five-day BOD: 24.0%.
(c) To suspended solids: 19.1%.
(3) For future costs of solids recycling:
(a) To five-day BOD: 23%.
(b) To suspended solids: 77%.
N. To total estimated revenue derived from charges under Subsections K
and L for excessive concentrations of five-day BOD and suspended
solids shall be subtracted from the total cost computed under
Subsection L for determination of the minimum charge and unit charge
described under Subsections A and B.
O. The minimum charge shall be determined by dividing the quantity of
water obtained under § 309-48 by the total quantity of water under
Subsection E and multiplying that number by the cost determined
under Subsection N, to obtain the total cost to be applied to the
minimum charge, and dividing that number by the total number of
customers served and multiplying that number by 1.10.
P. The unit charge per 100 cubic feet for water shall be determined by
dividing the difference between the cost under Subsection N and the
cost to be recovered by the minimum charge obtained under Subsection
O by the flow calculated under Subsection H and multiplying that
number by 1.10.
§ 309-48 TRENTON CODE § 309-49
305:802
ARTICLE VII
Industrial Cost Recovery
§ 309-50. Establishment of system and charge rates.
§ 309-51. Industrial user defined.
In accordance with 40 CFR 35.905, an industrial user, for the purpose of
administering the industrial cost recovery program, shall be defined herein
as any user which satisfies either or both of the following conditions:
A. There shall be and is hereby established an industrial cost recovery
(ICR) system for the City sewer utility. In accordance with the Federal
Clean Waters Act such system shall establish unit charge rates to
recover that portion of Federal Construction Grants Numbers
C-34-416-01, 03 and 04 which is allocable to the treatment of industrial
wastes.
B. Industrial cost recovery unit charge rates shall be based on the amount
of federal funds allocable to wastewater parameters of flow, five-day
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) divided
by the treatment works design capacity of each parameter. Such charge
rates shall be established as annual rates based on a thirty-year ICR
period. The ICR unit charge rates for year 1980 are:
(1) $13.09 per year per 1,000 gallons per work day.
(2) $6.47 per year per pound five-day BOD per work day.
(3) $0.27 per year per pound SS per work day.
A. Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned
treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000
gallons per day (GPD) of sanitary wastes and which is identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management
and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under one of the following
divisions:
(1) Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
(2) Division B: Mining.
(3) Division D: Manufacturing.
(4) Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Services.
(5) Division I: Services.
§ 309-50 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-51
305:803
§ 309-52. Billing procedure; unpaid charges to be lien.
§ 309-53. Commencement of collection of ICR charges.
Collection of the ICR charges herein established shall commence upon
completion of the treatment works funded by Federal Grant Numbers
C-34-416-01, 03 and 04 and continue for 30 years thereafter if not otherwise
modified by the Congress and the EPA.
§ 309-54. Use of recovery payments.
The equivalent of 25,000 GPD of sanitary waste shall be defined
as 25,000 GPD, and/or 42.5 pounds per day (PPD) of five-day BOD,
50.0 pounds per day (PPD) of (SS).
In recognition of domestic wastewater from an industrial user's
employees, the utility shall reduce each industrial user's total flow
and strength by the following factors prior to final determination
of industrial users: 20 GPD per employee; .075 PPD five-day BOD
per employee; .075 PPD SS per employee.
B. Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic
pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity
either singly, or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the
sludge of any municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any
sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or
animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in, or has an
adverse effect on, the waters receiving any discharge from the
treatment works.
A new industry shall be an industrial user, as defined herein, which
connects to the treatment works after the ICR system is operational.
ICR payments will begin on the date use is initiated and continue for
the unexpired portion of the ICR period or until the industry ceases
use of the facility. New industries shall pay the same unit charge rates
as existing industries.
A. Charges for the ICR system shall be made semiannually. In the event
that charges for ICR are not paid within 30 days after rendition of the
bill for such charges, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby
declared to be delinquent, and, thereafter, each delinquency shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied
unless otherwise prohibited by law, in the same manner and to the same
extent as is presently applicable to delinquent water bills.
B. Any of the utility's users can object in writing to the utility for a
determination with respect to any billings which are alleged to be
incorrect.
§ 309-51 TRENTON CODE § 309-54
305:804
§ 309-55. Notice of liability.
Upon the effective date of this article, a copy thereof properly certified by
the City Clerk shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Mercer County and
shall be deemed notice to all industrial users serviced by the City of Trenton
Sewer Utility of their liability for ICR.
§ 309-56. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon final adoption and publication in
the manner provided by law, except that collections shall be subject to the
provisions of § 309-53.
A. In accordance with CFR 35.928-2, the City shall use industrial cost
recovery payments received from industrial users as follows:
(1) Return 50%, together with any interest earned, to the U.S.
Treasury annually.
(2) Retain the remaining 50%.
B. A portion of the amounts retained by the City shall be used to pay the
incremental cost of administration of the industrial cost recovery
system. The incremental costs, which will be segregated from all other
administrative costs, are those costs remaining after deducting all costs
reasonably attributable to the administration of the user charge system.
A minimum of 80% of the amounts the City retains after paying the
incremental costs of administration, together with any interest earned,
shall be used for the allowable costs of any expansion, upgrading or
reconstruction of the treatment works necessary to meet the
requirements of the Clean Water Act. The remainder of the amounts
retained will be used as the City sees fit with the exception that they
may not be used for construction of industrial pretreatment facilities or
rebates to industrial users for costs incurred in complying with user
charge or industrial cost recovery requirements.
C. The City shall deposit all funds recovered during the annual accounting
period in interest-bearing accounts which are fully collateralized by
obligations of the U.S. Government or by obligations fully guaranteed as
to principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof.
§ 309-54 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-56
305:805

ARTICLE VIII
Delinquent Accounts
§ 309-57. Applicability.
The following procedures regarding delinquent accounts shall apply only
with respect to accounts within the City of Trenton. The Division of Water
and Sewer shall follow the procedures required by the Board of Public
Utilities for accounts outside the City.
§ 309-58. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — The person or entity who has contracted for water and
sewer services or, in the absence of such a contract, the owner or owners of
the premises being serviced.
DELINQUENT ACCOUNT — An account for which the total amount due for
water and sewer has not been paid within 40 days after billing.
OCCUPANT — A person to whom an owner has yielded possession of
property, or a dwelling unit, and includes tenants.
§ 309-59. Interest.98
Unpaid charges for water and sewer services rendered after October 1,
1989, shall bear interest at the same rates applicable to delinquent real
property taxes, beginning on the date that the account becomes delinquent.
§ 309-60. Discontinuation of service.
A. Except as provided below, the Division of Water and Sewer shall have
the right to discontinue service to premises with delinquent accounts
upon reasonable notice.
B. The Division of Water and Sewer shall not discontinue water service
under the following circumstances:
(1) The bill is in dispute and the customer or occupant has requested a
hearing and made payment of the undisputed portion of the bill
pursuant to § 309-62.
(2) The customer or occupant has entered into a deferred payment
agreement pursuant to § 309-63.
(3) The occupants are residential tenants who have entered into a
payment agreement pursuant to § 309-64.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 309-57 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-60
305:807
§ 309-61. Notification of intent to discontinue service.
§ 309-62. Disputed bills.
(4) The customer or occupant is in bankruptcy and has furnished
adequate assurance of payment for future services pursuant to
§ 309-65.
(5) A medical emergency exists, as defined in § 309-66.
A. Time. The Division of Water and Sewer shall give at least seven days'
written notice of its intention to discontinue services. The notice may be
served any time after the account becomes delinquent.
B. Service of notice.
(1) Persons to be served. The Division of Water and Sewer shall serve
the notice of termination on the account customer. In addition, the
Division of Water and Sewer shall annually notify all residential
customers that, upon request, notice of discontinuance of service
will be sent to a designated third party as well as to the customer.
Where the account customer has an address different from the
address of the premises being serviced, the notice shall also be sent
to the occupant of the premises.
(2) Manner of service. The notice of termination shall be sent by
regular mail. In addition, the Division of Water and Sewer shall
make a good faith effort to determine which of its residential
customers are over 65 years of age, and shall make a good faith
effort to notify such customers of discontinuance by telephone, in
addition to notice by regular mail.
C. Contents of discontinuance notice. On all notices of discontinuance
there shall be included:
(1) A clear statement of the amount believed to be in arrears.
(2) A statement that water service shall be terminated on or after a
specified date, which shall in no event be less than seven days from
the date of the posting of such notice.
(3) A statement that if the customer or occupant is presently unable to
pay an outstanding bill, the customer or occupant may contact the
Division of Water and Sewer to discuss the possibility of entering
into a reasonable deferred payment agreement.
(4) A statement that if the customer or occupant wishes to contest a
bill or the proposed termination of services, (s)he is entitled to a
hearing prior to termination of services. The Division of Water and
Sewer may require the customer or occupant to file a written
request for a hearing on forms to be prescribed by the Division.
(5) The address and telephone number of the Division.
§ 309-60 TRENTON CODE § 309-62
305:808
§ 309-63. Deferred payment agreement.
§ 309-64. Discontinuance of service to residential tenants.
A. The Division of Water and Sewer shall not discontinue service in cases
where a charge is in dispute, provided that the customer or occupant
files a request for a hearing and the undisputed charges are paid at or
prior to the hearing.
B. When a bill is in dispute and a request is made to the Division of Water
and Sewer for a hearing, the days allowed for net billing shall begin at
the date of receipt of the ruling or determination.
A. Whenever a customer or occupant advises the Division of Water and
Sewer prior to the date of a proposed discontinuance for nonpayment
that (s)he wishes to discuss a deferred payment agreement because
(s)he is presently unable to pay a total outstanding bill, the Division of
Water and Sewer shall make a good faith effort to enter into a
reasonable deferred payment agreement.
B. While a deferred payment agreement need not be entered into more
than once per year, the Division of Water and Sewer may offer more
than one agreement in a year.
C. If a customer or occupant defaults on any of the terms of the
agreement, the Division of Water and Sewer may discontinue service
after providing the customer with a notice of discontinuance pursuant
to § 309-62.
A. The Division of Water and Sewer shall make every reasonable attempt
to determine when a landlord-tenant relationship exists at residential
premises being serviced.
B. If such a relationship exists, discontinuance of service is prohibited
unless:
(1) The Division of Water and Sewer has posted notice of
discontinuance in the common areas of multiple-family premises
and, where possible, has given individual notice to occupants of
single- and two-family dwellings; and
(2) The Division of Water and Sewer has offered the tenant or tenants
continued service to be billed to the tenants. The Division of Water
and Sewer shall require the tenant or tenants to pay bills for future
services, and shall require the tenant or tenants to enter into a
deferred payment plan which would be sufficient to bring the
account current within one year.
(3) The amount to be paid by any tenant shall not exceed the amount of
that tenant's monthly rent.
§ 309-62 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-64
305:809
§ 309-65. Discontinuance of service in bankruptcy proceedings.
§ 309-66. Medical emergencies.
§ 309-67. Discontinuance of service on weekends and holidays.
The Division of Water and Sewer may not discontinue service for
nonpayment on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday on which the Division of
(4) The Division of Water and Sewer shall not be required to continue
service to a tenant or tenants where such billing is not reasonably
feasible.
(5) The Division of Water and Sewer shall not be held to the
requirements of this section if the existence of a landlord-tenant
relationship could not be reasonably ascertained or where the
tenant or tenants are the account customers.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B below, the Division of Water and
Sewer shall not refuse or discontinue service to a customer who has
filed for bankruptcy solely on the basis that a bill for services rendered
before the order for relief was not paid when due.
B. The Division of Water and Sewer may refuse or discontinue service to a
customer who has filed for bankruptcy if neither the trustee nor the
customer, within 20 days of the order for relief, furnishes adequate
assurance of payment in the form of a deposit or other security for
service after such date.
A. Discontinuance of residential service for nonpayment is prohibited if a
medical emergency exists within the premises which would be
aggravated by the discontinuance of service and the customer or
occupant gives reasonable proof of inability to pay.
B. Discontinuance shall be prohibited for a period of up to two months
when a customer submits a physician's statement, in writing, to the
Division of Water and Sewer as to the existence of the emergency, its
nature and probable duration, and that termination of water service will
aggravate the medical emergency.
C. Recertification by the physician as to continuance of the medical
emergency shall be submitted to the Division of Water and Sewer after
30 days. However, at the end of such period of emergency, the customer
or occupant shall still remain liable for payment for services rendered.
D. The General Superintendent of the Division of Water and Sewer may
extend the sixty-day period for good cause.
E. The Division of Water and Sewer, in its discretion, may delay
discontinuance of residential water service for nonpayment prior to
submission of the physician's statement required by this section when a
medical emergency is known to exist.
§ 309-64 TRENTON CODE § 309-67
305:810
Water and Sewer's offices are closed, or after 1:00 p.m. of the business day
prior to a weekend or holiday.
§ 309-68. Restoration of service.
§ 309-69. Unauthorized reconnection of services.
No owner or occupant of any premises whose water services have been
discontinued by the Division of Water and Sewer shall knowingly cause or
permit the reconnection of such service without the approval of the Division
of Water and Sewer. Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon
conviction, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty, of the Code of the City of Trenton.
§ 309-70. Hearing procedures; disputed bills. [Amended 2-5-2004
by Ord. No. 04-6]
A. Service shall be restored upon proper application when the conditions
under which service was discontinued are corrected and upon payment
of all proper charges due, including interest and a reconnection fee of
$50.
B. In addition to a payment of all charges due, the Division of Water and
Sewer shall require the customer, as a condition of restoration of
service, to make or establish over a period of payments a deposit equal
to the amount due for the past two quarters. Such deposit shall be
maintained to secure prompt payment for future billings.
A. A customer disputing a bill shall notify the Director of Water, in writing,
that the billing is being disputed and provide all evidence and
information relevant to the dispute.
B. The Director shall then review the case, make a determination and
respond to the customer in writing.
C. Should the Director or the customer request an informal meeting, the
date, time and place of the meeting shall be arranged.
§ 309-67 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 309-70
305:811
Chapter 312
YARD WASTE
§ 312-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the City of Trenton, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 312-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 312-3. Prohibited conduct; exceptions.
A. The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste,
unless the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that
is not containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for
placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or
said party shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
B. Exceptions. Areas scheduled for leaf collection through the Leaf
Collection Program are exempt from the containerized yard waste
ordinance, provided that the noncontainerized yard waste placed at the
curb or along the street is more than 10 feet away from any storm drain
inlet. Additionally, noncontainerized yard waste cannot be placed at the
curb or along the street at any time prior to the scheduled pick up date,
except as described in the Leaf Collection Program.
§ 309-70 TRENTON CODE § 312-4
305:812
§ 312-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the City of Trenton Police Department.
§ 312-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, as stated in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty, § 1-17.
§ 312-6. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, clause and phrase,
and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 312-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect in accordance with applicable law, after
adoption, publication and execution.
Chapter 315
ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 17.
Building construction — See Ch. 42.
Commercial structures — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 97.
Flood control — See Ch. 109.
Junkyards — See Ch. 137, Art. II.
Signs — See Ch. 233.
Special Improvement District — See Ch. 252.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 264.
§ 312-4 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 312-7
305:813

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 315-1. Scope.
This chapter regulates and limits the uses of land and the uses and locations
of buildings and structures; regulates and restricts the height and bulk
of buildings and structures and determines the area of yards and other
open spaces; regulates and restricts the density of population; divides the
City of Trenton into districts for such purposes; adopts a map of the City
showing boundaries and the classification of such districts; establishes
rules, regulations and standards governing the subdivision and
development of land within the City; establishes a Planning Board and a
Zoning Board of Adjustment; and prescribes penalties for the violation of its
provisions.
§ 315-2. Title.
The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be the "Zoning
and Land Development Ordinance of the City of Trenton."
§ 315-3. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:55D-1 et seq., in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare,
and in the furtherance of the following related and more specific objectives:
A. Encourage action to guide the appropriate use or development of all
lands in the City, in a manner which will promote the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Ensure that the development of Trenton does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities.
E. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods and the entire municipality as well as the preservation
of the environment.
F. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open
space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
§ 315-1 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-3
305:815
§ 315-4. Interpretation of standards.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed and
required by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations or
resolutions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where other laws,
rules, regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions than are
imposed by this chapter, the provisions of such other laws, rules and
regulations shall control.
§ 315-5. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited.
§ 315-6. Compliance.
All applicable requirements shall be met at the first time of erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use of a structure and shall
apply to the entire structure or structures, whether or not the entire
structure or structures were involved in the erection, enlargement,
alteration, moving or change in use. Moreover, no building or structure
shall be erected, moved, altered, added to or enlarged unless in conformity
with this chapter, and no building, structure or land shall be used for
any purpose or in any manner other than as specified in this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in plans,
construction or intended use of any buildings, structure or land on which
actual construction or the application for a permit or preliminary plans
were lawfully submitted to any governmental agency having applicable
jurisdiction, and such actions were begun and diligently pursued before the
adoption of this chapter.
H. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. Promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and to prevent the degradation of the environment,
including but not limited to the air, water and visual environment,
through improper use of land.
K. Encourage diverse types of housing construction.
L. Establish orderly and uniform procedures relating to land use and
development regulation.
M. Promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
N. Promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste.
§ 315-3 TRENTON CODE § 315-7
305:816
§ 315-7. Action to enjoin or remedy violations.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, moved or converted, or any building structure or land is used in
violation of, or contrary to, the provisions of this chapter, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of, or contrary to, any approved site
plan or subdivision, including any conditions made thereto, the City may
institute any action to enjoin or any other appropriate action or proceeding
to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion or use. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
restrict the right of any party to obtain a review by any court of competent
jurisdiction according to law.
§ 315-8. Violations and penalties.
§ 315-9. Word usage.
A. Any violation hereunder shall be considered an offense punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. The following
rules shall apply in determining responsibility for violations and
penalties:
(1) The owner, general agent, contractor or occupant, or any
combination thereof, of a building, premises, or part thereof, where
such a violation has been committed or exists shall be guilty of such
an offense.
(2) Any agent, contractor, architect, engineer, builder, corporation or
other person who commits, takes part or assists in such violation
shall be guilty of such offense.
B. Each day that a violation continues after notification that it exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. The imposition of penalties herein shall not preclude the City, or any
other person, from instituting an action to prevent an unlawful
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion or use or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent the illegal occupancy
of a building, land or premises.
A. For the purpose of the land use and development provisions, certain
phrases and words are defined as herein set forth. In addition, the
following rules of interpretation shall apply:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) Words used in the singular number include the plural number and
vice versa.
(3) The word "used" shall include "arranged," "designed,"
"constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased" or
"intended to be used."
§ 315-7 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-9
305:817
§ 315-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below. Definitions pertaining specifically to Article XXIII,
Telecommunications Facilities, are provided in § 315-148 et seq.99
Definitions pertaining specifically to Article XXV, Signs, are provided in
§ 315-191 et seq.100
ABUTTING — Joining at the side, whether or not a street intervenes.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or
use which is customarily associated with and is subordinate and incidental
to the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the
same lot therewith, including, but not limited to, garages, carports, kennels,
sheds and nonportable swimming pools. Any accessory building attached to
the principal building shall be considered part of the principal building.
ADDITION — An extension or an increase in floor area or height of a
building structure.
ADJOINING — Touching or bounding at a point or line.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The administrative officer of the City of
Trenton, Mercer County, New Jersey, unless a different municipal official is
designated by this chapter to administer certain of the responsibilities and
authorities specified for the administrative officer in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of 20 feet or
less.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in or additions to the
supporting members of a building, such as columns, walls, girders, beams
or rafters.
APPLICANT — The landowner or the agent, optionee, contract purchaser or
other person authorized to act for and acting for the landowner submitting
an application under this chapter.
(4) The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "premises."
(5) The word "building" includes the words "structure," "dwelling" or
"residence."
(6) The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning as
defined in Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English
Language, unabridged, or latest edition. Moreover, whenever a term is
used in this chapter which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such
term is intended to have the meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., unless specifically defined to the contrary in this chapter.
99.Editor's Note: More specifically, see § 315-149, Definitions and word usage.
100. Editor's Note: More specifically, see § 315-192, Definitions.
§ 315-9 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:818
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application or appeal forms,
and all accompanying documents, required by this chapter for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction for
issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A device or structure attached to the
exterior or erected on the roof of a building designed to support service
equipment or used in connection therewith, or to support advertising or
display functions, or other similar uses.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT — Any outdoor area or space where more than
three motor vehicles for sale to the public may be parked, stored or
displayed.
AWNING — An awning is an extension from the building to shade or protect
windows from sun and storm.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
BEDROOM — A room planned or used primarily for sleeping.
BLOCK — The length of a street between two street intersections.
BLOCK FRONTAGE — The distance along any street line between the
nearest streets intersecting it.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
a permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy structure and having a
roof.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured to the highest point,
exclusive of chimneys and similar features, from the mean elevation of the
finished grade at the foundation along the side(s) of the building facing
a street, or to the street line if the street line is within 10 feet distance
from the foundation. In all cases where this chapter provides for height
limitations by reference to a specified height and a specified number of
stories, the intent is to limit height to the specified maximum footage and
the specified number of stories within such footage.
BUILDING LINE — The line established by law beyond which a building
shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law.
BUILDING SITE — The area occupied by a building or structure, including
the yards and courts required for light and ventilation, and such areas that
are prescribed for access to the street.
BUSINESS USE — See "commercial use."
A. A detached building is one with no party wall or walls.
A semidetached building is one of two buildings with a single party wall
common to both.
B.
An attached building is one with two or more party walls or one party
wall in the case of a building at the end of a group of attached buildings.
C.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:819
CANOPY — A canopy is an overhanging protective covering for an entrance
extending from the main entrance of the building.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — An acquisition of real property, major
construction projects, or acquisition of expensive equipment expected to
last a long time.
CARPORT — A one-level structure, open on three sides, for the storage of
or parking for automobiles.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of a street customarily used
for vehicles in the regular course of travel. Where there are curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the curbs. Where there are no curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the edges of the paved or graded width.
CENTER LINE OF STREET OR ROAD — A line midway between and parallel
to two street or road property lines, or as otherwise defined by the City
Council.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — The certificate issued by the
Construction Official which permits the use of a building in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance with
the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its several
parts, together with any special stipulations or conditions of the building
permit.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use that substantially differs from the previous use
of a building or land resulting in an increase or decrease in intensity of use,
change in parking requirements, or means of ingress.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as
streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits
and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations,
warehouses and other storage buildings or shipment points.
CITY — The City of Trenton.
CLUBHOUSE — A building to house a club or social organization not
conducted for profit and which is not adjunct to or operated by or in
connection with a public tavern, cafe or other public place.
COMMERCIAL DISPLAY — The exhibition to the senses of another person
for valuable consideration, whether the valuable consideration is paid by
the recipient of the exhibition or by another and whether the exhibition
occurs at the exhibitor's place of business or elsewhere.
COMMERCIAL USE — A use that involves the sale of goods or services
carried out for profit.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES — A
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter, and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to no more than 15 persons with head
injuries, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live
in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to, group homes,
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:820
halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels.
Such a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within
the meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136
(N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.).
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any community
residential facility operated as a hospice program providing food, shelter,
personal guidance and health care services under such supervision as
required to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of a service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq.),
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance
and other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of
domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form, completed as specified
by this chapter and the rules and regulations for all accompanying
documents required by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to this chapter for approval of the application for
development, including, where applicable, but not limited to, a site plan,
provided that the Board may require such additional information not
specified in such chapter, or any revisions in the accompanying documents,
as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether
the requirements necessary for approval of the application for development
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack
of any such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the Board. An application shall be certified as
complete immediately upon the meeting of all requirements specified in the
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c.
448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the
community, and shall include, but not be limited to, group homes,
halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment
living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall not be
considered a health care facility within the meaning of the Health Care
Facilities Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.).
A.
In the case of such a community residence housing mentally ill persons,
such residence must be approved for a purchase of service contract
or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be
established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals
of the Department of Human Services.
B.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:821
chapter and in the rules and regulations of the Board and shall be deemed
complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative officer for the
commencement of the time period for action by the Board.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in the zoning provisions of this chapter, and upon the issuance of
an authorization thereof by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — See "dwelling."
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COVERAGE, BUILDING — The square footage or other area measurement
by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured in a horizontal plane around
the periphery of the foundation and including the area under any roof
extending more than two feet beyond the foundation.
COVERAGE, LOT — The square footage of all areas of a lot that are covered
by impervious surfaces, including buildings, parking areas, driveways,
sidewalks and any other area of concrete, asphalt or similar material that
does not allow natural runoff to percolate into the ground.
DAY-CARE/CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any facility outside of the caregiver's
home that is maintained for the care, development or supervision of six or
more children or elderly persons who attend the facility for less than 24
hours a day.
DECK — A raised platform structure without a permanent roof that is
located in the rear yard of either a detached, semidetached or row house
dwelling unit.
DENSITY — A number expressing dwelling units per gross land area.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable property interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure; or any other
use of land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be
required.
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT — A delineated business district located within
the City's downtown having certain distinctive characteristics with regard
to the design and controlled use of the thoroughfares and sidewalks upon
which the commercial property and places of business are situated.
DRAINAGE AND UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater and sanitary sewers, water
pipes or drainage ditches and other utilities or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:822
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment, building or
structure where service is provided to the customer from an automobile
service window with access provided by a drive-through lane incorporated
into the site design.
DWELLING —
DWELLING UNIT — A room, or series of connected rooms, designed for
permanent residency containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities for one housekeeping unit. The dwelling unit shall be selfcontained
and shall not require passing through another dwelling unit or
APARTMENT BUILDING/MULTIFAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE —
A residential dwelling structure that contains three or more dwelling
units.
A.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any building, or portion thereof, containing one
or more units of dwelling space arranged or intended for single-room
occupancy, exclusive of any unit occupied by an owner or operator, and
wherein personal or financial services are provided to the residents,
and as otherwise defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq.
B.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of ownership of real property under a
master deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvements together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
C.
COOPERATIVE — A form of common ownership of real property with
each owner having a share of the building and common elements
appurtenant to all units.
D.
DORMITORY — A space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same
family group in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms.
E.
ROW HOUSE DWELLING UNIT — A single-family dwelling attached to
two or more single-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
F.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A freestanding
single-family dwelling that does not share a common vertical wall with
any other dwelling unit on an adjoining zoning lot and where all sides of
the structure are surrounded by yards or open areas within the zoning
lot on which the unit is located.
G.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A single-family
dwelling attached to one other single-family dwelling by a common
vertical wall, and each dwelling located on a separate lot.
H.
I. (Reserved)
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE — A structure on a single lot
containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from
the other by an unpierced ceiling and floor, except for a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
J.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:823
other indirect route(s) to get to any other portion of the dwelling unit, nor
shall there be shared facilities with another housekeeping unit.
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other
legal means to permit the use of land by the municipality, the public, a
corporation or particular persons for specific uses.
FAMILY —
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — The private residence of a family day-care
provider that is registered as a family day-care home pursuant to the
"Family Day Care Provider Registration Act," P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A.
30:5B-16 et seq.).
FENCE — See "structure."
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of either the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment taken on a preliminarily approved site plan
after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled.
A person living alone or any one of the following groups living together:
Any number of people related by blood, marriage, civil union,
adoption, guardianship, or other duly authorized custodial
relationship; and
(1)
One unrelated person per bedroom plus one additional unrelated
person, not to exceed four persons. For persons who are unrelated
and for purposes of this definition, a studio or efficiency dwelling
unit shall be considered a one-bedroom dwelling unit. Therefore,
a studio, efficiency, or one-bedroom unit may have a maximum of
two occupants, a two-bedroom unit may have a maximum of three
occupants, and a three-bedroom unit may have a maximum four
occupants.
(2)
A.
The term "family" shall not refer to:
A community residence for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, community residences for persons
with head injuries, and adult family care homes for elderly persons
and physically disabled adults as defined and regulated by the
State of New Jersey.
(1)
Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge or like
organization.
(2)
Any group of individuals whose association is temporary (less than
60 days) or seasonal in nature.
(3)
Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as
a result of criminal offenses.
(4)
B.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:824
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining a water channel which
has been or may be covered by floodwaters of the channel, including the
following components:
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) — The plan projection of all roofed areas
on a lot multiplied by the number of full stories under each roof section
measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the center line of a
wall separating buildings. Basements which satisfy applicable construction
definitions of habitable space are included in the GFA for residential uses.
FLOOR AREA, NET HABITABLE (NHFA) — Finished and heated area fully
enclosed by the inside surfaces of walls, windows, doors and partitions and
having a headroom of at least 6 1/2 feet, including working, living, eating,
cooking, sleeping, stair, hall, service and storage areas, but excluding
garages, carports, parking spaces, half stories, unfinished attics and
basements and common hallways and entrances.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of the gross floor area of a structure
to the area of its zoning lot or tract.
FRONT STREET — The street upon which the majority of lots within a block
are fronted, or any street so designated by the City Council.
GARAGE, PARKING — A structured garage with one or more levels used
exclusively for parking passenger vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage for four or fewer passenger motor vehicles
without provision for repairing or servicing such vehicles for profit, and
not conducted as a business or used for the storage of more than one
commercial vehicle, which shall be owned by a person residing on the
premises.
GARAGE, SERVICE/REPAIR — A garage conducted as a business in which
provision is made for the care, repair or painting of motor vehicles. A repair
garage shall include auto body and fender work and engine dismantling and
is not limited to minor repairs or engine tune-ups.
GROSS LOT AREA — The gross area within the lot lines of a lot, including
any environmentally sensitive areas such as steep slopes or wetlands, and
excluding any public rights-of-way.
HEAVY INDUSTRY — In general, the production of goods, such as steel,
used in the production of other goods, and otherwise, industrial uses in
conformance with the applicable performance standards of this chapter.
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — That portion of the flood hazard area outside
of the floodway.
A.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land in the floodplain subject to a onepercent
or greater chance of flood in any given year.
B.
FLOODWAY — The river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
area that must be reserved in order to discharge the design flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.
C.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:825
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A district that has been designated by the City as
having a special character or special historic or aesthetic interest or value,
and representing one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one
or more eras in the history of the City, state or nation, and by reason of such
features to constitute a distinct section of the City.
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation and has been so designated pursuant to this
chapter.
HOME OCCUPATION USE — An occupation carried out in a dwelling unit by
the resident thereof, provided that the use is limited in extent and incidental
and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and
does not change the character thereof.
HOTEL — A commercial establishment providing temporary lodging
accommodations containing 10 or more rooms with at least 75% of all
rooms accessed by passing through the main lobby of the building and
containing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and
recreation facilities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA — The sum of the area of coverage or
footprint of all buildings, structures, paved areas, patios and other improved
surfaces on a lot preventing natural runoff from percolating into the ground,
measured in square feet. Areas paved with gravel, crushed stone and other
pervious materials as well as open wood decks with spacing between
floorboards shall not be considered impervious. Calculation of total
impervious surface area on a site shall be based upon gross lot area, not the
net developable area on a site.
JUNKYARD AND RECYCLING CENTER — Any space, whether inside or
outside a building, used for:
LIGHT INDUSTRY — In general, the production of goods and services
for direct consumption by the consumer, and otherwise, industrial uses in
conformance with the applicable performance standards of this chapter.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street parking space or berth on the same
lot with a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading.
Any Class A or Class B recycling facility regulated by the State of New
Jersey and/or the County of Mercer.
A.
The recycling, storage, keeping, processing or abandonment of:
(1) Junk, including scrap metals, or other scrap materials.
(2) Construction or demolition debris.
(3) Bottles, cans or other recyclable materials.
B.
The dismantling, demolition, salvage or abandonment of automobiles or
other vehicles or machinery, or any parts thereof.
C.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:826
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot, not including
any portion of a street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more intersecting streets where the
interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135°. Each corner lot shall
have two front yards and two side yards.
LOT COVERAGE — See "coverage, lot."
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the midpoint of the
rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall be the
same as the lot width. In the case of a corner lot, either street frontage
which meets the required frontage for that zone may be considered the lot
frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record, as shown or described on a plat or deed,
bounding a lot that divides one lot from another or from a public or private
street or any other public space.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between the side lot
lines at setback points on each side lot line measured an equal distance
from the street line. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the
minimum required building setback line. When side lot lines are not
parallel, the minimum lot width at the setback line shall not be less than
75% of the minimum lot frontage for the zoning district in which the lot is
located.
LOT/ZONING LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or
options as by a subdivision plat or deed record, survey map or by metes
and bounds, except that for purposes of this chapter, contiguous undersized
lots under one ownership shall be considered one lot, and further that no
portion of an existing public street shall be included in calculating a lot
boundary or lot area.
MARQUEE — A marquee is an extension from the building of a flat type of
construction to protect windows and doorways or to ornament the building.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug or token, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as pinball machines,
skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical bowling machines, video
amusement devices and all games, operations or transactions similar
thereto under whatever name they may be designated.
MOTEL — A commercial establishment providing transient lodging
accommodations containing 10 or more rooms with at least 75% of all rooms
having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through
the main lobby of the building.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:827
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, including any
structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline, oil or other fuel for
the propulsion of motor vehicles and incidental services, including facilities
for lubrication, hand washing and the furnishing of minor motor vehicle
accessories and repairs, but excluding an automobile car wash or repair
garage.
MULTISTORY BUILDING — A building consisting of more than two stories,
not including a basement.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning
provisions of this chapter but fails to conform to the requirements of the
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
means of such adoption, revision or amendments.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — The definition of obscene materials set forth in
P.L. 1978, c. 95, as amended by P.L. 1982, c. 211, § 1 (effective December
23, 1982, as N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2), as the same shall be from time to time
amended or supplemented, as well as in accordance with and not more
strictly than judicial interpretations thereof pursuant to the Constitutions of
the United States and of the State of New Jersey finally concluded in courts
of jurisdiction sufficient to render decisions on constitutional questions of
general application.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the property in question but
within the property of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a
development application, or on a contiguous portion of the street right-ofway
or drainage or utility easement.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application, or a contiguous portion of a street right-of-way or
drainage or utility easement.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot that is the subject of an application for
development.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially undeveloped
or unimproved and set aside, designated or reserved for public or private
use or enjoyment; provided that such areas are improved with only those
buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements
that are designed to be incidental to the natural or landscaped area.
PARKING SPACE — An area either within a structure or in the open, for the
parking of motor vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes
and public rights-of-way.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:828
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, including performance
bonds, letters of credit, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements in accordance with the requirements of this chapter,
which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements
be completed prior to final approval of a development application.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A minimum requirement or maximum
allowable limit on noise, vibration, smoke, odor or other noxious effect of an
industrial use.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
PERSONAL CUSTOMER SERVICES — Places of business which offer a
nontangible commodity between individuals, such as banks, barbers,
realtors, dry cleaners, tailors and travel and insurance agents, but in no
instance shall automobile service stations or government and not-for-profit
social service programs be considered personal customer services.
PERVIOUS SURFACE AREA — The sum of the gross lot area, which allows
natural runoff to percolate into the ground, measured in square feet. Areas
paved with gravel, crushed stone, or other pervious materials shall be
considered pervious.
PORCH — A platform without enclosed walls that extends from a dwelling
unit into the rear, front or side yard.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
PROJECT SITE — The portion of any lot, parcel, tract or combination thereof
that encompasses all phases of a proposed project.
PUBLIC FACILITY USE — The use of land or buildings by the governing
body of the City or any officially created authority or agency thereof.
RECYCLING CENTER — See "junkyard and recycling center."
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — An area that the City has determined is "in
need of redevelopment" as defined by state statute (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7).
Such areas are designated on the City's Redevelopment Area Map.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA MAP — An official City map that outlines the
boundaries of designated redevelopment areas.
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan for revitalization of a designated
redevelopment area that outlines the boundaries of the area and provides a
land use plan and a proposal for redevelopment, including land acquisition
and redeveloper's obligation. Land use regulations and the land use plan
outlined in a redevelopment plan supersede the regulations of the
underlying zoning district within which the redevelopment area is located.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food
is sold primarily for consumption on the premises and within a building.
However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or community
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:829
swimming pool, playground, playing field or park operated solely by the
agency or group operating the recreational facility and for the convenience
of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant.
RESTORATION PERMIT — Formal approval from the City of Trenton
Landmarks Commission to permit proposed development, restoration or
alteration to designated historic property or property in a designated
district.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division of a lot or the adjustment of a lot
line or lot lines.
RETAIL SALES — A business selling tangible commodities, such as
department stores, variety stores, apparel and accessory sales, furniture,
appliance and antique stores where all sales are under one roof.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Publicly dedicated land, including street, curb and
sidewalk.
SCHOOL — A public or private nonprofit organization providing regular
instruction for a normal school year, but not a school or college giving
special or limited instruction, such as business, art, beauty, music, dancing
or nursery school.
SCHOOL, PROPRIETARY — A person or corporation engaged in the
instruction of children or adults for personal profit and not as an integral
part of the public school system, of a college or similar institution of higher
learning or of an established religious or charitable organization; a business
use.
SETBACK (see also "yard") — A line drawn parallel with a street line or lot
line that indicates the minimum distance allowed between a building and
the front, rear and side lot lines on a zoning lot.
SETBACK, AVERAGE — The permitted setback line, for a particular lot or
building, based on a calculation which totals the existing setback distances
of existing principal structures, located on lots within 200 feet of the
particular lot or building on each side of such building or lot and fronting
on the same side of the street, divided by the number of existing setback
distances utilized. If a lot within the specific calculation area does not
contain a principal structure, the setback distance used in the calculation
shall be the required setback distance for that lot.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any of the uses, or any combination
therefor, as defined below.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to one
person per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:830
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers
for sale or for rental for any form of consideration any one or more of
the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed material or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict
or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
B.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
(2)
C.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration and which:
Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and has a sign visible from a public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of these adult types of photographic
reproductions;
(1)
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
10 hours; or
(2)
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
(3)
D.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult motion-picture theaters shall meet the seating criteria
established for adult theaters.
E.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities. Seating shall be provided in a design
F.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:831
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to or printed or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure or parcel of land and which directs attention to a person,
institution, organization, activity, place, object, product or business; also,
any structure, device, letter, word insignia or representation that is
designed to be seen from outside a building advertising activities, goods,
products, services or facilities available. This definition includes signs
attached onto the facade of buildings, in windows or doors, on canopies,
marquees and awnings, but does not include window displays of
merchandise or signs incidental to the display of merchandise. The display
of official public notices or the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, a
political unit or temporary displays are not included in this definition.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
consistent with traditional movie theaters. All sitting areas shall be
visible and unobstructed.
BILLBOARD — A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other
than the premises on which the sign is located.
A.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign designed to be seen from outside a
building that advertises activities, goods, products, services or facilities
available on site that is not attached to a building and is supported by
its own structure.
B.
SIGN AREA — The maximum projected area of the shape which
encloses the sign, device or presentation. In the case of lettering
attached to building facades, the sign area shall be the product of the
maximum horizontal dimensions of all lettering and symbols which form
the sign. The sign area shall be calculated including all decoration but
excluding supports, if any, unless the same are illuminated, as defined.
Any neon tube, string of incandescent lights or similar device shall be
considered as having a minimum dimension of three inches.
C.
SIGN HEIGHT — The distance measured in feet between the elevation
at the nearest street right-of-way and the top of the sign, excluding any
ornamentation which has a cross-sectional area of one square foot and
a height of 12 inches.
D.
SIGN WITH FLASHING, ANIMATED OR INTERMITTENT
ILLUMINATION — A sign upon which the illumination is not maintained
at a constant or stationary intensity and/or color at all times when
illuminated, or any revolving illuminated sign.
E.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not
limited to, topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
B.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:832
SITE PLAN, EXEMPT — Individual lot applications for detached one- or
two-dwelling unit buildings in conformance with district regulations, and
additions under 1,000 square feet to existing buildings of a permitted use in
a given district which complies with applicable district regulations.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — All site plans not defined as minor or exempt plans.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development consisting of one or more lots which:
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plan
for a lot or tract of land. Whenever the term "site plan approval" is used
in this chapter, it shall be understood to mean a requirement that the site
plan be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make a determination concerning the adequacy of the plan in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
C.
Proposes new development within the scope of development specifically
permitted by this chapter for a minor site plan.
A.
Does not involve a planned development, any new street or extension
of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to this
chapter.
B.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
C.
D. Is not situated within a flood hazard area.
Will not contain more than four off-street parking spaces, as required
by this chapter.
E.
Will contain a building or land area consisting of less than 3,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
F.
Less than completely and opaquely covered by fabric or cloth human
genitals, pubic region, anus or female breasts below the point
immediately above the top of the areola down to the bottom of the
areola. The entire areola and nipple of the female breasts must be
completely covered by opaque fabric or cloth as is shown on Exhibit A
annexed hereto and made a part hereof.101
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
101. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:833
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is not a floor
above it, then the surface between the floor and the ceiling next above it
and including those basements used for primary use. For the purpose of this
chapter, the interior of the roof shall not be considered a ceiling. A half story
is the area under a pitched roof at the top of a building, the floor of which is
at least four feet, but no more than six feet, below the plate.
STREET — Any road (other than a private road), highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct, drive or other way:
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever may result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between the street
and a lot.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having such location on
or in the ground, including buildings, fences, masonry walls, tennis courts,
tanks, signs, advertising devices and swimming pools.
SUBDIVISION —
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C of this definition.
D.
A. Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
B. Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law;
C. Which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter;
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines;
D.
A thoroughfare publicly or privately owned, open to general public use
and having a right-of-way width greater than 20 feet.
E.
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
A.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning
of this chapter if no new streets are created:
B.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:834
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any division of land not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any division of land containing an aggregate of
not more than three lots, one new lot and the remaining parcel(s), each
fronting on an existing street or streets, and:
SUBDIVISION REVIEW — The examination of the specific plat for a lot or
tract for subdivision of land. Whenever the term "subdivision approval" is
Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions,
provided that the division is in conformity with the applicable
ordinance requirements.
(1)
Divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited
to, judgments of foreclosure.
(2)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(3)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons and found and certified
by the administrative officer to conform to all requirements of
the municipal development regulations and which are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or
atlas in the City.
(4)
C. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
Not involving any new street or the installation of any street
improvements or the extension of City facilities.
A.
Not involving any streets requiring additional right-of-way width as
specified in the Master Plan or Official Map or the street requirements
of this chapter, unless such additional right-of-way width, either along
one or both sides of such street(s), as applicable, shall be deeded to the
City or to the appropriate governmental authority prior to classification
as a minor subdivision.
B.
Not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property and not in conflict with any provisions of the
Master Plan, Official Map or this chapter.
C.
Not being a further division of an original tract of land for which
previous subdivision(s) have been approved by the City within the
current calendar year and where the combination of the proposed
and approved minor subdivision(s) constitutes a major subdivision. The
original tract of land shall be considered any tract in existence at the
time of the adoption of the zoning provisions of this chapter as shown
on the City Tax Maps. Any readjustment of lot lines resulting in no new
lots shall be classified as a minor subdivision.
D.
Not being deficient in those details and specifications required of minor
subdivisions as specified in this chapter.
E.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:835
used within this chapter, it shall be understood to mean a requirement that
the subdivision plat be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment in conjunction with a use variance.
SURFACE PARKING LOT — Any outdoor area or space conducted as a
business, or rented or ancillary to any institution, business or residential
use, where more than three motor vehicles may be parked or stored,
excluding used car lots.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE, RESIDENTIAL — Any artificially constructed
swimming bathing pool or tank, above or below the ground, whether
permanently installed, portable, collapsible or otherwise, having either an
inside structural depth in excess of 18 inches below the level of the
surrounding ground, or in excess of 30 inches above the surface of the
surrounding ground, or a surface area in excess of 120 square feet, or a
capacity in excess of 1,400 gallons, constructed or maintained on any lot, as
an accessory use, by any person for the use of themselves, or any member
of their household, and guests. The term includes all buildings, structures,
equipment and appurtenances thereto, subject to all requirements of this
chapter.
TOURIST/GUESTHOUSE — A building occupied by a resident family and
arranged or used for additional temporary lodging, with or without meals,
for compensation, and containing up to 10 guest rooms.
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject
of a development application.
TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS — A comprehensive and professional study
which analyzes existing and future year traffic volumes and levels of service
for off-tract intersections and roadways which may be impacted by a
proposed development and includes recommendations for traffic
improvement strategies.
TRAILER or TRAILER CABIN — A vehicle, with or without its own motive
power, equipped or used for living purposes and mounted on wheels, or
designed to be so mounted and transported.
TRENTON DOWNTOWN ASSOCIATION (TDA) — The City of Trenton
downtown district management corporation.
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this chapter authorized by the
appropriate municipal agency in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
VARIANCE, BULK ("C" variance) — A deviation from zoning district
standards pertaining to yard setbacks, height (below a ten-percent
excess of permitted height), building massing, or other bulk provisions
and parking restrictions.
A.
VARIANCE, USE ("D variance) — A deviation from zoning district
standards pertaining to permitted uses, conditionally permitted uses,
floor area ratio, permitted density, or height (in excess of 10% above
permitted height) provisions.
B.
§ 315-10 TRENTON CODE § 315-10
305:836
YARD (see also "setback") — An open space that lies between the principal
building or buildings and the nearest lot line.
ZONING DISTRICT/ZONE — A specifically delineated area or district within
the City within which uniform regulations and requirements govern the use,
placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
ZONING MAP — An official City map that is a part of the City's land
development ordinances that delineates the boundaries of zoning districts.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer which is
required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that
such use, structure or building complies with the zoning provisions of this
chapter.
FRONT YARD — The space between the building line or front main wall
of a building, excluding steps and open porches not exceeding eight
feet and overhanging eaves, cornices and similar fixtures, and the front
property line.
A.
REAR YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building between
the rear wall of the building and the rear line of the lot and unoccupied
except for accessory buildings, decks and open porches which, in the
aggregate, shall not occupy more than 50% of the area.
B.
SIDE YARD — An open, unobstructed space on the same lot with a
building between the building and the side line of the lot, and extending
through from the front or the rear yard, into which space there is no
extension of building parts, other than eaves with an overhang of not
more than one foot, rainwater leaders, window sills and other such
fixtures, open steps for a distance not exceeding four feet and bay
windows not more than 12 feet wide, at one floor level only, and for a
distance not exceeding two feet.
C.
§ 315-10 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-10
305:837

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 315-11. Establishment.
A Planning Board is hereby created consisting of nine regular and two
alternate members, consisting of the following four classes:
A. Regular members.
(1) Class I: the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the City other than a member of the
City Council, to be appointed by the Mayor.
(3) Class III: a member of the City Council to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the City to be appointed by the Mayor.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one such member may be a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and one Class IV member may be a member of
the Board of Education. If there is an Environmental Commission,
the member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1,
shall be a Class IV Planning Board member, unless there is among
the Class IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member common to the Planning
Board and the Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class
II member of the Planning Board. For the purpose of this section,
membership on a municipal board or commission whose function is
advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary
and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of
municipal office.
B. Alternate members.
(1) Alternate members to the Board may be appointed only in Class IV.
Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall meet
the qualifications of Class IV members of nine-member Boards.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
(3) Alternate members shall be City residents.
§ 315-11 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-12
305:839
§ 315-12. Lack of quorum due to conflicts of interest.
If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate
members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 or the Local Government
Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., from acting on a matter due to
the member's personal or financial interests therein, regular members of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that
matter only, as temporary until there are the minimum number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any
personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect.102 If a
choice has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the
Chair of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.
§ 315-13. Terms.
A. Regular members. The term of the member composing Class I shall
correspond with his/her official tenure, or if the member is the Mayor's
designee in the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of
the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or
terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class IV, or a
Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission, shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of
his/her term as a member of the Environmental Commission, whichever
comes first. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Board of Education shall terminate
whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at the
completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first. The term of
each Class IV regular member shall be four years.
B. Alternate members. The terms of the Class IV alternate members shall
be two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be
such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire
in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms
of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years.
C. Staggered terms. All present Class IV members of the Planning Board
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. The terms of Class IV regular members first appointed
pursuant to this chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest
practicable extent, the expiration of such term shall be evenly
distributed over the first four years after their appointment, provided
that the initial term shall not exceed four years.
D. Commencement of term. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year
in which the appointment is made.
102. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 315-12 TRENTON CODE § 315-14
305:840
§ 315-14. Removal.
Any member or alternate member, other than a Class I member, may be
removed by the City Council for cause, but only after public hearing, if
requested, and other requested procedural due process protection.
§ 315-15. Vacancy.
If a vacancy of any class member, including alternate members, shall occur
otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment as
above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 315-16. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall organize annually by selecting from among its
Class IV regular members a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson. The Board
shall also select a secretary who may or may not be a member of the
Board or an employee of the City. The Board may create and fill such other
offices as established by ordinance. An alternate member shall not serve as
Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Planning Board.
§ 315-17. Planning Board Attorney.
The office of Planning Board Attorney is hereby created. The Planning Board
may appoint to such office and fix compensation or rate of compensation of
an attorney at law of New Jersey, other than the City Attorney.
§ 315-18. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for, and fix the
compensation of, such experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of gifts, grants, or application and escrow fees, the
amount appropriated by the City Council for its use.
§ 315-19. Budget.
The City Council, after giving due consideration to budget requests that
may be submitted by the Planning Board, shall make provisions in its budget
and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
§ 315-20. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below, in addition to other
powers established by law:
A. To make, adopt and, from time to time, amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the City, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relationship
to the planning of the City.
§ 315-14 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-20
305:841
B. To administer the subdivision and site plan review provisions of this
chapter in accordance with this chapter. In addition to the power to
review and approve site plan and subdivision applications for
development, the Planning Board's powers shall include the following:
(1) To grant subdivision or conditional use approval simultaneously
with site plan approval.
(2) To grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and subject to
the same extent and restrictions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
when the Planning Board is reviewing applications for approval of
subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses. Whenever relief is
requested pursuant to this subsection, public notice shall be given
and shall include reference to the requested variances.
C. To hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with
Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.) of this chapter.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. Pursuant to the Business Administrator's assemblage and submission to
the Planning Board of statements and estimates of the capital needs
and projections of the several departments in the City, to prepare and
transmit to the Mayor and Council, at such times as it may deem
appropriate, a proposed capital improvement plan. The Board may hold
public bearings on the proposed capital improvement plan on or before
September 15 of each calendar year and may transmit to the Mayor and
Council its recommended plan. The plan shall set forth by major
programs the Board's recommendations for capital improvements to be
initiated during the ensuing six fiscal years, and previously authorized
and uncompleted capital improvements, including reference to such
capital improvements as may be planned or in progress, or proposed by
the Board of Education, together with the estimated cost and method of
financing each improvement.
G. To consider and report to the City Council, within 35 days after referral,
as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it, and also to
pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by
the City Council.
H. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the City Council for the aid and assistance of the City
Council or other agencies and officers.
I. To study and report on such other matters as may be referred to it by
the Mayor or Council.
§ 315-20 TRENTON CODE § 315-20
305:842
J. To make recommendations to the City Council upon referral of the
Official Map or any amendment thereto. The Planning Board shall be
the custodian of the Official Map of the City, as such Official Map is
established, changed or amended from time to time pursuant to law;
and shall cause any change, amendment or addition thereto or deletion
therefrom made by ordinance to be recorded on the map by appropriate
revision and notation.
§ 315-20 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-20
305:843

ARTICLE III
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 315-21. Establishment. [Amended 12-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-82]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment was created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69
et seq., consisting of seven members. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may
have not more than four alternate members.
§ 315-22. Appointment; term; alternate members. [Amended
12-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-82]
§ 315-23. Lack of quorum due to conflicts of interest.
Is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 or the Local Government Ethics Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq. from acting on a matter due to the member's
personal or financial interest therein, Class IV members of the Planning
Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.103 The Class IV members
of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority
of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the minimum
number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the
matter without any personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or
indirect. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal
seniority, the Chair of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
A. Members shall be residents of the City of Trenton and shall be
appointed by the City Council. The term of each regular member shall
be four years, and the term of each alternate member shall be two
years.
B. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their appointment
as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," "Alternate No. 3" and "Alternate
No. 4."
C. Alternate members may participate in the discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. Participation of alternate members shall not be
deemed to increase the size of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
established by ordinance of the governing body pursuant to section 56
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69). A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate is to vote,
alternate members shall vote in the order of their numerical
designations.
D. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold an elective
office or position under the City of Trenton.
103. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 315-21 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-24
305:845
§ 315-24. Vacancy. [Amended 12-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-82]
§ 315-25. Removal.
A member may be removed by the City Council for cause, but only after
public hearing, if requested, and other requested procedural due process
protections.
§ 315-26. Organization of Board.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall organize annually by selecting from
among its regular members a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson. The
Board shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the
Board or a City employee.
§ 315-27. Zoning Board Attorney.
The office of Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney is hereby created. The
Board may annually appoint to such office and fix the compensation or rate
of compensation of an attorney at law of New Jersey, other than the City
Attorney.
§ 315-28. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for, and
fix the compensation of, such experts and other staff and services as it
may deem necessary. The Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures
which exceed, exclusive of gifts, grants, or application and escrow fees, the
amount appropriated by the City Council for its use.
§ 315-29. Budget.
The City Council, after giving due consideration to budget requests that
may be submitted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall make provisions
in its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 315-30. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-21, if a member of the Board, without being
excused by a majority of the authorized members, fails to attend and
participate for four consecutive regular meetings, his/her office shall be
deemed vacant and the Board shall notify the appointing authority, in
writing, of such determination.
B. Any vacancy on the Board occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the unexpired
term of the member whose term shall become vacant.
§ 315-24 TRENTON CODE § 315-30
305:846
A. Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant
that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision or refusal
made by the Zoning Officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning provisions of this chapter.
B. Interpretations. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the
Zoning Map or the zoning provisions of this chapter or for decisions
upon special questions upon which the Board is authorized to pass by
any zoning provisions of this chapter or by any duly adopted Official
Map.
C. General bulk variances.
(1) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property; by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property; or by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional
situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the
structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon,
the developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship.
(2) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property, the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by a
deviation from the zoning requirements and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from such zoning requirements;
provided, however, that the fact that a proposed use is an
inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a decision on a
variance under this subsection and provided that no variance from
those departures enumerated in Subsection D below shall be
granted under this subsection; and provided, further, that the
proposed development does not require approval by the Planning
Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction
with which the Planning Board has power to review a request for a
variance pursuant to § 315-20B.
D. Use variance, variances from conditional use standards and major
specific bulk variances.
(1) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from the zoning provisions of this chapter to
permit:
(a) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such
use or principal structures.
(b) An expansion of a nonconforming use.
§ 315-30 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-30
305:847
(c) A deviation from a particular specification or standard set forth
in this chapter as pertaining solely to a conditional use, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67.
(d) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in
§ 315-10 of this chapter and in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4.
(e) An increase in the permitted density as defined in § 315-10 and
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as applied to the required lot area
for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling unit
buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated undersize lot
or lots resulting from a minor subdivision, in which event
applications would be made pursuant to Subsection C above.
(f) A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or
10% the maximum height permitted in the district for a
principal structure.
(2) A variance under this section shall be granted only by affirmative
vote of at least five members of the Board.
E. General provisions.
(1) No variance or other relief may be granted by the Board under the
terms of this section, including an inherently beneficial use,
without a showing that such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and the
zoning provisions of this chapter.
(2) In respect to any airport safety zones delineated under the Air
Safety and Zoning Act of 1983, P.L. 1983, c. 260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et
seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of
this section, permitting the creation or establishment of a
nonconforming use which would be prohibited under standards
promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a permit
by the Commissioner of Transportation.
(3) An application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
F. Other powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have
such other powers prescribed by law, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval
whenever the proposed development requires approval by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to Subsection D
§ 315-30 TRENTON CODE § 315-30
305:848
§ 315-31. Appeals and applications.
of this section. The developer may elect to submit a separate
application requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall
be conditioned upon a grant of all required subsequent approvals
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval
shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and the
zoning provisions of this chapter. The number of votes of Board
members required to grant such subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this section for the approval in question, and
the special vote pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall not
be required.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to Section 23 of this act;104 or
(3) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
(4) Temporary permits may be authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for a period not to exceed one year for nonconforming
uses incidental to housing and construction projects, and including
such structures and uses as storage of materials and machinery,
the processing of building materials, and a real estate office located
on the tract being offered for sale, provided that such permits are
issued only upon agreement by the owner to remove the structure
or structures upon expiration of the temporary permit. Such
permits may be renewable for a period not to exceed three years.
(5) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review
its decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare
and adopt by resolution a report on its findings on zoning ordinance
provisions which were the subject of variance requests and its
recommendations for zoning ordinance amendment or revision, if
any. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall send copies of the report
and resolution to the City Council and Planning Board.
A. Appeals from administrative decisions. Appeals to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may be taken by any interested party affected by any
decision of an administrative officer of the City based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning provisions of this chapter or a duly adopted
Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a
notice of appeal with the official from whom the appeal is taken, with
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
§ 315-30 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-31
305:849
three copies of the notice given to the Secretary of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. The notice shall specify the grounds for the appeal. The
official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
B. Plans required.
(1) All applications or appeals before the Board requesting change in
lot area, signs, building coverage, building renovation, demolition
or use change shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate, drawn
to scale, showing the shape and dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location on the lot of any existing buildings
and accessory buildings, and the lines within which the building
shall be altered or erected, the existing and intended use and
dimensions of rooms in floor plans for each story, the existing and
intended use of each building or part of a building, location of offstreet
parking area and the number of families or dwelling units the
building is designed to accommodate.
(2) Applications for signs shall include scaled drawings of the sign and
describe the materials of construction and the nature, location and
function of the sign.
C. Decision of Board. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the action, order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and to that end
have all powers of the City official from whom the appeal is taken.
D. Stay of proceedings. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the
decision appealed from was made, unless the City official from whose
action the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him/her, that, by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice
to the City officer from whom the appeal is taken and due cause shown.
E. Direct application to Board. A developer may file an application for
development with the Zoning Board of Adjustment for action under any
of its powers without prior application to a City Construction Official.
F. Time for decision. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act upon an
appeal or any application for development within 120 days either from
the date the appeal is taken from the decision of the City official or from
the date the application is certified as a complete application, as the
case may be, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant, except that when an applicant elects to submit separate
consecutive applications for use variance approval and site plan,
subdivision or conditional use approval, the one-hundred-twenty-day
time period for action shall apply to the application for approval of the
§ 315-31 TRENTON CODE § 315-31
305:850
use variance, and the time period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the county
recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 315-31 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-31
305:851

ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 315-32. Conflicts of interest.
No regular or alternate member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall act on any matter in which she or he has, either directly
or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such member
shall disqualify himself/herself from acting on a particular matter, she or he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such particular
matter nor participate in any discussion by the Board or any decision
relating thereto.
§ 315-33. Meetings.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less than once a month. Any meeting
so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairperson or
on the request of any two Board members, which meeting shall be held
on notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. A quorum shall be the majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the Board
present at the meeting, except as otherwise required by any provision
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. A member of the Board who was absent for
one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held or was not a
member of the municipal agency at that time shall be eligible to vote on
a matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding such
absence from one or more of the meetings, provided that such Board
member has available to him/her the transcript or recording of all of the
hearings from which he or she was absent and certifies, in writing, to
the Board that he or she has read such transcripts or listened to such
recordings.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public, except as provided in the Open Public Meetings Law, N.J.S.A.
10:4-6. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with
the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law.
F. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any
matters to come before the Board shall not be deemed a regular or
special meeting within the meaning of this section.
§ 315-32 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-34
305:853
§ 315-34. Hearings.
§ 315-35. Notice of hearing.
A. The municipal agency shall hold a hearing on each application for
development, adoption, revision or amendment of the master plan, each
application for approval of an outdoor advertising sign submitted to the
municipal agency as required pursuant to an ordinance adopted under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 or any review undertaken by the Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31. Each Board shall make rules governing
such hearings.
B. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the Department of Housing and Economic Development. The
applicant may produce any documents, records or testimony at the
hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed
maps and documents.
C. The officer presiding at the hearings, or such persons as (s)he may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the
parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
D. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer. The right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
A. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following applications
for development:
(1) An extension of approvals for five or more years under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
(2) Modification or elimination of a significant condition or conditions
in a memorializing resolution in any situation wherein the
application for development for which the memorializing resolution
is proposed for adoption required public notice.
(3) Any request for a variance.
(4) Any request for conditional use approval.
§ 315-34 TRENTON CODE § 315-35
305:854
(5) Any request for preliminary and final approval of a subdivision or
site plan.
(6) Any request for certification of a nonconforming use.
(7) Any request for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76 as part of an application for development otherwise
excepted herein from public notice.
(8) Any request by a public entity seeking to erect an outdoor
advertising sign on land owned or controlled by a public entity as
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
B. The Secretary of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least two
weeks prior to the public hearing at which the application will be
discussed. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be given by
the applicant unless a particular municipal officer is so designated by
ordinance, provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent the
applicant from giving such notice if he so desires. Notice shall be given
at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the following manner:
(1) Publication in the official newspaper of the City, if there be one, or
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
(2) Notification by personal service or certified mail to the following.
An affidavit of proof of the giving of the required notice shall be
filed by the applicant with the Board at or prior to the hearing. It is
not required that a return receipt be obtained. Notice is deemed
complete upon mailing (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14):
(a) To all owners of real property, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located in the state and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by
notice to the condominium association, in the case of any unit
owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or to the
horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose
apartment has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be
given by i) serving a copy thereof on the property owner, as
shown on the said current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge
of the property, or ii) mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to
the property owner at his address as shown on the said current
tax duplicate.
[1] Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service
upon any partner.
[2] Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on
behalf of the corporation.
§ 315-35 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-35
305:855
[3] Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property
regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas
located within 200 feet of the property which is the subject
of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners
or homeowners on account of such common
elements or areas.
(b) To the Clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities
when the property involved is located within 200 feet of such
adjoining municipality or municipalities.
(c) To the Mercer County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road as shown on the County Official Map or
County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated
within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
(d) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey when the property abuts a state highway.
(e) To the State Planning Commission when the hearing involves
an application for the development of property which exceeds
150 acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall
include a copy of any maps or documents required to be filed
with the City.
(f) Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major
subdivision or a site plan not defined as a minor site plan under
this act requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection A of this
section shall be given:
[1] In the case of a public utility, cable television company or
local utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement
within the municipality and which has registered with the
municipality in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1 by:
[a] Serving a copy of the notice on the person whose
name appears on the registration form on behalf of the
public utility, cable television company or local utility;
or
[b] Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person
whose name appears on the registration form at the
address shown on that form.
[2] In the case of a military facility which has registered with
the municipality and which is situated within 3,000 feet in
all directions of the property which is the subject of the
hearing by:
§ 315-35 TRENTON CODE § 315-35
305:856
§ 315-36. Records.
[a] Serving a copy of the notice on the military facility
commander whose name appears on the registration
form; or
[b] Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the military
facility commander at the address shown on that form.
C. Notification by personal service or certified mail notice shall be
required for the initial public hearing on all applications requiring
notice pursuant to § 315-35A, including the public hearings for both
preliminary and final applications. If an application is continued to a
subsequent hearing on a date certain, an announcement of such
continuation and the date thereof shall be made at the time of
continuation and renotification by personal service or certified mail
shall not be required.
D. Upon the written request of an applicant, the City Engineer's office
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from current tax
duplicates of the names and addresses of owners within the City to
whom the applicant is required to give notice. In addition, the
administrative officer shall include on the list the names, addresses and
positions of those persons who, not less than seven days prior to the
date on which the applicant requested the list, have registered to
receive notice. The applicant shall be charged a fee as provided in
§ 315-71F for this list and shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained therein. Failure to give notice to any lot owner, to any public
utility, cable television company, or local utility or to any military facility
commander not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving
proper notice to all property owners pursuant to Subsection B(2) above,
who do not reside within the City.
E. Notices required by this section shall state the date, time and place of
the hearing and shall include a capsulated statement of the nature and
purpose of matters to be considered, an identification for the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the City
Tax Assessor's office, and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available.
A. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names and addresses of the persons appearing and
addressing the Board, and of any persons appearing by attorney, the
action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it and the
reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
Department of Housing and Economic Development. Any interested
party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as
evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of
§ 315-35 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-36
305:857
§ 315-37. Decisions.
such minutes. Such interested party shall be charged a reasonable fee
for the reproduction of the minutes.
B. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing on an application
for development submitted to the City. The recording of the
proceedings shall be made either by stenographer, mechanical or
electronic means. The City shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his/her
expense, provided that the charge for a transcript shall not exceed the
maximum permitted by N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4. Each transcript shall be
certified, in writing, by the transcriber to be accurate.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to
writing by the Board and shall include findings of facts and conclusions
thereon.
B. The Board shall provide the findings and conclusions through:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in this chapter for action by the Board on the application
for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held no later than
45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board voted to
grant or deny approval. Only the members of the Board who voted
for the action taken may vote on the memorializing resolution, and
the vote of a majority of such members present at the meeting at
which the resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to
adopt the resolution. If only one member who voted for the action
attends the meeting at which the resolution is presented for
adoption, the resolution may be adopted upon the vote of that
member. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9, resulting from
the failure of a motion to approve an application, shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those members
voting against the motion for approval being the members eligible
to vote on the memorializing resolution.
C. The vote on any memorializing resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorization of the action of the Board and not to be an action of the
Board; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution shall
constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings
and publications required in § 315-46.
D. If the Board fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as
hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply to the Superior
Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the Board to
reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and
the cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall be assessed
against the City.
§ 315-36 TRENTON CODE § 315-38
305:858
§ 315-38. Conditional approvals.
§ 315-38.1. Training in land use law and planning.
A. Conditions precedent. Whenever any application for development is
approved by the Board subject to specified conditions intended to be
fulfilled before the approval becomes effective, such approval shall
lapse and become null and void unless all specified conditions are
fulfilled within 190 days of the date the approval was granted by the
Board.
B. Conditions subsequent. Whenever any application for development is
approved by the Board subject to conditions which are not required to
be fulfilled before the approval becomes effective and are not
guaranteed pursuant to § 315-72, then the failure to fulfill any such
condition within six months from the date of the approval of the
application for development shall be grounds for the issuance of a stopwork
order by the enforcing official and the withholding of any zoning
permit, construction permit, certificate of occupancy or any other
approval until such condition is fulfilled.
C. Time limit for fulfilling condition. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed as preventing the Board from specifying a longer period of
time within which any specific condition must be fulfilled or from
granting, upon an ex parte application, an extension of time for fulfilling
a condition, for good cause shown.
D. Notice of fulfillment. The fulfillment of all conditions, precedent or
subsequent, shall be reported, in writing, to the Board, which may
cause such reports to be verified in an appropriate manner. Only upon
fulfillment of all conditions shall any subdivision plat or site plan be
signed or any required zoning permit, construction permit, occupancy
permit or other approval be issued.
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 315-38.1D, a person shall not be
seated as a first-term member or alternate member of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment unless the person agrees to take
the basic course in land use law and planning required to be offered
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3, which the person shall successfully
complete within 18 months of assuming Board membership in order to
retain Board membership.
B. Except as otherwise provided in § 315-38.1D, any person who is serving
as a regular or alternate member of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment on the first date on which a course in land use law
and planning is offered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 shall be
required to complete that course within 18 months of the date upon
which the course is first offered in order to retain membership on that
Board.
§ 315-38 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-38.1
305:859
C. A hearing or proceeding held, or decision or recommendation made, by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not be
invalidated if a member has participated in the hearing or proceeding
or in the decisionmaking or recommendation and that member is
subsequently found not to have completed the basic course in land use
law and planning required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3.
D. The following persons shall be exempt from the educational
requirements established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3:
(1) The Mayor or person designated to serve on a Planning Board in
the absence of a Mayor who serves as a Class I member pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and § 315-11.
(2) A member of the governing body serving as a Class III member
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and § 315-11.
(3) Any person who is licensed as a professional planner and maintains
a certificate of license issued pursuant to Chapter 14A of Title 45 of
the Revised Statutes105 which is current as of the date upon which
that person would otherwise be required to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3.
(4) Any person who offers proof of having completed a more extensive
course in land use law and planning than that required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.3 and § 315-38.1 within 12 months of the date upon
which that person would otherwise be required to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 and
§ 315-38.1 and which, in the determination of the Commissioner, is
equivalent to or more extensive than that course offered pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 and § 315-38.1.
105. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:14A-1 et seq.
§ 315-38.1 TRENTON CODE § 315-38.1
305:860
ARTICLE V
Appeal of Zoning Board of Adjustment Decisions
§ 315-39. Appeal to City Council or court.
Any interested party may appeal to the City Council any final decision
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application for a use
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and § 315-30D. Notwithstanding
the aforesaid right of appeal to the City Council, any party has the right to
obtain a review of such Zoning Board of Adjustment decision by any court
of competent jurisdiction according to law.
§ 315-40. Time for appeal; notice.
Any appeal to the City Council shall be made within 10 days of the date of
publication of such final decision pursuant to § 315-46. The appeal to the
City Council shall be made serving the City Clerk, in person or by certified
mail, with a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof and the name
and address of his/her attorney, if represented.
§ 315-41. Fees; transcript.
§ 315-42. Notice of hearing; basis for decision.
Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
City Clerk, by personal service or certified mail, to the appellant, to those
entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to § 315-46, and to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment at least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting.
The appeal shall be decided by the City Council only upon the record
established by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The parties may submit oral
and written arguments on the record at the City Council meeting, and the
City Council shall provide and pay for verbatim recording and transcripts of
such meeting.
A. The applicant shall pay an application fee of $100 and either:
(1) Within five days of serving the notice of the appeal, arrange for a
transcript for use by the City Council and pay a deposit of $50 or
the estimated cost for such transcription, whichever is less,
provided that the charge by the City to the applicant for the
transcript shall not exceed the maximum permitted by N.J.S.A.
2B:7-4; or
(2) Within 35 days of serving the notice of the appeal, submit a
transcript to the City Clerk for use by the City Council.
B. Should the appellant neither arrange for nor submit a transcript, as
provided hereinabove, the City Council may dismiss the appeal for
failure to prosecute. All transcripts shall be certified, in writing, by the
transcriber to be accurate.
§ 315-39 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-43
305:861
§ 315-43. Time for decision.
The City Council shall conclude a review of the record below not later
than 95 days from the publication of the notice of the subject decision of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, unless the appellant consents, in writing,
to an extension of such time period. Failure of the City Council to hold a
hearing and conclude a review of the record below and to render a decision
within such specified period without such written consent of the appellant
shall constitute a decision affirming the action of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 315-44. Decision; vote necessary.
The City Council may reverse, remand or affirm, with or without conditions,
the final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment being appealed. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of City
Council shall be necessary to reverse, remand or modify any final action
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. In the event that an affirmative vote
of a majority of the fully authorized membership of the City Council is
not obtained, the aforesaid final decision shall be deemed affirmed without
charge.
§ 315-45. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal to the City Council shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
Zoning Board of Adjustment certifies to the City Council, after the appeal
has been filed, that, by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by an order of the Superior Court,
on application, upon notice to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and on good
cause shown.
§ 315-43 TRENTON CODE § 315-45
305:862
ARTICLE VI
Notice of Decisions; Minimum Requirements
§ 315-46. Notice of decisions.
Any decision of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment when
acting upon an application for development and any decision of the City
Council when acting upon an appeal shall be given notice in the following
manner.
§ 315-47. Minimum requirements.
The rules, regulations and standards contained in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Trenton. Any action
taken by the City under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire City. Moreover, if an applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to his/her land, the literal enforcement
of one or more of the regulations within or referred to within § 315-10,
Article IX (§ 315-56 et seq.) or Articles XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.), XXV
(§ 315-191 et seq.) and XXVI (§ 315-208 et seq.) is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship, the appropriate Board may permit such exceptions as
may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by this chapter.
A. Copy to applicant, interested parties. A copy of the decision shall be
mailed by the appropriate City authority within 10 days of the date of
decision to the applicant or appellant, or, if represented, then to his/her
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed within 10 days to any interested party who has requested it and
who has paid the designated fee.
B. Newspaper notice. A brief notice of every final decision shall be
published in the official newspaper of the municipality, if there be one,
or in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trenton. Such
publication shall be arranged by the applicant unless a particular
municipal officer is so designated by ordinance, provided that nothing
contained herein shall be construed as preventing the applicant from
arranging such publication if he so desires. The municipal agency may
make a reasonable charge for its publication. The notice shall be sent to
an official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any
such decision.
C. The period of time in which an appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction may be made shall run from the first publication, whether
arranged by the municipality or the applicant.
§ 315-46 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-47
305:863

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 315-48. Compliance required.
No structure or land shall be used in violation of this chapter and/or any
approved site plan.
§ 315-49. Duties of Zoning Officer.
§ 315-50. Notification of violation; hazardous conditions response.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The City Zoning Officer shall inspect the
structures and land in the City and order the owner, in writing, to
remedy any condition found to exist in violation of any provision of this
chapter and/or any site plan approved by the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, including any
conditions of approval written in the approval resolution.
B. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to investigate any violation or
alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter, whether by complaint
of third persons or from their own personal knowledge or observation.
When any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of any provision of this chapter, it shall be the duty of
the Zoning Officer to proceed with the enforcement of said provision
and the penalties provided for hereunder. Such enforcement may
include the issuance of summons requiring an appearance in Municipal
Court. The Zoning Officer may also pursue such other statutory method
or methods, heretofore or hereafter provided, as may be available.
C. In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Officer
may apply to the Municipal Court for a warrant to search and inspect
the properties and premises upon which he/she has reason to believe
any violation of said article has taken or is taking place, and upon
probable cause shown, the Municipal Court Judge may issue such a
warrant, and the information obtained pursuant thereto shall be
admissible as evidence in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
purpose of proving any case brought for violation of this chapter.
A. The Zoning Officer shall notify the owner of any structure or land found
to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter and/or any approved
site plan of such violation(s), in writing by certified mail. Such notice
shall specify that the owner will have 15 days thereafter to respond to
the Zoning Officer as to such violation(s) and the remedies to be taken.
A copy of the notice and response shall be immediately filed in the
Office of Inspections.
B. If the violation creates hazardous conditions, the Zoning Officer may
require a response or correction within 24 hours to 48 hours.
§ 315-48 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-51
305:865
§ 315-51. Certificate of occupancy revocation.
Upon notice being served of any condition found to exist in violation of
any provision of this chapter and/or any approved site plan with respect to
any land use, the certificate of occupancy for such use thereupon, without
further notice, shall be null and void, and a new certificate of occupancy
shall be required for any further use of such structure or land.
§ 315-52. Report to City Attorney; filing of summons.
A. Within 15 days following the mailing of the notice to the owner, the
owner shall respond to the Zoning Officer as to the violation(s) and the
remedies to be taken. A lack of response from the owner shall result in
an automatic filing of a summons in Municipal Court.
B. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this chapter, the proper local authorities, as
contained herein, or an interested party may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises. Each and every day such
violation continues after the expiration of an abatement notice or after
initial construction, as the case may be, shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation.
§ 315-51 TRENTON CODE § 315-52
305:866
ARTICLE VIII
Permits and Certificates
§ 315-53. Construction permits.
§ 315-54. Zoning permit.
No land shall be used, no use shall be commenced and no structure shall be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, and no land, use or
structure shall be changed from an existing use to a new use until a zoning
permit is issued by the Zoning Officer, stating the use, structure or building
conforms and complies with the provisions of this chapter or that a variance
has been granted from the appropriate provisions of this chapter by a Board
of competent jurisdiction.
§ 315-55. Certificates of occupancy.
A. Construction Official. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to
monitor the construction of any building or structure in the City.
B. Permit plans; survey required.
(1) No new building addition or structure, and no improvement to the
interior of any existing structure, including that which is exempt
from site plan review, shall be undertaken until detailed site and
drainage plans and a survey are submitted to the Construction
Official and a construction permit is obtained from such official.
(2) For all new construction involving footings and foundations, a
second site survey shall be submitted to the Construction Official
after installation of footings and foundations in order to detail
actual building location.
(3) Construction permits shall be required as provided by the State
Uniform Construction Code, its subcodes and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. Fees for construction permits shall
be in accordance with the applicable ordinance of the City.106
A. Required. It should be unlawful to use or permit the use of any
structure or part(s) thereof, either occupied by a new use or occupant
or hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged wholly or in part,
until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Construction Official, as stipulated by the Uniform Construction
Code.107
B. Application. Upon the completion of any building, structure or
alteration in compliance with this chapter or any other ordinance, rule
or regulation, the owner, or his/her agent, may apply to the
Construction Official, in writing, for the issuance of a certificate of
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction.
§ 315-53 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-55
305:867
occupancy for such structure, building or alteration pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
C. Fee. Every application for a certificate of occupancy shall be
accompanied by payment of the fee in accordance with the applicable
ordinance of the City.
D. Site plans. With respect to any finally approved site plan, or section
thereof, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued only upon the
completion of the following improvements as such improvements may
be required as part of site plan approval:
(1) Curbs, sidewalks and driveway aprons.
(2) All utilities.
(3) Water supply and sewerage treatment facilities, which shall be
functioning and servicing the property in question.
(4) Storm drainage facilities.
(5) Rough grading of the property.
(6) Base course of the street or streets serving the property.
(7) Base course of driveways and parking areas.
(8) Regulatory signs and numbers.
(9) Open space plan and improvements.
E. Copy at premises. A copy of any issued certificate of occupancy shall be
kept on file at the premises affected and shall be shown to the
Construction Official upon request.
F. Prohibited uses prior to issuance. The following shall be unlawful until a
certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Official:
(1) Occupancy and use of a structure erected, constructed, restored,
altered or moved, or any changes in use of an existing structure.
(2) Occupancy, use or change in use of vacant land.
(3) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
(4) Occupancy and use of any enlargement to an existing structure.
§ 315-55 TRENTON CODE § 315-55
305:868
ARTICLE IX
Development Application and Review Procedures
§ 315-56. Overlapping powers of Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
The Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment have certain
overlapping powers to expedite the review process. Their respective
responsibilities are outlined below.
§ 315-57. Jurisdiction of Planning Board.
§ 315-58. Jurisdiction of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the
same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval when a use variance/"D"
variance is also requested by an applicant pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
§ 315-59. Review of all subdivisions required.
All subdivisions, as defined under § 315-10, are subject to the review
procedures specified herein, for the purpose of preventing the creation of
undersized lots so as to maintain the character and integrity of the City's
neighborhoods.
§ 315-60. Site plan review.
No construction permit shall be issued for any new structure, for any
modification to an existing structure or for any addition to an existing
structure and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any change
of use of an existing structure until the site plan has been reviewed and
approved by the City, except that a construction permit for additions to any
existing building of 1,000 square feet or less of floor area, or a single-family
detached dwelling unit or a two-family dwelling unit, or their accessory
building(s) on a lot, shall not require site plan approval. Applications for
a conditional use permit may require site plan review and approval, per
§ 315-63 et seq. of this Code. The Planning Board may waive site plan
review and approval for a change of use if the change of use will not result
in an increase in the intensity of land use on the site.
A. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant subdivision or
conditional use approval simultaneously with site plan approval.
B. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant bulk variances/"C"
variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in lieu of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and subject to the same extent and restrictions of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment when the Planning Board is reviewing
applications for approval of subdivisions, site plans or conditional uses.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, public notice
shall be given and shall include reference to the requested variance(s).
§ 315-56 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-61
305:869
§ 315-61. Other approvals.
In the event that an application for development requires an approval by a
governmental agency other than the Board, the Board shall, in appropriate
circumstances, condition approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency, provided that the City shall make a decision on any
application for development within the time period provided in this chapter,
or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by the applicant,
unless the City agency is prevented or relieved from so acting by operation
of law.
§ 315-62. Variance applications.
All applications for variance relief to the Zoning Board of Adjustment not
involving any related site plan, subdivision or conditional use approval shall
be filed at least 15 days prior to the next regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board. The filing shall include 10 copies of any maps and
related material; five completed copies of the appropriate application
form(s), which includes the checklist for variances pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.3 attached to this chapter108; and the fee in accordance with
§ 315-71. The Board shall act upon the application as stipulated by law.
§ 315-63. Conditional use; standards for review; time for decision.
§ 315-64. Informal review.
A. All applications for conditional use shall be granted or denied by the
Planning Board pursuant to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).
B. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use application shall
include site plan review. In cases where a conditional use application
does not include alteration of the exterior of a building and will not have
an impact on parking requirements, the Planning Board may waive site
plan submission requirements as provided for in § 315-65B. The time
period for action by the Board on conditional use applications shall
apply to such site plan review.
C. If the development requiring conditional use approval deviates from a
conditional use specification or standard, thereby requiring approval by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment of a variance to allow such deviation,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in lieu of the Planning Board,
grant or deny the application.
D. The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional
use within 95 days of submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer of the Board or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant.
108. Editor's Note: Said checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-61 TRENTON CODE § 315-64
305:870
§ 315-65. Waiver of subdivision or site plan regulations;
simultaneous review and approval.
A. At the request of the developer, the City's Division of Planning staff or
the Planning Board shall grant one informal review of a concept plan for
a development for which the developer intends to prepare and submit
an application for development.
B. The developer shall not be required to submit any fees for the one
informal review by the Planning Board; however, no professional
review(s) will be undertaken of any concept plat or concept plan.
C. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review
is requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by any such
review.
D. A developer desiring to have a concept plan informally reviewed by the
City's Division of Planning staff or by the Planning Board shall so notify
the administrative officer at least 14 days prior to the next regularly
scheduled monthly meeting of the Planning Board. The administrative
officer shall thereafter notify the developer of the time and place of the
informal review which has been scheduled by planning staff or the
Planning Board.
A. The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review if the literal enforcement of one or more
provisions is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
B. The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary site
plan approval, including site plan approval related to conditional use
applications, shall have the power to grant exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of the provisions for site plan review if
the literal enforcement of one or more provisions is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the land in question.
C. The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application to the Planning Board or the Planning Board being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the Planning Board, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use
is requested by the developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such
conditional use.
§ 315-64 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-66
305:871
§ 315-66. Minor subdivision plat and minor site plan applications.
A. Procedure.
(1) For all minor subdivision plat and minor site plan applications, an
applicant shall submit to the administrative officer, at least 30 days
prior to the first regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be:
(a) Five completed copies of the appropriate application form(s),
which includes the checklist(s), attached to this chapter as
Appendixes A and B, and the items of information required
therein pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
(b) Ten copies of the minor or preliminary major plat and/or plan
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, printed on
one of the following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 by 13, 15 by 21,
24 by 36, 30 by 42. The plat and/or plan must be signed and
sealed by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer, or other
representative deemed acceptable by the City's Division of
Planning staff, and folded into eights with the title block
revealed.
(c) One reduced-scale copy of the plat or plan printed on elevenby-
seventeen-sized paper.
(d) Five copies of protective covenant or deed restrictions
affecting the property, as applicable.
(e) Application fee in accordance with Article X (§ 315-71 et seq.).
(2) The application shall contain an acknowledgment signed by the
applicant stating that the applicant is familiar with the procedure
set forth herein for submitting and acting upon subdivision plats
and agrees to be bound by it. The application shall also contain
certification that the applicant is the owner of the land, or the
properly authorized agent of the owner, or that the owner has
consented to the application under an option agreement. The
administrative officer shall process the application and shall issue
an application number, which number shall be communicated to
the applicant. Once an application has been assigned a number,
such number shall appear on all papers, maps, plats or plans and
other documents for processing in conjunction with the application.
(3) Major subdivision and major site plan applications, as defined in
§ 315-10, shall be subject to both a preliminary and a final hearing.
(4) Prior to any subdivision of property, any existing lots to be included
in the proposed subdivision must be consolidated.
B. Details required for minor/preliminary major subdivision plat and
minor/preliminary major site plan applications.
§ 315-66 TRENTON CODE § 315-66
305:872
(1) Each plat shall be drawn from a field survey by a professional
engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey and shall bear the signature, seal, license number and
telephone number of such professional engineer or land surveyor.
All engineering data shall be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer, and all surveying data shall be signed and sealed by a
professional land surveyor.
(2) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale of not less
than one inch equals 50 feet and shall be submitted on one of the
following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches; 15 inches
by 21 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; or 30 inches by 42 inches.
(3) If one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire project site, the
property may be divided into sections to be shown on separate
sheets of equal sizes, with reference on each sheet to the adjoining
sheets. Each subdivision plat and site plan shall show the following
information, as applicable:
(a) A key map showing the entire project site and its relation to the
surrounding area, at a scale of one inch equals not more than
2,000 feet.
(b) A title block in accordance with the rules governing title blocks
for professional engineers, N.J.A.C. 13:40-8.2, including:
[1] The name of the subdivision or development and City of
Trenton and Mercer County.
[2] The name, title, address and telephone number of the
applicant.
[3] The name, title, address and license number of the
professional or professionals who prepared the plat or
plan.
[4] The name, title and address of the owner(s) of record.
[5] The scale, in written and graphic form.
[6] The date of original preparation and of each subsequent
revision thereof, and a list of the specific revisions entered
on each sheet.
(c) North arrow.
(d) For both subdivisions and site plans: the square footage or
acreage of the project site to the nearest hundredth of an acre,
not including areas within public rights-of-way. For site plans: a
computation of the area of the project site to be disturbed.
(e) Approval signature lines for:
§ 315-66 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-66
305:873
[1] The Planning and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment
Chairperson.
[2] The Planning and/or Zoning Board Secretary.
[3] The Director of the Division of Planning.
(f) The existing tax sheet number(s) and existing block and lot
number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided or developed as they
appear on the City Tax Map, and proposed block and lot
numbers, as provided by the City Tax Assessor upon written
request.
(g) The subdivision or development boundary line must be shown
as a heavy solid line.
(h) The location of existing and proposed:
[1] Property lines, with bearings and distances;
[2] Streets, alleys, structures with their numerical dimensions
and an indication as to whether existing structures will be
retained or removed;
[3] Parking spaces, loading areas, driveways, watercourses,
railroads, bridges, culverts, and drainpipes;
[4] Any natural features, such as wetlands and trees; and
[5] Any historic landmarked areas or sites, as indicated on the
Historic Landmarks and Districts Map attached to this
chapter.109
[6] Any redevelopment areas, as indicated on the City's
Redevelopment Areas Map.110
(i) The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements.
(j) Zoning districts on and adjacent to the project site, including
district names and requirements, with proposed variance
requests.
(k) Proposed buffer and landscaped areas.
(l) Delineation of floodplains, including both floodway and floodfringe
areas.
(m) Contours, as shown on the USGS topographic maps.
109. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City Clerk's office.
110. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 315-66 TRENTON CODE § 315-66
305:874
§ 315-67. Preliminary major subdivision plat and preliminary major
site plan applications.
(4) The names and lot and block numbers of all property owners within
200 feet of the extreme limits of the project site, as shown on the
most recent tax list prepared by the City Engineer's office.
(5) A certificate from the City Tax Collector that all taxes and
assessments are paid to date shall be provided with the application.
(6) No subdivision involving any street(s) requiring additional right-ofway
or cartway width, as specified in the Master Plan or Official
Map and the street requirements of this chapter, shall be approved
unless such additional right-of-way, either along one or both sides
of such streets, as applicable, shall be granted to the City or other
appropriate governmental agency.
(7) No subdivision involving any corner lot shall be approved unless a
sight triangle shall be granted as specified in this chapter.
(8) Deed descriptions, including metes and bounds, easements,
covenants, restrictions and roadway and sight triangle dedications,
shall be submitted for approval prior to filing with the county
recording officer.
A. All preliminary major subdivision plat and preliminary major site plan
applications shall include all documents and details enumerated in
§ 315-66 et seq. of this chapter.
B. Additional requirements for preliminary major site plan applications.
(1) Enumeration of requirements.
(a) The location and species associations of all existing individual
trees or groups of trees having a caliper of eight inches or
more measured three feet above the ground level on portion(s)
of the site that are proposed to be disturbed. The proposed
location of all proposed plantings shall be indicated and a
legend provided listing the botanical and common names, the
sizes at time of planting, the total quantity of each plant, and
the location of each plant keyed to the plan or plat.
(b) All existing and proposed bridges, culverts, drainage swales,
and watercourses both on the project site and within 200 feet
of its boundaries shall be shown. Cross sections of the
watercourses and/or drainage swales must be provided at an
appropriate scale showing the extent of the floodplain, top of
bank, normal water levels and bottom elevations.
(c) Existing and proposed contours with intervals of five feet. All
contour information shall refer to a known datum. Existing
§ 315-66 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-67
305:875
contours shall be shown as a dashed line; finished grades shall
be shown as a solid line.
(d) A soil erosion and sediment control plan as required by N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(e) Locations of all existing structures, showing existing and
proposed front, rear and side yard setback distances, an
indication of whether the existing structures and uses will be
retained or removed, and any landmark areas or sites as
indicated on the City's Historic Landmarks and Districts
Map.111
(f) The size, height and location of all proposed buildings,
structures, signs and lighting facilities.
(g) A zoning compliance table demonstrating conformity to the
requirements of the zoning district(s) in which the property is
located. Information to be shown on this table must include,
but is not limited to, lot size, lot coverage, building setbacks,
building height, floor area ratio, and parking requirements, as
well as whether or not any variances are being requested. All
tract and lot sizes shall be expressed in square feet and shall
include bearings and distances.
(h) Architectural drawings, which shall include:
[1] Proposed floor plans.
[2] Proposed elevations.
[3] Indication of room sizes and building height of proposed/
existing structures on both floor plans and elevations.
[4] Materials and manufacturers of building details, including
windows and siding.
[5] Color palette for proposed structures, including but not
limited to facade, trim, and roof.
[6] Proposed facade details, including but not limited to doors,
shutters, and cornices.
[7] Materials, sizes and treatments for all porches, stoop
areas, garden walls, planters and stair railings, as well as
landscaping in accordance with § 315-210.
[8] Height, size, boundaries and entry/gate locations for all
fencing.
111. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
§ 315-67 TRENTON CODE § 315-67
305:876
[9] Locations, type and character of all proposed wallmounted
light fixtures, mailboxes and any other exterior
building features.
[10] Proposed paving patterns and brick work for sidewalks,
driveways and parking areas.
[11] Size, color, materials for any proposed building signage,
unless already included on engineering drawings, as well
as scaled representations on elevations, including
verbiage and font style.
[12] Design and location of any proposed freestanding signs,
including size and materials to be used.
(i) The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and
type of proposed outdoor lighting, including details of lighting
poles, luminaires and hours of operation in accordance with
Article XXVI (§ 315-208 et seq.). This information shall be
provided in both textual form and shown on the plat.
(j) A proposed landscaping, screening, buffering and open space
plan in accordance with Article XXVI (§ 315-208 et seq.) and
Article XXVII (§ 315-211 et seq.).
(k) The location and design of any off-street parking area, showing
size and location of parking spaces, aisles and barriers.
Landscaping in parking areas shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of § 315-210.
(l) Proposed public art and location of such art to be provided by
the applicant as part of the proposed project per § 315-215, as
applicable.
(m) Vehicular access and egress; traffic impact study.
[1] All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the
site onto public streets and alleys showing the site and the
location of driveways, cartways and curb cuts, including
the possible utilization of traffic signals, channelization,
acceleration and deceleration lanes, sight triangle
easements, additional width and other proposed devices
necessary to prevent vehicular conflicts. Curb cuts are
discouraged on major arteries unless no alternate
practicable means to access the site are available. All curb
cuts are subject to review and approval by the City's
Department of Public Works.
[2] At the discretion of the Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, a traffic impact study may be
required to assess the traffic impacts that are expected to
result from a proposed development. In the event that a
§ 315-67 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-67
305:877
traffic impact study is required, sufficient escrow must be
provided by the applicant to cover the costs of professional
review services for the study, per § 315-71.
(n) The application shall include plans and computations for any
storm drainage system(s) in order to demonstrate compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 254:
Stormwater Management, of the City Code, including but not
limited to the following:
[1] All existing or proposed storm lines within or adjacent to
the tract showing size and slope of the lines, direction of
flow and the location of each catch basin, inlet, manhole,
culvert and headwall in plan and profile.
[2] A map drawn to scale, minimum scale one inch equals 50
feet, showing the contributing area to each inlet or cross
drain.
(o) The location of existing infrastructure such as water and sewer
mains, utility structures, gas transmission lines and hightension
power lines on the project site and within 200 feet of its
boundaries.
(p) Plans of proposed infrastructure improvements and utility
layouts, including sewers, storm drains and waterlines and
feasible connections to gas, telephone and electrical utility
systems.
(q) Plans for proposed streets, including typical cross sections and
construction details, horizontal and vertical alignments of the
center line of all proposed streets and of all existing streets
abutting the project site. The vertical alignments shall be
based on USGS vertical datum and shall include curbing,
sidewalks, storm drains, drainage structures and cross
sections every half and full station of all proposed streets and
of all existing streets abutting the project site. Sight triangles,
the radius of curblines and street sign locations shall be clearly
indicated at all intersections.
(r) Any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being developed shall be indicated on the submitted
subdivision plat or site plan.
(s) Any proposed permanent monuments shall be shown, in
accordance with the Map Filing Act, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
(t) The applicant shall provide proof of review and approval from
the New Jersey State Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission,
where applicable.
§ 315-67 TRENTON CODE § 315-67
305:878
(u) The applicant shall submit a copy of the site plan application to
the City of Trenton Historic Landmark Commission for
advisory review, where applicable.
(v) The applicant shall submit a subdivision application to the
Mercer County Planning Board for review and approval.
(w) The applicant shall submit a recycling plan to the Mercer
County Improvement Authority, as set forth in the county
recycling plan, for any new development of 50 or more singlefamily
units, 25 multifamily units and 1,000 square feet or
more of lot area for commercial or industrial use.
(2) Consideration of built context.
(a) In addition to the above requirements, the Planning Board
shall consider the relation of proposed structures to the
surrounding built environment in its review of site plan
applications. Proposed structures shall be related
harmoniously to themselves and to existing topography,
buildings and roads in the vicinity of the project site. The
achievement of a harmonious relationship may include the
creation of focal points with respect to public views of the site,
surrounding terrain and other buildings. Proposed structures
shall be sited so as to minimize any adverse impact upon the
surrounding area and particularly upon any nearby residences
by reason of:
[1] Building location, height, bulk and shadows.
[2] Location, intensity, direction and times of use of outdoor
lighting.
[3] Likelihood of nuisances.
[4] Other similar considerations.
(b) Appropriate natural or artificial screening may be required to
minimize any potential adverse impacts.
(3) The City and the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Appeals
reserve the right to require additional information before granting
a preliminary subdivision and/or site plan hearing or approval
when, in their judgment, such additional information is required in
order for the relevant Board to make an informed decision or when
unique circumstances affect the project site or when the
application for development poses special problems for the project
site and the surrounding area. Such information shall include, but
not be limited to, drainage calculations and traffic impact analyses
or engineering studies.
C. Sustainable design incentives.
§ 315-67 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-67
305:879
(1) Sustainable design practices and guidelines.
(a) The City of Trenton shall promote sustainable/"green" design
practices for site planning and building design in accordance
with the following sustainable design guidelines or any official
sustainable design guidelines adopted by the State of New
Jersey. Applications for development are encouraged but not
required to comply with these sustainable design guidelines.
As part of all site plan applications, applicants must indicate
what efforts they have made to incorporate these guidelines
into their site plans.
(b) Sustainable design guidelines:
[1] Improve energy and water efficiency (thereby reducing
energy costs).
[a] Orient buildings to the south.
[b] Site taller buildings to minimize shadows on open
space and other buildings.
[c] Orient open space to maximize winter solar exposure.
[d] Provide tree canopy cover and reduce hardscape in
areas with high summer solar exposure.
[e] Provide opportunities for vegetated screening,
awnings, overhangs, and adjustable shade structures
on buildings with high summer solar exposure.
[f] Use rooftop gardens to reduce solar gain in summer
and insulate in winter.
[g] Utilize Energy Star appliances, compact fluorescent
light bulbs (CFLs), low-flow toilets and shower heads
or other similar energy-saving and/or water-saving
fixtures.
[2] Incorporate sustainable site design.
[a] Minimize disturbed areas by limiting clearing and
grading to a carefully described development
envelope.
[b] Recycle construction and demolition materials.
[c] Increase the extent of on-site landscaping beyond the
minimum required by this chapter.
[ed] Minimize the need for fertilization and pesticides
while reducing the need for watering by encouraging
the growth of native and well-adapted species.
§ 315-67 TRENTON CODE § 315-67
305:880
§ 315-68. Final subdivision plat and final site plan applications.
[f] Reduce soil erosion.
[g] Promote natural recharge and infiltration without the
threat of surface contamination.
[h] Reduce runoff volumes and peak runoff rates.
[i] Use sustainable stormwater systems, including
bioswales/rain gardens, permeable surfaces,
greywater systems, retention and detention facilities,
and continuous trenching.
[j] Use recycled materials on site.
[k] Provide safe public access to waterways via pathways
and boardwalks.
[l] Orient buildings to gather wind for dispersion of air
pollutants.
(2) Applications proposing to incorporate sustainable/"green" design
practices for site planning and building design as described
hereinabove:
(a) Shall be expedited by the City's Department of Planning and
Economic Development by receiving priority review and
consideration before other applications.
(b) Density bonus.
[1] May, at the discretion of the Planning Board, be eligible for
an increase in development density on site of up to 15%,
provided that documentation is prepared by a licensed
engineer demonstrating:
[a] An increase in energy efficiency.
[b] An increase in water efficiency.
[c] A reduction in the rate and quantity of stormwater
runoff levels from predevelopment conditions.
[2] The Planning Board shall grant or deny this density bonus
as part of preliminary site plan review. In each zoning
district, a fifteen-percent increase in the number of
housing units, or a fifteen-percent increase in the square
footage of nonresidential uses to include a fifteen-percent
increase in FAR, whichever is applicable, is allowed as a
matter of right if the requirements of this section are met.
Bonusable units or square footage shall reflect the same
general unit mix and design as the nonbonusable units.
§ 315-67 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-68
305:881
A. Procedure. A final plat or final plan shall be submitted to the
administrative officer within three years after the date of preliminary
approval, or any authorized extension thereof. The applicant shall
submit to the administrative officer, at least 30 days prior to the first
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, as the case may be:
(1) Three completed copies of the appropriate application(s), which
includes the checklist(s) pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 and the
items of information required therein, attached to this chapter as
Appendix D.
(2) Six copies of the final subdivision plat and/or site plan at a scale of
not less than one inch equals 50 feet, printed on one of the
following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 by 13, 15 by 21, 24 by 36, 30
by 42. The plat and/or plan must be signed and sealed by a New
Jersey professional engineer and folded into eights with the title
block revealed.
(3) One reduced-scale copy of the plat or plan printed on eleven-byseventeen-
sized paper.
(4) A fee in accordance with Article X (§ 315-71 et seq.).
(5) An acknowledgment signed by the applicant stating that the
applicant is familiar with the procedure set forth herein for
submitting and acting upon final site plans and final subdivisions
and agrees to be bound by it.
B. Details required for final site plans.
(1) All details stipulated in § 315-66B and § 315-67 et seq.
(2) All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval.
(3) Detailed architectural and engineering data, including:
(a) An architect's third angle projection drawing, with total
envelope dimensions, of each structure and sign or of a typical
structure and/or sign, showing front, side and rear elevations.
(b) Cross sections, plans, profiles and established grades of all
streets, aisles, lanes and driveways, including center-line
geometry and horizontal alignments with bearings, radii and
tangents.
(c) Plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains.
(d) Satisfaction of City of Trenton art requirement, where
applicable.
(4) The final submission shall be accompanied by a certificate from the
City Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments are paid to date.
§ 315-68 TRENTON CODE § 315-69
305:882
§ 315-69. Action by City.
A. Reviewing completeness of applications. The Division of Planning shall
review any of the aforesaid applications for the purpose of determining,
within 45 days of its submission, whether such application is complete.
(1) If the application is found to contain all of the information required
by the checklist, the Division of Planning shall certify that the
application is complete.112
(2) If the application is found to lack some of the information required
by the checklist, the Division of Planning shall either:
(a) Cause the applicant to be notified, in writing, that the
application is incomplete, specifying the deficiencies in the
application; or
(b) If the Division reasonably concludes that the missing items of
information are necessary to make an informed decision on the
application but are not of such significance to cause the
application to be deemed incomplete, the Division may declare
the application complete, conditioned upon the submission of
the missing items of information to the administrative officer
within 10 days; or
(c) If the Division reasonably concludes that the missing items of
information are not necessary for it to make an informed
decision on the application, the Division may waive the
requirement that such items be supplied as a prerequisite for
completeness and certify that the application is complete,
notwithstanding the missing items.
(3) An applicant who has been notified that his/her application is
incomplete may request a waiver of one or more of the submission
requirements set forth in the relevant sections of this chapter. Such
request shall be granted or denied by the Board within 45 days
thereafter.
(4) In the event the Division of Planning fails to act pursuant to
Subsection A(1) and (2)(a) and (b) above within 45 days of the date
of submission of the application, the application shall be deemed
complete as of the 46th day following its submission.
B. Determination of completeness. On the date the application is certified
complete, or on the 46th day following the submission of the application
in the event the Division of Planning fails to make a determination of
completeness, as the case may be, the applicable time period within
which the Board must act upon the application shall commence. In any
case, the applicant is obliged to prove that she or he is entitled to
approval of the application. The Board may subsequently require
112. Editor's Note: The checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-69 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-69
305:883
correction of any information found to be in error, may require
submission of additional information not specified in this chapter, or
may require revisions in the application documents as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements for approval of the application have been met, provided
that the application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or revisions.
C. Distribution of application. Promptly after certification of
completeness, the application documents shall be distributed by the
administrative officer to the following:
(1) The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be: seven copies of the preliminary and final plat or plan and
seven copies of the application.
(2) The Division of Planning: two copies each of the preliminary and
final plat plan and the application.
(3) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment attorney, as the
case may be: one copy each of the preliminary and final plat or plan
and the application.
(4) The Construction Official: one copy of the preliminary and final plat
or plan.
(5) The Zoning Officer: one copy of the preliminary and final plat or
plan.
(6) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment Secretary, as
the case may be: one copy of each of the preliminary and final plat
or plan and the application.
(7) At the direction of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, additional copies of the
preliminary and final plat or plan shall be sent to other City, county
or state agencies and officials, including a subdivision or site plan
committee as may be designated by the Board.
D. Planning staff review. Planning staff shall read any written report
submitted concerning the application and shall itself review the
submission to ascertain its conformity with the requirements of this
chapter. Planning staff shall hold meetings on the application and shall
maintain minutes of the meetings, such minutes to be made a part of
the record of the Board. Planning staff shall offer its recommendations
to the Board.
E. Public notice of hearing. All hearings held on any applications for
subdivision approval and site plan approval shall require public notice
of the hearing, unless such requirement is waived by the Planning
Board for a minor application. The Division of Planning shall set the
date, time and place for the public hearing and shall inform the
§ 315-69 TRENTON CODE § 315-69
305:884
applicant of this at least 14 days prior to such hearing date. Notice of
the hearing in accordance with the requirements of § 315-35B shall be
given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
F. Time for action by the Board. The Board shall take action on any site
plan and any subdivision application within 45 days after the
application has been certified complete or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within
the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application,
except in the case of the following circumstances:
(1) Any preliminary site plan or subdivision application which includes
any request variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and
§ 315-57B of this chapter shall be acted upon within 120 days, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Any preliminary site plan application involving more than 10 acres
of land, more than 10 dwellings or a preliminary subdivision
application involving more than 10 lots shall be acted upon within
95 days after the application has been certified complete, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure
of the Board to act within the prescribed time period shall
constitute approval of the application, provided that any
preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision application which
includes any request variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60
and § 315-57B shall be acted upon within 120 days, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(3) The Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary site plan
application or subdivision application under its jurisdiction unless
the preliminary site plan or subdivision application is being
considered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment simultaneously with
an application for a use variance in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d and § 315-30D of this chapter, in which case the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act on all aspects of the application
within 120 days after the application has been certified complete
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act
within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the
application.
G. Approval conditioned on revision.
(1) Should minor revisions or additions to the plat or plan be deemed
necessary, the Board may grant preliminary approval subject to
specified conditions and receipt of revised plans within 60 days
from the date of such approval. Should major revisions be deemed
necessary, the Board shall require that an amended plat or plan be
submitted and acted upon as in the case of the original application.
(2) Any proposed subdivision or development determined by the Board
to be creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to the possibility
§ 315-69 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-69
305:885
§ 315-70. Effect of approvals.
of an adverse effect upon either the property in question or upon
any adjacent properties may be required to be revised to remove
any adverse effect(s) prior to further review, classification or
approval by the Board.
(3) Where the remaining portion of the original tract is sufficient to be
subdivided or developed further, the applicant may be required to
submit a sketch of the entire remaining portion of the tract to
indicate a feasible plan whereby the applied for subdivision or
development, together with subsequent subdivision(s) or
development(s), may be submitted that will not create, impose,
aggravate or lead to any adverse effect.
H. Minor technical changes to approved plans; administrative review.
Should a minor technical change to an approved plat or plan be
required as a result of field conditions related to code or health and
safety issues, the Planning Board may defer consideration and approval
of such minor technical changes to the Director of the Division of
Planning.
I. Considerations by Board.
(1) The recommendations of those agencies and officials to whom the
plat or plan was submitted shall be given careful consideration in
the final decision on the development application. If the County
Planning Board approves the submission, such approval shall be
noted on the plat or plan. If the Board acts favorably on the final
plat or plan, the Director of the Division of Planning and the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Board, or the Acting Chairperson
or Secretary where either or both may be absent, shall affix their
signatures to at least seven paper copies of the plat or plan, with
the notification that it has been approved.
(2) If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the preliminary
plat or plan, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be
made by the Chairperson of the Board to that effect on the plat or
plan, and a resolution shall be adopted in accordance with § 315-37
setting forth the reasons for such rejection. One copy of the plat or
plan and such resolution shall be returned to the applicant within
10 days of the adoption of such resolution.
A. Subdivision approval.
(1) When a subdivision is approved by the Board, a notation to that
effect, including the date of approval, shall be made on a master
copy. At least 10 prints of the plat or plan and any related deed
descriptions to be filed with the county recording officer by the
applicant shall be signed by the Director of the Division of Planning
and the Chairperson and Secretary of the Board, or the Acting
§ 315-69 TRENTON CODE § 315-70
305:886
Chairperson or Secretary where either or both may be absent.
No further approval of the application shall be required, and the
Secretary of the Board, within 10 days of the date of approval,
shall notify the applicant of the Board's action. Additionally, the
Secretary of the Board shall forward to the applicant a copy of the
approval resolution, adopted in accordance with § 315-37, within
10 days of its adoption by the Board.
(2) When a subdivision is disapproved by the Board, the Secretary of
the Board, within 10 days of such action, shall notify the applicant
of such disapproval. Additionally, the Secretary of the Board shall
forward the applicant a copy of the disapproval resolution, adopted
in accordance with § 315-37, within 10 days of its adoption by the
Board, setting forth the reasons for the disapproval.
(3) Within 190 days from the date of approval by the Board of a minor
subdivision, a plat map drawn in compliance with the approval and
the Map Filing Act, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or deed clearly
describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer
with the county recording officer, the Municipal Engineer and the
Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted for such
filing shall have been signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of
the Board, or the Acting Chairperson or Secretary where either or
both may be absent. Unless filed within 190 days, the approval shall
expire and will require new Board approval as in the first instance.
(4) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of minor subdivision approval by the Board,
provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly
recorded.
(5) Within 95 days of approval by the Board of a final subdivision plat,
the subdivider shall file a copy of same with the Mercer County
Clerk. In the event of failure to file within 95 days, the approval of
the major subdivision shall expire and any further proceedings
shall require the filing of a new application as in the first instance.
The Board, for good cause shown, may extend the filing for an
additional 95 days.
B. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval shall confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
of preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including, but not
limited to, use requirements, layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements;
§ 315-70 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-70
305:887
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat or plan; and
(3) That the applicant may apply for, and the Board may grant,
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
C. Effect of final approval. Final approval of a subdivision or site plan shall
confer upon the applicant the following rights for a period of two years
from the date of final approval:
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the final approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed.
(2) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the Board may extend the period of protection for
extensions of one year each, not exceeding three such extensions.
D. Effective term of use variance approval. Approval of a use variance
granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall expire after two years
from the date of granting of the variance if no construction, alteration
or conversion has commenced within such time.
§ 315-70 TRENTON CODE § 315-70
305:888
ARTICLE X
Fees, Guarantees and Off-Tract Improvements
§ 315-71. Application fees and escrow fees for professional review
services.
Every application for development is subject to an application fee,
professional development fee, escrow fee for professional review services
and administrative fees. These fees must be paid upon submission of any
development application to the City of Trenton and must be provided in four
separate checks payable to the City of Trenton.
A. Application fee. Each application for development shall be accompanied
by payment of a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in § 315-71C.
There shall be a separate fee required for preliminary and final site plan
applications as well as subdivision and conditional use applications.
B. Professional development fee. Per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8b, development
applications are subject to a professional development fee to defray the
cost of tuition for those persons required to take the course in land use
law and planning in the municipality as required pursuant to P.L. 2005,
c. 133 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 et seq.). All site plan and subdivision
applications shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable
professional development fee as set forth in § 315-71C.
C. Fee Schedule.
Type of Application Application Fee
Professional
Development
Fee
Site plan/subdivision
Preliminary site plan1 (square
feet of land area)
Up to 10,000 $225 $10
10,001 to 20,000 $325 $20
20,001 to 40,000 $400 $30
Over 40,000 $450 $40
Final site plan1 (square feet
of land area)
Up to 10,000 $225 $10
10,001 to 20,000 $325 $20
20,001 to 40,000 $400 $30
Over 40,000 $450 $40
Preliminary subdivision
(square feet of land area)
Up to 10,000 $225 $10
§ 315-71 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-71
305:889
Type of Application Application Fee
Professional
Development
Fee
10,001 to 20,000 $325 $20
20,001 to 40,000 $400 $30
Over 40,000 $450 $40
Final subdivision (square feet
of land area)
Up to 10,000 $225 $10
10,001 to 20,000 $325 $20
20,001 to 40,000 $400 $30
Over 40,000 $450 $40
Conditional use permit $200 n/a
Variance $200 n/a
Designation of redevelopment
area and creation of
redevelopment area plan
$2,500 n/a
Amendment to redevelopment
plan
$1,500 n/a
NOTES:
1 For preliminary and final site plan review there is an additional
fee of $100 for every 50,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction
thereof, in excess of the first 50,000 square feet of any development.
D. Escrow fees for professional review services.
(1) Each application for development shall be accompanied by
payment of an escrow fee in addition to the nonrefundable
application fee set forth above, to be deposited with the City. The
amount of the escrow fee shall be as set forth in the schedule
below:
Type of
Application Escrow Fee
Site plan review $300+
Residential $100 per dwelling unit
Nonresidential $425 per 1,000 gsf
Subdivision review $300 plus $100 per lot; if a subdivision
includes the dedication of public roads, the
fee shall be $150 per lot
Conditional use
permit review1
$3002
§ 315-71 TRENTON CODE § 315-71
305:890
NOTES:
1 This fee is applicable to conditional use permit applications
that do not require submission of a full site plan, per § 315-63B.
When a full site plan review is required as part of a conditional
use permit application, the site plan review escrow fees shown
in the above chart shall apply.
2 With the exception of conditional use permit applications for
telecommunications facilities. Escrow fees applicable to
conditional use permit applications for telecommunications
facilities are enumerated in Article XXIII, § 315-159.
(2) Performance standard review required under § 315-165: $300.
(3) Waiver of escrow requirement. A waiver of all or part of the escrow
fee requirement for performance standard review applications or
site plan applications containing 10 or fewer residential units, or
20,000 or fewer gross square feet of nonresidential space, may be
granted at the sole discretion of the Planning Board, after receiving
a staff recommendation. The granting of a full or partial waiver
shall be based upon review of a completed application and a finding
that the nature of the application and its potential impacts are such
that no substantial technical or professional review is required.
(4) Use of escrow funds. Escrow fees shall be utilized to cover the cost
of professional services required for the review of application
materials, the conduct of hearings on the application, and
necessary follow-up activities arising from approval of an
application, including, but not limited to, engineering, professional
planning, environmental analysis, historic preservation, urban
design, and traffic analysis.
(5) Escrow agreement. The applicant shall execute an escrow
agreement with the City to authorize payment of such expenses.
Sums not utilized by the City in the review process shall be
returned to the applicant within a reasonable time after adoption of
a resolution of memorialization by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment disposing of the pending application, except
with respect to matters where either Board approves an application
subject to outstanding conditions requiring action, monitoring or
analysis by the City or the applicant subsequent to such action. In
such cases, escrow funds shall be retained until such time that all
outstanding conditions have been satisfied.
(6) Additional escrow. If the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment finds that the initial escrow fee deposit is inadequate
and that additional funds are deemed necessary to continue
processing an application, the applicant shall be notified of the
additional amount required and shall add to his/her escrow fee
deposit such additional amount. The Planning Board or Zoning
§ 315-71 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-71
305:891
Board of Adjustment may withhold final action on any application
until all required escrow fees are paid.
(7) Issuance of building permit or certificate of occupancy upon
payment; lien for payment. No building permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until all escrow fee deposits have been
made. All charges which are due and owing shall become a lien
upon the premises with respect to which such charges are required
and shall remain until paid. The City shall have the same remedies
for the collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties, as it
has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate. All escrow
fee deposits shall be administered by the City in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
E. Attorney, Secretary and planning staff administrative fees.
(1) All applications for development shall be charged an additional
processing fee for the time that the Attorney, the Planning Board/
Zoning Board Secretary, stenographer and the Planning Board
planning staff expend reviewing the application and considering
the application for development at the public hearing and any other
meetings required.
(2) The applicant shall be assessed the processing fee in quarter-hour
increments at the following rates:
(a) Attorney: $150 per hour.
(b) Planning Board/Zoning Board Secretary: $30 per hour.
(c) Stenographer: $275 per meeting.
(d) Planning staff:
[1] Director: $75 per hour.
[2] Supervising planner: $60 per hour.
[3] Senior planner: $40 per hour.
(3) An initial escrow deposit of $530 shall be submitted to the City
Treasurer in an amount of $530 for one hour of the Attorney and
Planning Board Secretary's rate and two hours of the Planning staff
reviewer's rates. Any unexpended escrow funds for the
administrative review shall be returned to the applicant within 30
days after the applicant has secured a certificate of occupancy.
(4) If additional funds are needed from the applicant to pay for the
administrative review, the City shall notify the applicant and the
applicant shall submit payment to the City within 15 days. The
Division of Planning staff will not sign off on the certificate of
occupancy until all administrative fees have been paid to the City.
F. Other administrative fees.
§ 315-71 TRENTON CODE § 315-71
305:892
§ 315-72. Guarantees.
§ 315-73. Off-tract improvements.
(1) Certified list of property owners (see § 315-35D): $0.25 per name
or $10, whichever is greater.
(2) Copy of minutes, transcripts or decisions, per page (see §§ 315-36
and 315-46): $0.50
(3) Court reporter. If an applicant desires a court reporter, the cost for
taking testimony, transcribing it and providing a copy of the
transcript to the City shall be at the expense of the applicant, who
shall arrange for the reporter's attendance.
A. Performance guarantee estimate.
(1) In cases of an application for development involving large-scale
public improvements to be carried out by the developer, the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment may require
that an applicant file a performance guarantee with the City
Department of Public Works, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, to
insure the installation of such public improvement on or before a
specified date or before a specified phase of the development
project.
(2) A required performance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by
the applicant's engineer and submitted to the Department of Public
Works for review and approval, setting forth all requirements for
improvements, as fixed by the Board, and their estimated cost.
Prior to final approval by the Board of the application for
development, the City Council shall pass a resolution either
approving or adjusting this performance guarantee.
A. Required improvements. As a condition for approval of a subdivision,
site plan or conditional use, the applicant may be required to pay his/
her pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary
street improvements or water, sewerage and drainage facility
improvements, and any necessary easements therefor located outside
the property limits of the subject premises, but indicated in the City
Master Plan and necessitated or required by the construction or
improvements within such subdivision or development. Such
improvements must be consistent with the City's Stormwater
Management Ordinance, Chapter 254 of the City Code. The following
criteria shall be utilized in determining the developer's proportionate
pro rata monetary share for the necessary off-tract developments:
(1) Improvements to be constructed at the expense of the developer. In
cases where the need for an off-tract improvement is created by the
proposed subdivision or development and where no other property
owners receive a special benefit thereby, as opposed to a mere
§ 315-71 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-73
305:893
incidental benefit, the applicant may be required, as a condition
of approval and at the applicant's sole expense, to acquire or
improve lands outside the tract and dedicate such lands to the City
of Trenton or County of Mercer, or, in lieu thereof, require the
subdivider or developer to deposit with the City a sum of money
sufficient to allow the City to acquire or improve such lands, on
conditions it may deem appropriate under the circumstances.
(2) General standards for other improvements. In cases where the
need for any off-tract improvement to be implemented now or in the
future is necessitated by the proposed development application,
and where it is determined that properties outside the development
will also be benefited by the improvement, the following criteria,
together with the provisions or rules and regulations of the City or
any department thereof, may be utilized in determining the
developer's proportionate share of such improvements:
(a) Sanitary sewers. For distribution facilities, including the
installation, relocation or replacement of collector, trunk and
interceptor sewers and the installation, relocation or
replacement of other appurtenances associated therewith, the
applicant's proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
[1] The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system
shall be based on the rules and regulations for the
preparation and submission of plans for sewerage
systems, New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection and City sewer design standards, including
infiltration standards.
[2] Developer's pro rata share:
[a] The capacity of the existing system to serve the entire
improved drainage area shall be computed. If the
system is able to carry the total development drainage
basin, no improvement or enlargement cost will be
assigned to the developer, although some charges,
including, but not limited to, capacity charges, may be
imposed. If the existing system does not have
adequate capacity for the total development drainage
basin, the prorated enlargement or improvement
share shall be computed as follows:
Developer's costººººº
Total enlargement or
improvement cost
=
Development gpdººº
Total tributary gpd
[3] If it is necessary to construct a new system in order to
develop the subdivision or development, the prorated
§ 315-73 TRENTON CODE § 315-73
305:894
enlargement share to the developer shall be computed as
follows:
Developer's
costººººº
Total project cost
=
Development tributary
gpdºººººººººº
Total tributary gpd to new
system
[4] The plans for the improved system or the extended system
shall be prepared by the developer's engineer. All work
shall be calculated by the developer and approved by the
City Engineer.
(b) Roadways. For street widening, alignment, channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility
improvements uncovered elsewhere, the construction or
reconstruction of new or existing streets, and other associated
street or traffic improvements, the applicant's proportionate
cost shall be determined as follows:
[1] The applicant's engineer shall provide the Department of
Public Works and the Department of Traffic with the
existing and anticipated peak-hour volumes which impact
the off-tract acres in question, which volumes shall analyze
pedestrian, bicycle and motor vehicle traffic.
[2] The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvements, which shall include the estimated peakhour
traffic generated by the proposed development. The
ratio of the peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed
development to the future peak-hour traffic shall form the
basis of the proportionate share. The prorated share shall
be computed as follows:
Developer's
costººººººº
Total cost of roadway
improvement and/or
extension
=
Additional peak-hour trafficgenerated
by the development
Future total peak-hour traffic
(c) Drainage improvements. For the stormwater and drainage
improvements, including the installation, relocation of storm
drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, or improved
drainage ditches and appurtenances thereto, and the
relocation or replacement of other storm drainage facilities or
appurtenances associated therewith, the applicant's
proportionate share shall be determined as follows:
§ 315-73 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-73
305:895
[1] The capacity and design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on a
method described in Urban Hydrology for Small
Watershed, Technical Release 55, Soil Conservation
Service, USDA, January 1975, as amended, and shall be
computed by the developer's engineer and approved by
the City Engineer.
[2] The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved
system required for the subdivision or development and
areas outside of the subdivision or development shall be
computed by the developer's engineer and be subject to
the approval of the Department of Public Works. The plans
for the improved system shall be prepared by the
developer's engineer, and the estimated cost of the
enlarged system shall be calculated by the Department of
Public Works. The prorated share for the proposed
development shall be computed as follows:
Developer's costººººº
Total enlargement or
improvement cost of
drainage facilities
= Development cfsººººº
Total tributary cfs
B. Escrow accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be
undertaken at a future date, funds required for the improvement shall
be deposited to the credit of the City in a separate account until such
time as the improvement is constructed. In lieu of a cash escrow
account, developers may present irrevocable letters of credit for the
term required, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. If the off-tract
improvement is not begun within 10 years of the deposit, all monies and
interest shall be returned to the applicant or the letter of credit, as the
case may be, surrendered. An off-tract improvement shall be considered
"begun" if the City has taken legal steps to provide for the design and
financing of such improvements.
C. Implementation of off-tract improvements.
(1) In all cases, developers shall be required to enter into an
agreement or agreements with the City in regard to off-tract
improvements, in accordance with this chapter and any other
ordinances, policies, rules and regulations of the City of Trenton,
County of Mercer and State of New Jersey, and any departments,
authorities or agencies thereto.
(2) Where properties outside the subject tract will be benefited by the
improvements, the City Council may require the applicant to
escrow sufficient funds, in accordance with Subsection B, Escrow
accounts, above, to secure the developer's pro rata share of the
§ 315-73 TRENTON CODE § 315-73
305:896
eventual cost of providing future structural improvements based
upon the standards expressed herein.
(3) Benefit to properties outside subject tract.
(a) Where properties outside the subject tract will benefit by the
improvements, the City Council may determine that the
improvement or improvements are to be installed by the City
as a general improvement, the cost of which is to be borne as a
general expense.
(b) If the City Council shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed as a general
improvement, the City Council may direct the Planning Board
to estimate, with the aid of the Department of Public Works, or
such other persons who have pertinent information or
expertise, the amount, if any, by which the total cost thereof
will exceed the total amount by which all properties, including
the subject tract, will be specifically benefited thereby, and the
subdivider or developer shall be liable to the City for such
expense.
(4) If the City Council shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed as a local
improvement, all or a part of the cost of which is to be assessed
against properties benefited thereby in proportion to the benefits
conferred by the improvements, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:56-1 et seq., the developer may be required to sign an
agreement acknowledging and agreeing to this procedure, and in
addition, the City Council may require that the developer shall be
liable to the City, in addition to the amount of any special
assessments against the subject property for benefits conferred by
the improvement or improvements, for the difference between the
cost actually incurred and the total amount by which all properties,
including the subject tract, are specially benefited by the
improvement, as the same may be determined by the Board of
Improvement Assessors.
(5) If the City Council shall determine that the improvements are to be
constructed or installed by the applicant, such agreement may
contain provisions, consistent with the standard in this chapter and
any other rules, regulations or policies of the City of Trenton,
County of Mercer and State of New Jersey, and any departments,
authorities or agencies thereof with jurisdiction therein, whereby
the applicant shall be reimbursed by the City, or otherwise, as a
result of any participation fees, connection charges, charges paid
in regard to developer's agreements with other applicants and the
like, all in accordance with an agreement between the City Council
and the applicant.
§ 315-73 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-73
305:897
§ 315-74. Radio communication airways.
(6) In determining the procedures to be followed in the event of the
submission of a list and request from the Planning Board, the City
Council shall be guided by the following standards and
considerations:
(a) The local trends in regard to the probability of development
within the drainage or circulation area in question and the
intensity of such development.
(b) The risk and exposure that neighboring areas are subject to in
the event that the improvements to be required are delayed.
(c) The extent to which temporary measures may sufficiently
alleviate the condition or conditions requiring the off-tract
improvement and the likelihood that larger regional or
subregional facilities will be required in the future to serve the
development tract and the general area of the City in which the
same is located.
(d) The extent to which the health, safety and welfare of the
residents, both current and future, depend upon the immediate
implementation of the off-tract improvement.
A. Findings.
(1) Any structure exceeding four stories in height above the ground is
a potential cause of interference, interruption or severe
degradation to the City's public safety and municipal
communications systems.
(2) The City has invested considerable funds to implement and operate
the communications system, which is paramount to the provisions
of police, fire, medical and other public services for those who
work, reside or own property in the City.
(3) It is imperative that these communication networks and systems be
protected from interference, interruption or degradation by the
construction or modification of any building or structure within the
City.
B. Escrow fees. An applicant of any preliminary or final site plan
application for a structure exceeding four stories or 40 feet in height
above the ground shall be required to submit double the required
professional services escrow fee at the time of application submission
(refer to § 315-71 for fee calculations) in order to cover the cost of
hiring a radio communication expert to determine whether the
proposed new construction is likely to interfere with the City's radio
communications system. The applicant shall be required to replenish
the escrow account on an as-needed basis in accordance with § 315-71.
§ 315-73 TRENTON CODE § 315-74
305:898
C. Regulations. In the event that it is determined by the City's radio
communications expert that the construction or modification of such
structure may result in interference, interruption or degradation of the
City's communications system, approval of the site plan application
shall be conditioned upon the applicant providing the following
facilities, services and/or financial relief as determined necessary by
the City under advisement by its consulting radio communications
expert:
(1) The applicant shall be required to provide sufficient space, up to
1,000 square feet, in the new or modified building to install radio
transmitting and receiving equipment as may be necessary to
correct all radio system degradation or interference resulting
directly or indirectly from the construction or modification. Such
space shall be required to overcome the negative or potential effect
of the structure on the City's communications systems.
(2) The applicant shall provide power, including that provided by an
emergency electric power generator, adequate to operate all radio
and ancillary equipment installed by the City in the proposed
facility. Such power sources shall be secure and free from the
possibility of disconnection, by accident or otherwise, by
maintenance or other persons.
(3) The applicant shall provide antenna-mounting space and antenna
cable paths as necessary to permit the erection of transmitting and
receiving antennas in a manner consistent with the radio system's
operational and coverage needs.
(4) The applicant shall provide free and easy access to the radio
equipment, antenna systems and power sources, 24 hours per day,
seven days per week, without exception. Such access shall not
require any City radio system management or its authorized
maintenance personnel to wait more than 10 minutes for such
access after arriving at the site. Parking and loading facilities shall
be provided and conveniently located. Stickers, keys or cards
necessary to access these areas will be provided in quantities as
needed and at no cost to the City.
(5) The applicant shall provide such space, power and other services
and access without charge or fee to the City, except that the
electric service may be provided with a meter that causes a bill for
such electric power to be issued directly to the City by the power
utility company.
(6) The City shall be responsible for the maintenance and cleaning of
the interior equipment room areas it uses in accordance with these
requirements. The building or structure owner shall be responsible
for the maintenance and access to these areas and for all roof
areas.
§ 315-74 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-74
305:899
(7) The City shall have the right to install and maintain such security
devices as it deems necessary for the protection of its equipment.
Such devices shall include, but not be limited to, door locks,
intrusion alarms, fire and smoke alarms, sprinkler systems and fire
extinguishers. Where appropriate in the City's view, fire and smoke
alarms may be interconnected with other building fire and smoke
alarms to assure maximum protection and safety to those working
in or occupying the building.
(8) Applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all necessary coverage
and operational capacities when the proposed construction or
modification of the structure is determined to potentially cause
interference or degradation to the City's radio systems, and the
structure, such as a monument, is not physically adaptable to
supporting radio communications equipments. Such costs shall
include leasing, purchasing or otherwise acquiring space in other
buildings, erecting radio towers, acquiring building equipment
shelters and for doing all other work deemed necessary to restore
and secure communications or radio services. The applicant shall
also pay the costs of radio control wire lines and other circuits
leased from the telephone company that are necessary for the
control and operation of the radio equipment at this site. The
applicant shall be obligated to pay such recurring costs for leased
sites and/or equipment for a period of not less than 10 years or
until such time as the City vacates the premises, whichever occurs
first.
(9) The applicant shall provide, install and maintain signal distribution
and/or other communication facilities that will assure portable
radio coverage throughout the structure and between the inside of
the structure and the outside free air. Such facilities will be at the
expense of the applicant when determined by the City to preserve
life and property, including that of the building owner, those who
work in the building and/or those public safety personnel who may
have to provide services within the building.
§ 315-74 TRENTON CODE § 315-74
305:900
ARTICLE XI
Zoning Districts, Zoning Map, and Redevelopment Areas
§ 315-75. Zoning districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Trenton is hereby divided into
10 districts as follows:
RA Residential
RB Residential
RB-1 Residential
RB-2 Residential
MU Mixed Use
BA Business
BB Business
DD Downtown District
IA Industrial
IB Industrial
§ 315-76. Redevelopment areas.
Redevelopment areas, as shown on the Redevelopment Areas Map,113 dated
July 2007, have been so designated by the City Council under N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq. and are subject to the specific regulations as adopted
by the City Council for the particular redevelopment area. These specific
regulations take precedence over the underlying zone district regulations.
The applicable regulations for each redevelopment area may be obtained
from the office of the City Clerk or the Department of Housing and
Economic Development.
§ 315-77. Historic districts and sites.
Historic districts and sites, as shown on the City's Historic Landmarks
and Districts Map,114 dated December 1985, and listed in § 315-229, are
subject to the regulations of the zone district or districts in which they are
located and are also subject to the additional requirements of Article XXIX
(§ 315-218 et seq.).
§ 315-78. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established on the map entitled
"Zoning Map of the City of Trenton," dated June 1988, revised 2007, which
accompanies and is hereby made part of this chapter.115
113. Editor's Note: The Redevelopment Areas Map is on file in the City offices.
114. Editor's Note: The Historic Landmarks and Districts Map is on file in the City Clerk's
office.
115. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 315-75 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-79
305:901
§ 315-79. Interpretation of boundaries.
§ 315-80. Location of retail and commercial establishments near
residential areas.
Any retail or commercial establishment within 100 feet of any residential
area is subject to the business hour restrictions as provided for in Article V
of Chapter 146, Licensing.
A. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they exist on
lots of record at the time of enactment of this chapter, unless otherwise
indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map.
B. Any dimensions shown on the Zoning Map are measured horizontally
and from the street right-of-way line, even if the center line of that
street is used for the location of the zoning district line.
C. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be
determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. The zoning standards, controls and designations apply to every
structure, lot and use within each district, and the district lines extend
vertically in both directions from ground level.
§ 315-79 TRENTON CODE § 315-80
305:902
ARTICLE XII
General District Regulations
§ 315-81. Compliance required.
No buildings shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged,
added to, moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be
designed, used or physically altered for any purpose in any manner, except
in conformity with this chapter.
§ 315-82. Existing buildings.
When a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building, any
subdivision shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the
requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing building.
§ 315-83. Combining open space.
No open space provided around any principal building for the purpose of
complying with front, side or rear yard provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing the yard provisions for another principal building.
§ 315-84. Supplementary provisions.
See Article XXX (§ 315-230 et seq.) of this chapter for supplementary
provisions.
§ 315-85. Certain uses permitted in all districts.
Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community
shelters for victims of domestic violence, community residences for the
terminally ill, community residences for persons with head injuries, adult
family-care homes for elderly persons and physically disabled adults, and
family day-care homes shall be permitted uses in all residential districts
of the City of Trenton, and the requirements thereof shall be the same as
for single-family dwelling units located within such districts. In accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b, in condominiums, cooperatives and horizontal
property regimes that represent themselves as being primarily for retirees
or elderly persons, or which impose a minimum age limit tending to attract
persons who are near retirement age, deed restrictions or bylaws may
prohibit family day-care homes from being a permitted use. Day-care/childcare
centers for which a license is required from the Department of Human
Services pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.) shall be a
permitted use in all nonresidential districts of the City of Trenton.
§ 315-81 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-85
305:903

ARTICLE XIII
Residence A and Residence B-1 Districts
§ 315-86. Principal permitted uses.
Detached single-family dwelling units.
§ 315-87. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
§ 315-88. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII, Conditional Uses (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
§ 315-89. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Residence A and
B-1 Districts are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-90. General requirements.
A. Private residential swimming pools and tennis courts in accordance
with § 315-238.
B. Private residential greenhouses, storage sheds and private garages, in
accordance with § 315-233.
C. Attached and detached private garages and carports, not to exceed
spaces for three vehicles.
D. Satellite communications dish receiving antennas, provided that the
dish antenna is located only in a rear yard area and does not exceed 15
feet in height, measured from the ground level at the installation
location. Roof installations may be permitted only if the dish antenna is
not visible from the street frontage.
E. Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the total area of the
shelter does not exceed 24 square feet.
F. Signs in accordance with Article XXV (§ 315-191 et seq.).
G. Unroofed exterior accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted
residential uses, such as, but not limited to, patios, decks and child play
facilities, in accordance with Article XXX (§ 315-230 et seq.).
A. Churches.
B. Telecommunications facilities.
A. Not more than one principal residential structure shall be located on a
lot.
§ 315-86 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-90
305:905
B. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
Other permitted uses shall comply with the parking requirements of
Article XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.), or other applicable sections.
C. The parking of vehicles on front or side yards in front of the front
building line is prohibited, except in enclosed garages, and must
comply with the requirements of § 315-180.
D. The exterior storage of vehicles, trucks and boats shall comply with the
requirements of § 315-234.
E. Fences and masonry walls shall not be permitted in front yards in front
of the building line. Otherwise, fences and masonry walls behind the
front building line shall comply with the requirements of § 315-236.
F. When a residential structure is proposed to be built on a vacant parcel
of land, the building design of the proposed dwelling unit shall be
similar to other residential structures within a radius of 200 feet with
respect to:
(1) Building height.
(2) Roof shape.
(3) Wall siding materials.
(4) Window and door type, size and number.
(5) Street orientation.
G. When a garage door is proposed to be located on the front facade of a
residential structure, the residential structure must be at least 20 feet
wide and the garage door must not comprise more than 40% of the
front facade. Such door must be incorporated into the ground floor
facade in such a manner as to provide the appearance of residential
living space on the ground floor level.
§ 315-90 TRENTON CODE § 315-90
305:906
ARTICLE XIV
Residence B-2 District
§ 315-91. Principal permitted uses.
§ 315-92. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
Same as Residence B District. Refer to § 315-97.
§ 315-93. Permitted conditional uses.
Same as Residence B District. Refer to § 315-98.
§ 315-94. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
Same as Residence B District. Refer to § 315-99.
§ 315-95. General requirements.
Same as Residence B District. Refer to § 315-100.
A. Detached single-family dwelling units.
B. Semidetached single-family dwelling units.
§ 315-91 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-95
305:907

ARTICLE XV
Residence B District
§ 315-96. Principal permitted uses.
§ 315-97. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
§ 315-98. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
A. Detached single-family dwelling units.
B. Semidetached single-family dwelling units.
C. Row house dwelling units.
A. Private residential swimming pools and tennis courts, in accordance
with §§ 315-238 and 315-239.
B. Private residential greenhouses, storage sheds and private garages, in
accordance with § 315-233.
C. Attached and detached private garages and carports.
D. Home occupation use, provided that such use is conducted only in the
principal dwelling structure, only by the residents of such structure,
does not occupy more than one room or 25% of the gross floor area of
the dwelling structure, there is no exterior evidence of such use, i.e., no
exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and no exterior change
in the residential character of the principal building, and no sounds,
vibrations, fumes, odors, generation of traffic or other such nuisances
shall be discernible outside the dwelling structure. No more than one
client, customer or pupil may be on the premises at any one time, and
no stock-in-trade or commodity shall be sold upon the premises as in a
sales outlet.
E. Family day-care homes, in accordance with § 315-241.
F. Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the total area of the
shelter does not exceed 24 square feet.
G. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV (§ 315-191 et seq.).
H. Unroofed exterior accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted
residential uses, such as, but not limited to, patios, child play facilities
and decks, in accordance with Article XXX (§ 315-230 et seq.).
I. Satellite communications dish receiving antennas, provided that the
dish antenna is located only in a rear yard area and does not exceed 15
feet in height, measured from the ground level at the installation
location. Roof installations may be permitted only if the dish antenna is
not visible from the street frontage.
§ 315-96 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-98
305:909
§ 315-99. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Residence B
District are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-100. General requirements.
A. Public utility use.
B. Schools.
C. Churches.
D. Parking lot.
E. Day-care/child-care center.
F. Nursing home.
G. Telecommunications facilities.
A. Not more than one principal residential structure shall be located on a
lot.
B. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each single-family
dwelling unit (including detached, semidetached, and rowhouse units).
Other permitted uses shall comply with the parking requirements of
Article XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.), or other applicable sections.
C. The parking of vehicles on front or side yards in front of the front
building line is prohibited, including parking provided, except in
enclosed garages. Permitted parking must comply with the
requirements of § 315-180.
D. The exterior storage of vehicles, trucks and boats shall comply with the
requirements of § 315-234.
E. Fences and masonry walls shall comply with the requirements of
§ 315-236.
F. When a residential structure is proposed to be built on a vacant parcel
of land, the building design of the proposed dwelling unit shall be
similar to other residential structures within a radius of 200 feet, with
respect to:
(1) Building height.
(2) Roof shape.
(3) Wall siding materials.
(4) Window and door type, size and number.
(5) Street orientation.
§ 315-98 TRENTON CODE § 315-100
305:910
(6) Housing type, detached, semidetached or row.
G. When a garage door is proposed to be located on the front facade of a
residential structure, the residential structure must be at least 20 feet
wide and the garage door must not comprise more than 40% of the
front facade. Such door must be incorporated into the ground floor
facade in such a manner as to provide the appearance of residential
living space on the ground floor level.
§ 315-100 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-100
305:911

ARTICLE XVI
Mixed Use MU District
§ 315-101. Principal permitted uses.
§ 315-102. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
A. Detached single-family dwelling units.
B. Semidetached single-family dwelling units.
C. Two-family dwelling structures.
D. Row house dwelling units.
E. Multifamily dwelling structures, and dwelling units located over
permitted nonresidential uses, in accordance with multifamily dwelling
structure regulations.
F. Public facilities of the City of Trenton.
G. The office of a doctor, lawyer or other licensed professional office
buildings for business and professional purposes and medical clinics.
H. The offices or headquarters of a nonprofit or service organization, such
as the Red Cross, Chamber of Commerce or generally similar leagues or
associations not organized for pecuniary profit.
I. Mixed-use structures.
A. Private residential swimming pools and tennis courts, in accordance
with §§ 315-238 and 315-239.
B. Private residential greenhouses, storage sheds and private garages, in
accordance with § 315-233.
C. Attached and detached private garages and carports.
D. Home occupation use, provided that such use is conducted only in the
principal dwelling structure, only by the residents of such structure,
does not occupy more than one room or 25% of the gross floor area of
the dwelling structure, there is no exterior evidence of such use, i.e., no
exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and no exterior change
in the residential character of the principal building, and no sounds,
vibrations, fumes, odors, generation of traffic or other such nuisances
shall be discernible outside the dwelling structure. No more than one
client, customer or pupil may be on the premises at any one time, and
no stock-in-trade or commodity shall be sold upon the premises as in a
sales outlet.
E. Family day-care homes, in accordance with § 315-241.
F. Accessory parking for uses permitted in the MU District.
§ 315-101 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-102
305:913
§ 315-103. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
§ 315-104. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Mixed Use
District are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-105. General requirements.
G. Satellite communications dish receiving antennas, provided that the
dish antenna is located only in a rear yard area and does not exceed 15
feet in height, measured from the ground level at the installation
location. Roof installations may be permitted only if the dish antenna is
not visible from the street frontage.
H. Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the total area of the
shelter does not exceed 24 square feet.
I. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV (§ 315-191 et seq.).
J. Unroofed exterior accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted
residential uses, such as, but not limited to, patios, decks and child play
facilities, in accordance with Article XXX (§ 315-230 et seq.).
A. Public utility uses.
B. Health care facility.
C. Schools.
D. Churches.
E. Parking lot.
F. Funeral parlor.
G. Nursing home.
H. Restaurant, retail and personal services uses.
I. Telecommunications facilities.
A. Permitted uses shall comply with the parking requirements of Article
XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.).
B. The parking of vehicles on front or side yards in front of the front
building line is prohibited, except in enclosed garages, and in
compliance with the requirements of § 315-180.
C. When a garage door is proposed to be located on the front facade of a
residential structure, such door must be incorporated into the ground
floor facade in such a manner as to provide for the appearance of
§ 315-102 TRENTON CODE § 315-105
305:914
residential living space on the ground floor level of the residential
structure.
D. The exterior storage of vehicles, trucks and boats shall comply with the
requirements of § 315-234.
E. Fences and masonry wall shall comply with the requirements of
§ 315-236.
F. When a garage door is proposed to be located on the front facade of a
residential structure, the residential structure must be at least 20 feet
wide and the garage door must not comprise more than 40% of the
front facade. Such door must be incorporated into the ground floor
facade in such a manner as to provide the appearance of residential
living space on the ground floor level.
§ 315-105 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-105
305:915

ARTICLE XVII
Business A District
§ 315-106. Principal permitted uses.
Business A Districts generally comprise the central shopping areas and are
primarily designed for the conduct of retail trade and general business.
More than one use may be designed to occupy one building. Buildings
and other structures and uses permitted therein are all those permitted
in the Residence and Mixed Use Zone Districts, retail sales and services,
professional and business offices, restaurants, hotels of 100 rooms or more,
theaters and multistory parking garages and related uses, except the
following, which are specifically prohibited:
§ 315-107. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
A. Any process of manufacture, assembly or treatment which is not clearly
incidental to a retail business conducted on the premises or which
normally constitutes a nuisance by reason of odor, noise, dust or smoke,
and any use prohibited in the industrial zone districts.
B. Laundromats.
C. Warehousing, lumber and outdoor storage yards.
D. Motor vehicle service stations, car washes and motor vehicle repair
shops.
E. Drive-through establishments.
F. Billiard parlors and pool halls.
G. Bowling alleys utilizing street frontage.
H. Business establishments having more than three pinball machines or
mechanical or electronic amusement devices, exclusive of
establishments licensed under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage
Act (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.).
I. Animal pounds and kennels.
J. Surface parking lots.
K. Auto sales and services.
L. Motels.
A. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV (§ 315-191 et seq.).
B. Accessory surface parking lots not exceeding two spaces, or up to five
spaces if screened from street view.
C. Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal uses.
§ 315-106 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-108
305:917
§ 315-108. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
§ 315-109. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Industrial A
District are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-110. General requirements.
There is no parking requirement unless an office or residential development
exceeds 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. [See Article XXIV (§ 315-178
et seq.).]
A. Churches.
B. Clubhouse.
C. Funeral parlor.
D. Telecommunications facilities.
§ 315-108 TRENTON CODE § 315-110
305:918
ARTICLE XVIII
Downtown District
§ 315-111. Principal permitted uses.
The designation "Downtown District" shall apply to an area which has been
designated on the City's Zoning Map as a Downtown District.116 Except as
provided hereinbelow, the permitted uses, yard and height requirements,
and bulk standards within the Downtown District (DD) are all of those
permitted within Business A Districts. In addition to design standards which
apply to this district, street-level use in the Downtown District is restricted
to retail sales, restaurants and personal customer services. Residential uses
may be located above such street-level uses in the Downtown District.
§ 315-112. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal uses.
§ 315-113. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
§ 315-114. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Downtown
District are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-115. General design guidelines.
A. Telecommunications facilities.
A. Purpose. It is the intention of this section to encourage property owners
to maintain their properties in such a manner as to create within the
Downtown District a coordinated and aesthetically attractive
composition of building facades.
B. Building line. The existing building line, at the street line, should be
maintained, unless a proposed setback is part of a larger development
plan or is part of a functional open space plan acceptable to the
Planning Board at site plan review.
C. Storefront treatment. If several storefronts are located in one building,
they should be unified in design treatment; i.e., design of windows and
door openings, signage, use of materials and color. All storefronts shall
include display windows with a sill height not more than two feet from
grade.
D. Facade renovations.
116. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 315-111 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-115
305:919
(1) Facade renovations should not destroy or cover original details on a
building. Brick and stone facades should not be covered in artificial
siding or panels.
(2) Natural, unpainted brick should be retained. Already painted brick,
if weathered and losing its paint finish, can be stripped using
chemical solutions.
(3) Roof cornices should be retained, repaired or replaced. When
replacing windows on a facade, windows and window trim of the
same size and character as the original should be used.
(4) Building materials should be compatible with the predominant
materials of adjacent buildings. Facade renovations should include
as few new or different materials as possible.
(5) Roof shape should remain original, and construction materials
should be architecturally compatible with the rest of the building
and should reflect the area pattern.
E. Paint and metal finish.
(1) No bare metal is permitted. Metal may be bronzed, iodized or
painted with the recommended color to be approved by the Trenton
Downtown Association (TDA), the downtown district management
corporation of the City.
(2) Only approved colors for exterior paints may be used. Accent or
complementary colors harmonizing with the main color may be
used for trim or awnings.
F. Awnings and canopies.
(1) Awnings and canopies should be solid or striped canvas in colors
recommended for exterior paints. Solid colored awnings and
canopies may include lettering on the portion parallel to the street.
(2) No awning or canopy shall extend more than five feet over the
building line.
(3) No awning or canopy shall be less than eight feet above the
sidewalk.
(4) No awning or canopy shall be closer than one foot to the bottom sill
of windows above the first floor, nor higher than the bottom of the
cornice trim at the first-floor level.
(5) All awnings and canopies shall be constructed and installed so that
the frame and fabric are of integral design. No supports shall
extend to the ground in the public right-of-way.
G. Marquees.
§ 315-115 TRENTON CODE § 315-115
305:920
(1) All marquees shall be installed so that the method of installation is
concealed or made an integral part of the design of the canopy. No
supports for the marquee shall extend to the ground in the public
right-of-way.
(2) No marquee shall extend more than five feet over the front building
line.
(3) No part of the marquee shall be less than 10 feet above the
sidewalk, or closer than one foot to the top of the sill of the first
level of windows above the first floor, nor higher than the bottom of
the cornice trim at the first-floor level.
(4) The marquee shall not extend beyond the width of the property nor
exceed 18 inches in vertical overall construction.
H. Signage.
(1) The only signs permitted in the Downtown District will be signs
attached to buildings. Freestanding signs are prohibited.
(2) A hanging sign projecting more than 12 inches from the wall
surface must be made of wood, have a maximum five-foot
projection from the wall surface and measure a maximum of 12
square feet in total area. The sign must be well maintained and
professionally prepared.
(3) All other signs may be of wood, metal, plastic or painted lettering
on glass, and must be installed flush to the wall surface. The
preferred signable area is the horizontal length between the first
and second floors of the building.
(4) Installation of a sign by individual letters or devices cut into or
securely fastened to the exterior wall of a building is permitted,
provided that such letters have a minimum depth or projection of 1/
4 inch.
(5) Sign lighting should be indirect or external to the sign, except in
the case of interior backlit signs. No flashing, blinking or colored
lights are permitted.
(6) The bottom of a sign attached to the building must be no closer
than one foot to the top of the ground floor window, and its top must
extend no higher than whichever of the following is the lowest:
(a) Eighteen feet above the ground.
(b) One foot below the top of the sill of the first level of windows
above the first floor.
(c) The cornice line of the building.
(7) No sign or billboard shall be on top of a building.
§ 315-115 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-115
305:921
(8) No window sign may exceed 30% of the total glass area of the
window or door.
(9) All signs attached to the building and all signs in a ground floor
window shall not be, individually or in the aggregate, larger in
square footage than the square footage derived by multiplying 2 1/
2 times the width of the frontage occupied by the business, with a
maximum of 2 1/2 feet in height.
(10) All rectangular signs shall be of a proportion with the width greater
than the height.
(11)No product/brand sign shall be attached to, or project from, the
building unless this trademark represents the principal business
conducted.
(12) Regulations for temporary construction signs and other related
sign issues not dealt with specifically in this section are listed in
Article XXV (§ 315-191 et seq.).
I. Review of general design guidelines.
(1) Preliminary site plan, variance, conditional use or other
applications for the Downtown District shall be presented to the
Trenton Downtown Association (TDA) for design review and
recommendations to either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, before the public hearing.
(2) Those Downtown District applications to the Building Inspector not
requiring either Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
review shall be presented to TDA for design review. If TDA
approves the application, the Building Inspector shall proceed as
usual. In the case of a denial of an application for approval by TDA
and the applicant's rejection of TDA's recommendations, the
applicant shall be entitled to exercise his/her rights to apply to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment for a variance and to reapply to the
Building Inspector on the basis of a new application.
(3) An applicant shall be entitled to seek relief from the strict
application of any standard or requirement imposed by this
subsection, provided that:
(a) An exemption from the strict application of any such standard
is necessary to avoid hardship relating to expense associated
with structural alterations or other building modifications
necessary to achieve compliance with such standards; or
(b) The exemption relates to a fixture regulated by this subsection,
the design or location of which constitutes an element of an
overall plan or proposal for the design or redesign of the
structure or facade thereof; or
§ 315-115 TRENTON CODE § 315-115
305:922
§ 315-116. General requirements.
(c) The relaxation or modification of the standards would not
subvert the intent and purpose of this subsection by
substantially detracting from the aesthetic design and
composition among the properties within the Downtown
District which is intended to be coordinated, maintained and
preserved by this subsection.
A. Permitted uses shall comply with the parking requirements enumerated
in Article XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.).
B. Merchandise displays are limited to an extension of three feet from the
building line. In the case of large displays, a permit from TDA is
required.
§ 315-115 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-116
305:923

ARTICLE XIX
Business B District
§ 315-117. Principal permitted uses.
§ 315-118. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
A. Business B Districts generally comprise retail and personal service
shopping areas and are primarily designed for neighborhood shopping
and business convenience. Principal buildings and other structures and
uses permitted and prohibited therein shall be the same as for Business
A Districts, except for the following uses which are prohibited in a
Business A zoned district but shall be permitted in the Business B zoned
district:
(1) Surface parking lots.
(2) Dance halls and skating rinks.
(3) Bowling alleys.
(4) Laundromats, self-service or with service attendants.
B. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
(1) Any process of manufacture, assembly or treatment which is not
clearly incidental to a retail business conducted on the premises or
which normally constitutes a nuisance by reason of odor, noise,
dust or smoke, and any use prohibited in the industrial zone
district.
(2) Animal pounds and kennels.
(3) Warehousing, lumber and outdoor storage yards.
(4) Motor vehicle service stations, car washes and motor vehicle repair
shops.
(5) Drive-through establishments.
(6) Billiard parlors and pool halls.
(7) Auto sales and services.
(8) Motels.
(9) Business establishments having more than three pinball machines
or mechanical or electronic amusement devices, exclusive of City
licensing or Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
(10) Convenience food stores over 2,000 gross square feet.
A. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV (§ 315-191 et seq.).
B. Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal uses.
§ 315-117 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-119
305:925
§ 315-119. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
§ 315-120. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Business B
District are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-121. General requirements.
Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be provided for
all new construction or additions, as required in Article XXIV (§ 315-178).
A. Churches.
B. Clubhouse.
C. Funeral parlor.
D. Schools.
E. Health care facility.
F. Telecommunications facilities.
§ 315-119 TRENTON CODE § 315-121
305:926
ARTICLE XX
Industrial A District
§ 315-122. Principal permitted uses.
A. The Industrial A (IA) District is for light manufacturing and heavy
commercial usage. The following uses are permitted in the IA District:
(1) Commercial warehouses.
(2) Lumber and building material storage yards.
(3) Repair and machine shops.
(4) Bottling works and bakeries.
(5) Wholesale markets.
(6) Processes of assembly, manufacture or treatment.
B. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
(1) Any residential building or use; provided, however, that a single
residential dwelling unit shall be permitted within an industrial
building, where such dwelling is incident to the existing industrial
use of the building. A dwelling unit is incident to the existing
industrial use if the dwelling is occupied by the owner of the
building, by a member of the owner's family or by an employee of
the owner whose presence on the premises is necessary for the
operation or security at the building.
(2) Coal yards.
(3) Laundries, institutional.
(4) Cleaning and dye works.
(5) Storage of autos and trucks, except as ancillary to a permitted use.
(6) Trucking terminals and motor freight stations.
(7) The servicing and repairing of motor vehicles, except as ancillary to
a permitted use.
(8) Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment constituting a
nuisance by reason of smoke, odor, dust or noise and including, but
not limited to, such things as the manufacture or refining of
asphalt, blast furnaces, the manufacturing or processing of
fertilizer, glue or gelatin, the tanning and storage of raw hides and
skins, and the manufacture of paint, oil and varnish.
(9) Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment constituting a
hazardous use, including, but not limited to, such things as the
manufacture or storage of fireworks, explosives or poisonous gas,
and the storage of any gas, except as may be incidental and
§ 315-122 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-122
305:927
§ 315-123. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
§ 315-124. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
§ 315-125. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Industrial A
District are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-126. General requirements.
essential to a permitted industrial process conducted on the
premises.
(10) Stockyards and slaughterhouses.
(11) Foundries, forge shops and boiler works.
(12) Junkyards and automobile disassembly plants, storage of wrecked
cars and auto salvage parts and the storage of used materials for
resale or recycling.
(13) Fossil fuel generation of power, except when it may be incidental
and essential to a permitted industrial process conducted on the
premises.
(14) The storage of crude oil or any of its volatile products or other
flammable liquids in aboveground tanks with unit capacity greater
than 10,000 gallons, and in aboveground tanks with unit capacity
greater than 500 gallons closer than 50 feet to any property line.
A. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV (§ 315-191 et seq.).
B. Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal uses.
A. Telecommunications facilities.
B. Billboards, where the advertising area, including any trim, exceeds 300
square feet and is no more than 672 square feet.
A. In Industrial A Districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be provided for all new construction or additions, as
provided for in Article XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.).
B. Front yards of all properties must be landscaped, including trees,
bushes and grass in accordance with § 315-210.
C. In Industrial A Districts, it shall be the obligation of prospective users to
demonstrate, if required, that the applicable performance standards of
this chapter can be met. (Refer to § 315-216.)
§ 315-122 TRENTON CODE § 315-126
305:928
ARTICLE XXI
Industrial B District
§ 315-127. Principal permitted uses.
The Industrial B Districts are for heavy industrial uses. Principal buildings
and other structures and uses permitted therein are all those permitted in
the Industrial A Districts and all similar uses, except for the following, which
are specifically prohibited:
§ 315-128. Permitted accessory buildings and uses.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal uses.
§ 315-129. Permitted conditional uses.
[Refer to Article XXII (§ 315-132 et seq.).]
A. Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment constituting a
nuisance by reason of smoke, odor, dust or noise and including, but not
limited to, such things as the manufacture or refining of asphalt, blast
furnaces, the manufacturing or processing of fertilizer, glue or gelatin,
the tanning and storage of raw hides and skins, slaughterhouses and
the manufacture of paint, oil and varnish.
B. Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment constituting a
hazardous use, including, but not limited to, such things as the
manufacture or storage of fireworks and explosives and the
manufacture or storage of gas or poisonous gases, except as may be
necessary and incidental to a permitted industrial process.
C. The storage of crude oil or any of its volatile products or other
flammable liquids in aboveground tanks with a unit capacity greater
than 10,000 gallons, and in aboveground tanks with a unit capacity
greater than 500 gallons closer than 50 feet to any property lines.
D. Junkyards, automobile disassembly plants, storage of wrecked vehicles,
auto salvage parts and the storage of used materials for resale or
recycling.
E. Residential buildings and uses; provided, however, that a single
residential dwelling unit shall be permitted within an industrial building
where such dwelling is incident to the existing industrial use of the
building. A dwelling unit is incident to the existing industrial use if the
dwelling is occupied by the owner of the building, by a member of the
owner's family or by an employee of the owner whose presence on the
premises is necessary for the operation or security at the building.
F. The servicing, storage and repairing of motor vehicles, except as
ancillary to a permitted use.
A. Telecommunications facilities.
§ 315-127 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-129
305:929
§ 315-130. Lot size, area, yard and building requirements.
[The lot size, area, yard and building requirements for the Industrial B
District are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 315-131. General requirements.
B. Sexually oriented business.
C. Billboards, where the advertising area, including any trim, exceeds 300
square feet and is no more than 672 square feet.
A. In Industrial B Districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be provided for all new construction or additions, as
provided for in Article XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.).
B. In Industrial B Districts, it shall be the obligation of the prospective
user to demonstrate, if required, that the applicable performance
standards of this chapter can be met. (Refer to § 315-216.)
C. Front yards of all properties must be landscaped, including trees,
bushes and grass in accordance with § 315-210.
§ 315-129 TRENTON CODE § 315-131
305:930
ARTICLE XXII
Conditional Uses
§ 315-132. Purpose and scope.
§ 315-133. Guiding principles.
In making its decision on an application for a conditional use, the Board
shall take no action which will be detrimental to the public welfare or which
will substantially impair the intent or purpose of this chapter. The Board
may attach such terms and conditions to an approval of such applicant if, in
its judgment, it will preserve the public welfare or such intent or purpose
and shall be guided by the following principles:
A. The purpose of this article is to set forth the requirements and
procedures applicable to conditional uses, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67. A conditional use shall not be approved on any site unless
such use is specifically permitted as a conditional use in the zone for
which it is proposed.
B. Before a construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for any conditional use, as permitted by this chapter, application shall
be made to the Planning Board. The review by the Planning Board of a
conditional use shall include any required site plan review.
A. The proposed use will not be detrimental to the character of the
neighborhood.
B. The proposed use does not affect adversely the general plans for the
physical development of the City, as embodied in this chapter and in any
Master Plan, or portion thereof.
C. The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of
adjacent properties or the general neighborhood.
D. The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses.
E. Suitability of the use and/or proposed structure to its environment and
location considering the general use of the structure, neighboring land
uses, the surrounding open space and treatment of adjacent properties.
F. Adequacy of provisions of off-street automobile parking, storage of
loading space, and adequacy of neighboring street capacity relating to
increased traffic and congestion due to proposed use.
G. That the use will not be contrary to the general character of the
neighborhood or public interest and will not materially increase fire
hazards or other danger, nor be injurious to the health, morals or
general welfare of the neighboring communities.
§ 315-132 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-134
305:931
§ 315-134. Compliance required.
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the Planning
Board shall not approve an application for a conditional use unless the
requirements for the particular use, as set forth below, shall have been met.
All other applicable regulations for the zone district in which the conditional
use is permitted must also be met.
§ 315-135. Sexually oriented business.
Intent and purpose. In the development and execution of this article, it is
recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature,
are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics.
It has been determined that strict control and regulation of these uses is
required to ensure their operation is maintained in compliance with the
law for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the people of Trenton and to prevent their contributing to
the blighting and downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term "adult establishment" shall be defined as
set forth in Article I, § 315-10 et seq.
§ 315-136. Billboards.
A. This use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the
site of an existing adult establishment.
B. This use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a residential or mixeduse
district, church school, school bus stop, municipal or county
playground, place of public resort and recreation, hospital, child-care
center or public building.
C. Every adult establishment shall be surrounded by a perimeter buffer of
at least 50 feet in width with plantings, fence or other physical divider
along the outside of the perimeter sufficient to impede the view of the
interior of the premises on which the business is located.
D. No adult establishment shall display more than two exterior signs,
consisting of one identification sign and one sign giving notice that the
premises is off limits to minors. The identification sign shall be no more
than 40 square feet in size.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, a billboard is a conditional use if:
(1) Its advertising area, including any trim, exceeds 300 square feet
and is no more than 672 square feet in size; or
(2) It is located within 500 feet from a residential or mixed-use district.
B. For billboards where the advertising area, including any trim, exceeds
300 feet and is no more than 672 square feet, the following conditions
shall apply:
§ 315-134 TRENTON CODE § 315-136
305:932
§ 315-137. Churches.
§ 315-138. Clubhouse.
(1) Such billboard shall be located to show only to a limited-access
highway, per NJ DOT outdoor advertising standards.
(2) The maximum vertical length of the billboard shall not exceed 14
feet.
(3) The maximum horizontal length of the billboard shall not exceed 48
feet.
(4) Billboards shall be spaced no less than 1,500 feet apart.
(5) Such billboard shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
(6) Such billboard shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from
residential or mixed-use districts.
(7) A landscape buffer plan must be provided.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "churches" shall include any
religious institution serving a congregation or membership.
B. Permitted accessory uses include:
(1) Staff residences.
(2) Off-street parking.
(3) Religious classes.
C. The proposed use shall comply with the bulk requirements for the zone
in which it is located, with the exception of building height, which may,
at the discretion of the Planning Board, be increased to allow for a
church steeple or bell tower. Allowable height shall be determined
based on an analysis of viewsheds and shadows to be provided by the
applicant. Such church steeple or bell tower shall not exceed 15% of the
total floor area of the structure.
D. All off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space for each
four seats, or equivalent, plus spaces for permitted accessory uses, as
determined at the time of site plan review. These requirements may be
reduced upon submission by the applicant of acceptable proofs as to
specific need requirements.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "clubhouse" shall include a
social club, meeting hall or community center, not organized or
conducted for profit, and which is not an adjunct to or operated by or in
conjunction with a public tavern, cafe or other place of business.
B. The proposed use shall comply with the bulk requirements for the zone
in which it is to be located.
§ 315-136 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-138
305:933
§ 315-139. Day-care/child-care center.
§ 315-140. Funeral homes.
C. Off-street parking for new construction or for expansion of existing
facilities shall be provided at the rate of one space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area. The above requirements may be reduced upon
submission by the applicant of acceptable proof as to specific need
requirements.
D. A clubhouse shall have the following permitted hours of operation:
(1) Sunday through Thursday: 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(2) Friday and Saturday: 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "day-care/child-care center"
is defined as a state licensed facility providing for the care of six or
more preschool children or elderly persons, without provision of
overnight facilities.
B. Submission of proof of compliance with applicable state agency
requirements, and compliance with all provisions of applicable health
and construction codes shall be required.
C. A safe outdoor play area for children must be provided for by the daycare/
child-care center, with a fence between property lines and a
planted buffer between neighboring residential uses.
D. When located in a residential zone, the following additional
requirements shall be met:
(1) The day-care/child-care center shall maintain a residential
appearance and shall be substantially similar to existing
surrounding residential development.
(2) When located in or abutting a residential zone, a minimum five-foot
planted buffer around the perimeter of the children's play area
shall be provided.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided, as determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review, based on applicant testimony as to
specific need requirements.
F. Adequate provision for the safe loading and unloading of elderly
persons or children must be provided for, as determined by the
Planning Board during site plan review.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "funeral home" shall include a
building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and for
ceremonies prior to burial.
§ 315-138 TRENTON CODE § 315-140
305:934
§ 315-141. Health care facility.
B. All zoning requirements of the zone in which the funeral home is to be
located shall be met.
C. Funeral homes in residential zones shall maintain a residential
appearance and shall be substantially similar to existing surrounding
residential development.
D. Submission of proof of licensing by the applicable state agency and
compliance with all provisions of applicable health codes shall be met.
E. One parking space for each four seats of capacity, plus one parking
space for each resident family, and one parking space for each funeral
vehicle shall be provided. These requirements may be reduced upon
submission by the applicant of acceptable proofs as to specific need
requirements.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "health care facility" shall
include hospitals, clinics, health maintenance organizations (HMOs)
and other public or private institutions, offices or facilities principally
engaged in providing services for health maintenance, counseling,
diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or
physical condition. Excluded from this definition are nursing homes,
animal research facilities, drug or alcohol rehabilitation centers, and
the joint offices of physicians numbering five physicians or fewer.
B. Permitted accessory uses include:
(1) Labs incidental to permitted use.
(2) Outpatient departments.
(3) Training facilities.
(4) Management offices.
(5) Medical staff residences.
(6) Off-street parking.
(7) Staff recreational facilities.
C. Bulk standards for new construction shall correspond to the zoning
district in which the proposed use is located.
D. A landscaped buffer of at least 10 feet in width shall be provided within
all minimum property line setback areas.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XXIV
(§ 315-178 et seq.).
F. Loading space requirements shall be determined at time of site plan
review.
§ 315-140 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-141
305:935
§ 315-142. Nursing home.
§ 315-143. Parking lot.
§ 315-144. Public utility uses.
G. All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall be met.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "nursing home" shall include
public or private institutions or facilities principally engaged in
providing full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by
reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care
for themselves.
B. Bulk standards shall conform to zone requirements.
C. All construction shall maintain a residential appearance.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review, based on applicant testimony as to
specific need requirements.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "parking lot" shall include
any automobile surface parking lot located on land directly adjoining a
business or industrial district and extending continuously not more
than 200 feet therefrom.
B. No occupied portion of such parking lot shall extend into a required
front yard or extend closer to a residential side or rear property line
than 10 feet.
C. Where directly abutting upon a residential property or properties, the
borders of such parking lot shall provide a densely planted landscape
screen for a depth of not less than 10 feet.
D. All parking lots shall be paved and drained in accordance with City
standards.
E. The demolition of a structurally sound residential structure to create a
parking lot under this section is prohibited.
F. Shade trees shall be provided in the ratio of one tree for each 10 spaces.
G. A wall, fence or planting, or combination thereof, between three feet
and four feet in height, shall be provided between the parking lot and
any street front right-of-way line, except where a building intervenes.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "public utility uses" shall
include such uses as telephone dial equipment centers, power
substations and other utilities serving the public, but shall exclude
dumps, sanitary landfills, sewage treatment plants and service or
storage yards.
§ 315-141 TRENTON CODE § 315-144
305:936
§ 315-145. Restaurant and retail trade uses.
§ 315-146. Schools.
B. The proposed installation in a specific location must be reasonably
necessary for the satisfactory provision of service by the utility to the
neighborhood or area in which the particular use is located.
C. The design of any building in connection with such facilities must not
adversely affect the safe, comfortable enjoyment of property rights in
the surrounding area and shall not create a visual intrusion.
D. Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as may be
required. Fences, when used to enclose public utility facilities such as
electrical power substations, shall be built in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the New Jersey Board of Public Utility
Commissioners and the National Electrical Code in effect at the time of
construction.
E. Landscaping requirements shall be determined at the time of the site
plan review and at minimum shall provide for appropriate screening.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review, based on applicant testimony as to
specific need requirements.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "restaurant and retail trade
uses" shall include restaurants which do not provide food items for offpremises
consumption, retail establishments engaged primarily in
selling merchandise for personal or household use, and barbershops
and beauty parlors, but excluding the sale of intoxicating liquors.
B. Restaurant and retail trade uses may only be located on the ground
floor of a multistory building which is primarily residential or office use,
based on total gross floor area.
C. All external aspects of restaurant and retail trade uses, such as, but not
limited to, access, parking, signage and lighting, shall be designed to be
compatible with adjoining residential uses.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided for all building uses in accordance
with the standards of Article XXIV (§ 315-178 et seq.).
E. All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall be met.
A. For purposes of this section, the term "schools" shall include
institutions of higher learning, which are not conducted as a business,
and may include living and dining facilities for faculty and students.
B. Bulk standards shall correspond to the zoning district in which the
proposed use is located.
C. Sufficient open space shall be provided for recreational use by students.
§ 315-144 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-146
305:937
§ 315-147. Telecommunications facilities.
Refer to Article XXIII (§ 315-148 et seq.) for conditional use permit
requirements for telecommunications facilities.
D. A landscaped buffer and fencing shall be provided where school
property borders on adjacent residential use.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XXIV
(§ 315-178 et seq.).
§ 315-146 TRENTON CODE § 315-147
305:938
ARTICLE XXIII
Telecommunications Facilities
§ 315-148. Purpose and legislative Intent.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of Trenton's
authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities. The City Council finds that wireless
telecommunications facilities and related equipment may pose unique
impacts upon the public health, safety and welfare and environment of
the City and its inhabitants and may have other adverse impacts, visual
and otherwise, upon the community, its character and thus the quality of
life in the City. The intent of this article is to ensure that the placement,
construction or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities and
related equipment is consistent with the City's land use policies and
ordinances; to minimize the negative and adverse visual impact of wireless
telecommunications facilities; to assure a comprehensive review of
environmental impacts of such facilities; to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the City of Trenton; and to encourage shared use of wireless
telecommunications facilities.
§ 315-149. Definitions and word usage.
For purposes of this article, the defined terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this
section.
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — A facility or structure serving or
being used in conjunction with a telecommunications facility and located on
the same property or lot as the telecommunications facility, including, but
not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency signals. Such waves shall
include, but not be limited to, radio, television, cellular, paging, personal
telecommunications services (PCS) and microwave telecommunications.
APPLICATION — The form approved by the Planning Board, together with
all necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant submits in
order to receive a conditional use permit for a telecommunications facility.
APPLIED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — An antenna
array that is applied or attached to a building or structure with any
accompanying pole or device that attaches the antenna array to the building
or structure and connection cables.
BREAK POINT — The location on a telecommunications tower which, in the
event of a failure of the tower, would result in the tower falling or collapsing
within the boundaries of the property on which the tower is placed.
CITY — The City of Trenton, New Jersey.
§ 315-148 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-149
305:939
CO-LOCATION — The use of the same structure or telecommunications
tower to carry two or more antennas for the provision of wireless services
by two or more persons or entities.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE
— Shall have the meaning in this article and any conditional use permit
granted hereunder as is defined and applied under the United States
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — The official document or permit by which
an applicant is allowed to construct and use a wireless telecommunications
facility as granted or issued by the City.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated
and authorized successor agency.
FREESTANDING TOWER — Any structure that is specifically designed
for the purpose of supporting a wireless telecommunications device. This
definition shall include monopoles and self-supporting and guyed towers.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured
from the grade level existing prior to construction of a tower or if an
existing structure, the grade level existing prior to application to place a
wireless telecommunications antenna to the highest point on the tower or
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, jointstock
company, association of two or more persons having a joint common
interest, or governmental entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See the definition for "wireless
telecommunications facility."
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES (PWS) or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE (PCS) (or any functionally equivalent
service or technology that may be developed in the future) — Shall have the
same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
SITE — See the definition for "wireless telecommunications facility."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of audio,
video, data and other information by wire, radio frequency, light and other
electronic or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — Any structure used in,
associated with or necessary for the provision of wireless services and as
described in the definition of "wireless telecommunications facility."
TEMPORARY — In relation to all aspects and components of this article, less
than 90 days.
§ 315-149 TRENTON CODE § 315-149
305:940
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, TOWER, SITE OR
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY (or any functionally equivalent service
or technology that may be developed in the future) — A structure or
location designed or intended to be used or used to support antennas. It
includes, without limit, antennas applied to the facade of a building or
roof-mounted antennas, freestanding towers, guyed towers, monopoles and
similar structures that employ camouflage technology, and including, but
not limited to, structures such as a church steeple, water tower, flagpole,
sign or other similar structures intended to mitigate the visual impact of
an antenna or the functional equivalent of such. It is a facility or structure
intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging
or personal telecommunications services or microwave
telecommunications, but excluding those used exclusively for fire, police
and other dispatch telecommunications or exclusively for private radio and
television reception and private citizens bands, amateur radios and other
similar telecommunications.
§ 315-150. Overall policy and desired goals for conditional use
permit.
A. In order to ensure that the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities conforms to the City's purpose
and intent of this article, the City Council creates a conditional use
permit for a wireless telecommunications facility. It shall be a violation
of this article to erect, construct, replace or modify a wireless
telecommunications facility within the City of Trenton without first
obtaining a conditional use permit.
B. Any conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility
issued shall, to the greatest extent possible, conform to the following
goals:
(1) Establish a policy for examining an application for and issuing a
conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility
that is both fair and consistent.
(2) Establish reasonable time frames for granting or not granting a
conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility or
recertifying or revoking the conditional use permit granted under
this article.
(3) Promote and encourage, wherever possible, the sharing and/or colocation
of a wireless telecommunications facility among service
providers.
(4) Promote and encourage, wherever possible, the placement of a
wireless telecommunications facility in such a manner as to cause
minimal disruption to the land, property, buildings and other
facilities adjacent to, surrounding and in generally the same area
as the requested location of such a wireless telecommunications
§ 315-149 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-150
305:941
§ 315-151. Conditional use permit application and other
requirements.
facility and to minimize adverse aesthetic impacts to the
community.
A. All applicants for a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility or any modification of such facility shall
comply with the requirements set forth in this section.
B. All applicants for a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall submit an application to the
Department of Housing and Economic Development's Planning Division
on forms prepared by the City of Trenton. An application for a wireless
telecommunications facility, as defined in this section, shall be directed
by the Planning Staff to the Planning Board for review and approval.
C. An application for a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall be made by the person or entity which
will own the wireless telecommunications facility and shall be signed on
behalf of the applicant by the person preparing the same and with
knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and
attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. The
landowner, if different from the applicant, shall also sign the
application. At the discretion of the Planning Board, any false or
misleading statement in the application may subject the applicant to
denial of the application without further consideration or opportunity
for correction.
D. Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein, or which are
otherwise incomplete, shall be rejected by the Planning Board.
E. The applicant shall include a statement, in writing:
(1) That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facility
will be maintained in a safe manner and in compliance with all
conditions of the conditional use permit, without exception, unless
specifically granted relief by the Planning Board, in writing, as well
as all applicable and permissible local codes, rules and regulations,
including any and all applicable county, state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.
(2) That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facility is
legally permissible, including, but not limited to, the fact that the
applicant is authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
F. No wireless telecommunications facility or tower or other structure
shall be installed or constructed for the purpose of providing wireless
telecommunications service until a plan of the site, including elevation,
is reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.
§ 315-150 TRENTON CODE § 315-151
305:942
G. All applications for the construction or installation of a new wireless
telecommunications facility shall be accompanied by a report
containing the information hereinafter set forth. The report shall be
signed by a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
New Jersey and shall contain the following information. Where this
section calls for certification, such certification shall be by a qualified
State of New Jersey licensed professional engineer, unless otherwise
noted. The application shall include, in addition to the other
requirements for the conditional use permit, the following information:
(1) Documentation that demonstrates the need for the wireless
telecommunications facility to provide service primarily within the
City.
(2) Name and address of the person preparing the report.
(3) Name and address of the property owner, operator and applicant,
to include the legal form of the applicant.
(4) Postal address and Tax Map designation of the property.
(5) Zoning district in which the property is situated.
(6) Size of the property, stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines.
(7) Location of all residential structures within 750 feet in the case of a
freestanding tower and within 250 feet in the case of all other
wireless telecommunications facility applications.
(8) Location of all schools and habitable structures within 750 feet in
the case of a freestanding tower and within 250 feet in the case of
all other wireless telecommunications facility applications.
(9) Location of all structures on the property which is the subject of the
application.
(10) Location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas and
all appurtenant structures.
(11) Type, size and location of all proposed and existing landscaping.
(12) The number, type and design of the wireless telecommunications
facility's antenna(s) proposed and the basis for the calculations of
the wireless telecommunications facility's capacity to
accommodate multiple users.
(13) The make, model and manufacturer of the wireless facility and
antenna(s).
(14) A description of the proposed wireless facility and antenna(s) and
all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above preexisting grade, materials, color and
lighting.
§ 315-151 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-151
305:943
(15) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment.
(16) Transmission and maximum effective radiated power of the
antenna(s).
(17) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s).
(18) The applicant's proposed wireless facility maintenance and
inspection procedures and related system of records.
(19) Certification that NIER levels at the proposed site are within the
threshold levels adopted by the FCC.
(20) Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with existing telecommunications devices.
(21) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the use of the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(22) Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and
analysis has been conducted and, taking into account the
subsurface and substrata and the proposed drainage plan, that the
site is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower on the proposed site.
(23) Propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining proposed
or in-service or existing sites.
(24) The applicant shall disclose, in writing, any agreement in existence
prior to submission of the application that would limit or preclude
the ability of the applicant to share any new wireless
telecommunications facility that it constructs.
H. In the case of a new wireless telecommunications facility, the applicant
shall be required to submit a report demonstrating its efforts to secure
shared use of existing wireless telecommunications facilities. Copies of
written requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to the
Planning Board.
I. Certification that the wireless telecommunications facility, accessory
facilities and structures, and attachments are designed and constructed
(as built) to meet all county, state and federal structural requirements
for loads, including wind and ice loads.
J. After construction certification that the wireless telecommunications
facility and related facilities are grounded and bonded so as to protect
persons and property and installed with appropriate surge protectors.
K. A visual impact assessment, which shall, at the Planning Board's
request, include:
§ 315-151 TRENTON CODE § 315-151
305:944
(1) A "zone of visibility" map, which shall be provided in order to
determine locations where the facility may be seen.
(2) Computer-generated pictorial representations of "before" and
"after" views from key viewpoints to be determined by the Planning
Board, including, but not limited to, state highways and other major
roads, state and local parks, other public lands, historic districts,
preserves and historic sites normally open to the public, and from
any other location where the site is visible to a large number of
visitors or travelers. The Planning Board will provide guidance
concerning the appropriate key sites at a preapplication meeting.
(3) An assessment of the visual impact of the facility base, guy wires
and accessory structures from abutting and adjacent properties
and streets.
L. The applicant shall, in a manner approved by the Planning Board,
demonstrate and provide, in writing and/or by drawing, how it shall
effectively screen from view its proposed wireless telecommunications
facility base and all accessory facilities and structures, subject to
approval by the Planning Board.
M. All utilities serving any wireless telecommunications facility site shall
be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, rules and
regulations of the City, including, specifically, but not limited to, the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where
appropriate. The Planning Board may waive or vary the requirements of
underground installation of utilities whenever, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, such waiver or variance shall not be detrimental to the
health, safety, general welfare or environment, including the visual and
scenic characteristics of the area.
N. All applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities and accessory
facilities and structures shall demonstrate that the facility be sited so as
to have the least possible adverse visual effect on the environment and
its character and on the residences in the area of the wireless
telecommunications facility site.
O. Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory
or associated facilities and structures shall maximize the use of building
materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to
which it may be affixed and with the natural surroundings.
P. An access road and parking to assure adequate emergency and service
access shall be provided, should such be deemed necessary by the
Planning Board. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or
private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall
at all times minimize ground disturbance and vegetation-cutting. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and reduce soil erosion potential.
§ 315-151 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-151
305:945
Q. A person who holds a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall construct, operate, maintain, repair,
modify or restore the permitted wireless telecommunications facility in
strict compliance with all current technical, safety and safety-related
codes and regulations adopted by the City, county, state or United
States, including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code (or
substitute codes), as well as accepted and responsibly workmanlike
industry practices and recommended practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that
include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire,
safety, health and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or
among any of the preceding, the more stringent shall apply.
R. A holder of a conditional use permit granted under this article shall
obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by
applicable law, rule or regulation and must maintain the same, in full
force and effect, for as long as required by the City or other
governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
S. If the applicant is proposing the construction of a freestanding tower,
the applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a tower to
accommodate future demand for at least two additional commercial
applications, e.g., future co-locations. The wireless telecommunications
facility shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least two
additional antenna arrays equal to those of the applicant and located as
close to the applicant's antenna as possible without causing
interference. This requirement may be waived, provided that the
applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared
usage of the wireless telecommunications facility is not technologically
feasible or is commercially impracticable and creates an unnecessary
and unreasonable burden, based upon:
(1) The number of foreseeable FCC licenses available for the area.
(2) The kind of wireless telecommunications facility site and structure
proposed.
(3) The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless
telecommunications facility spaces/sites.
(4) Available space on existing and approved telecommunications
towers.
T. Unless waived by the Planning Board, there shall be a preapplication
meeting. The purpose of the preapplication meeting will be to address
issues which will help to expedite the review and permitting process.
Where the application is for the shared use of an existing
telecommunications tower or other high structure, the applicant can
seek to waive any application requirements that may not be applicable.
At the preapplication meeting, the waiver requests, if appropriate, will
be decided by the City. Costs of the City's attorneys, engineers,
§ 315-151 TRENTON CODE § 315-151
305:946
§ 315-152. Location.
planners and other consultants to prepare for and attend the
preapplication meeting will be borne by the applicant.
U. The holder of a conditional use permit shall notify the Planning Board of
any intended modification of a wireless telecommunications facility and
shall apply to the Planning Board to modify, relocate or rebuild a
wireless telecommunications facility.
A. Location priorities.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Code or any
other local law, wireless telecommunications facilities may be,
subject to the provisions of this article, located in any zoning
district. Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall
locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities,
including towers or other tall structures, in accordance with the
following priorities, No. 1 being the highest priority and No. 7
being the lowest priority:
Priority
RankingLocation
1 Co-location on a site with existing telecommunications
towers or structures containing existing
telecommunications facilities in nonresidential districts
and on nonresidential buildings
2 Existing nonresidential tall structures
3 Industrial or commercial areas
4 Other nonresidential areas
5 Co-location on a site with existing telecommunications
towers or structures containing existing
telecommunications facilities in residential districts
6 Existing residential structures over five stories in height
7 On other property in the City
(2) If the proposed property site is not the highest priority listed above,
then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a
higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an
exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons
why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site and the
hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were
not granted for the proposed site.
(3) An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating that
the site presented is the only site leased or selected. An application
shall address co-location as an option, and if such option is not
proposed, the applicant must explain why co-location is
§ 315-151 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-152
305:947
§ 315-153. Shared use of telecommunications facilities.
commercially or otherwise impractical. Agreements between
providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid
basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship.
(4) Notwithstanding the above, the Planning Board may approve any
site located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided
that the Planning Board finds that the proposed site is in the best
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the City and its
inhabitants.
B. The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the
applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority,
demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If the site
selected is not the highest priority, then a detailed written explanation
as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included
with the application.
C. The applicant shall, in writing, identify and disclose the number and
locations of any additional sites that the applicant has, is or will be
considering, reviewing or planning for wireless telecommunications
facilities in the City, and all municipalities adjoining the City, for a twoyear
period following the date of the application.
D. Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of
highest priority or highest available priority, the Planning Board may
disapprove an application for any of the following reasons:
(1) Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements.
(2) Conflict with traffic needs or traffic laws, or definitive plans for
changes in traffic flow or traffic laws.
(3) Conflict with the historic nature of a neighborhood or historical
district.
(4) The location of a wireless telecommunications facility will be in
such proximity to residences or other noncommercial uses so as to
create an unacceptable impact upon any adjoining property by
virtue of visual or aesthetic impacts and/or by virtue of the impact
of the placement of such a facility upon adjoining property values.
(5) The placement and location of a wireless telecommunications
facility which would create an unacceptable risk, or the probability
of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the City,
or employees of the service provider or other service providers.
(6) Placement of a wireless telecommunications facility, which, by
virtue of its location, would be in conflict with the purpose and
intent of the Zoning Code or Master Plan of the City of Trenton.
§ 315-152 TRENTON CODE § 315-153
305:948
§ 315-154. Height of facilities and antennas.
A. Location of antennas on preexisting wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be considered and preferred. Shared use of existing
telecommunications towers or other existing structures shall be
preferred by the City, as opposed to the proposed construction of new
telecommunications towers or facilities. Where such shared use is
unavailable, the applicant shall submit a comprehensive report which
lists an inventory of existing wireless telecommunications facilities and
other appropriate structures which could be used to support antennas
within four miles of any proposed new wireless telecommunications
facility site, unless the applicant can show that some other distance is
more reasonable, and outlining opportunities for shared use of existing
facilities and the use of other preexisting structures as a preferred
alternative to new construction.
B. An applicant intending to share use of an existing telecommunications
tower or other tall structure shall be required to document the intent of
the existing owner to share use.
C. In the event that an application to share the use of an existing
freestanding telecommunications tower does not increase the height of
the freestanding telecommunications tower, the Planning Board may
waive such requirements of the application required by this article as
may be unnecessary to the review of the application.
D. Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array
technologically required to provide service within the City unless it is
demonstrated that a more extensive antenna array is necessary to fill a
service gap which cannot be filled without erecting additional
freestanding towers or telecommunications structures within the City.
In no event shall an antenna be installed which does not principally
provide service in a manner which fills an existing gap in service within
the City.
A. The applicant must submit documentation demonstrating that the total
height of any wireless telecommunications facility and/or antenna is
necessary to provide service within the City or to otherwise fill a service
gap which cannot be filled in any other reasonable fashion.
B. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be no higher than the
minimum height necessary. Unless waived by the Planning Board upon
good cause shown, the maximum height shall be 100 feet, based on
three co-located antenna arrays and ambient tree height of 70 feet.
C. The maximum height of any wireless telecommunications facility and
attached antennas constructed after the effective date of this article
shall not exceed that which shall permit operation without artificial
lighting of any kind in accordance with municipal, county, state and/or
federal laws and/or regulations.
§ 315-153 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-155
305:949
§ 315-155. Visibility.
§ 315-156. Security against unauthorized access.
All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located,
fenced or otherwise secured in a manner which prevents unauthorized
access. Specifically:
§ 315-157. Signage.
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than
four square feet to provide adequate notification to persons in the
immediate area of the presence of an antenna that has transmission
capabilities. The sign shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and
operator(s) of the antenna(s) as well as emergency telephone number(s).
The sign shall be located so as to be visible from the access point of the site.
No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted on any wireless
telecommunications facilities, antennas, antenna supporting structures or
antenna towers, unless required by law.
§ 315-158. Lot size and setbacks.
A. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or
marked, except as required by law.
B. Telecommunications towers and facilities shall be of a galvanized finish
or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to
harmonize with the surroundings, as approved by the Planning Board,
and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this
article.
C. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for
sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations, and an artist's
rendering or other visual representation showing the effect of light
emanating from the site on neighboring habitable structures within
1,500 feet of all property lines of the parcel on which the wireless
telecommunications facility is located.
A. All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy
wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or
shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or run into.
B. Transmitters and telecommunications control points must be installed
such that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to
operate or service them.
A. All proposed telecommunications towers and associated equipment
shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and
road and street lines a distance sufficient to substantially contain on
site all icefall or debris from a tower or tower failure and to preserve
light, air and privacy of any adjoining properties.
§ 315-155 TRENTON CODE § 315-158
305:950
§ 315-159. Retention of expert assistance; reimbursement by
applicant; deposit required.
§ 315-160. Conditional use permit required; exceptions;
continuation of existing facilities.
B. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located with a minimum
setback from any property line a distance equal to the height of the
facility, plus 10 feet, or the existing setback requirement of the
underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Further, any accessory
structure shall be located so as to comply with the minimum setback
requirements for the property on which it is situated.
C. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, if a wireless
telecommunications facility is placed on an existing building, the
Planning Board may vary the setbacks, provided that the Planning
Board requires that the wireless telecommunications facility be set
back to the maximum extent permitted under the circumstances.
A. The Planning Board may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to
assist in review and evaluation of the application and any requests for
recertification.
B. An applicant shall deposit with the City funds sufficient to reimburse
the City for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and
consultation to the Planning Board in connection with the review of any
application. The initial deposit shall be $7,500 for a facility application
and $5,000 in the case of co-location. These funds shall accompany the
filing of an application, and the City will maintain a separate escrow
account for all such funds. The City's consultants/experts shall bill or
invoice the City no less frequently than monthly for its services in
reviewing the application and performing its duties. If at any time
during the review process the balance of this account falls below
$2,500, additional funds must be submitted to the City to bring the
balance of the account to $7,500, or in the case of co-location, $5,000,
or upon request from the applicant, a lesser amount to be set by the
Planning Board, before any further action or consideration is taken on
the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by the City
is more than the amount of the actual billing or invoicing, the difference
shall be promptly refunded to the applicant.
C. The total amount of the funds set forth in Subsection B of this section
may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the
completeness of the application and other information as may be
needed by the Planning Board or its consultant/expert to complete the
necessary review and analysis. Additional funds, as required, shall be
paid by the applicant. The initial amount of the escrow deposit shall be
established at a preapplication meeting with the City.
A. No person, corporation or other entity shall be permitted to site, place,
build, construct or modify, or prepare any site for the placement or use
§ 315-158 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-160
305:951
§ 315-161. Action on permit applications; notification of applicant.
of, a wireless telecommunications facility as of the effective date of
this article without having first obtained a conditional use permit for a
wireless telecommunications facility. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in this section, no conditional use permit shall be required
for those exceptions noted in the definition of "wireless
telecommunications facility," such as those used exclusively for fire,
police and other dispatch telecommunications or exclusively for private
radio and television reception and private citizens bands, amateur radio
and other similar telecommunications.
B. After the date of adoption of this article all construction, including
routine maintenance on an existing wireless telecommunications
facility, shall comply with the requirements of this article.
C. All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the
effective date of this article shall be allowed to continue as they
presently exist; provided, however, that any modification to existing
facilities must comply with this article.
A. The Planning Board will undertake a review of an application pursuant
to this article in a timely fashion and shall act within a reasonable
period of time given the relative complexity of the application and the
circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be
involved and the applicant's desire for a timely resolution.
B. Except for necessary building permits, no additional permits or
approvals from the City, other than the conditional use permit granted
under this article, shall be required for telecommunications facilities
and telecommunications structures covered by this article.
C. After the public hearing and after formally considering the application,
the Planning Board may approve and issue, approve with conditions, or
deny a conditional use permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall
be based on the record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit
shall always be upon the applicant.
D. If the Planning Board approves the conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility, then the applicant shall be notified of such
approval, in writing, within 10 calendar days of the Board's action, and
the conditional use permit shall be issued within 30 days after such
approval.
E. If the Planning Board denies the conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility, then the applicant shall be notified of such
denial in writing within 10 calendar days of the Board's action.
F. The decision on the application shall also be filed in the office of the City
Clerk within 10 days after it is rendered.
§ 315-160 TRENTON CODE § 315-161
305:952
§ 315-162. Right of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the granting or denial of an application for a
wireless telecommunications facility may take an appeal therefrom to the
Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey within 30 days from the date of
filing of the decision of the Planning Board on the application.
§ 315-163. Recertification of conditional use permits.
G. Upon receipt of the conditional use permit, the applicant shall
thereafter apply for and obtain a building permit from the Building
Department.
A. At least six months prior to the fifth anniversary of the effective date of
the conditional use permit and every five years thereafter, the holder of
a conditional use permit for such facility shall submit a written request
for recertification. In the written request for recertification, the holder
of such conditional use permit shall note the following:
(1) The name of the holder of the conditional use permit for the
wireless telecommunications facility.
(2) If applicable, the number or title of the conditional use permit.
(3) The date of the original granting of the conditional use permit.
(4) Whether the wireless telecommunications facility has been moved,
relocated, rebuilt, repaired or otherwise modified since the
issuance of the conditional use permit.
(5) If the wireless telecommunications facility has been moved,
relocated, rebuilt, repaired or otherwise modified; whether the
Planning Board approved such action; the terms and conditions of
such approval; and a certification that the holder of the conditional
use permit is in compliance with all terms and conditions of the
approval.
(6) Any requests for waivers or relief of any kind whatsoever from the
requirements of this article and any requirements for a conditional
use permit.
(7) That the wireless telecommunications facility is in compliance with
the conditional use permit and in compliance with all applicable
codes, laws, rules and regulations.
B. If, after such review, the Planning Board determines that the permitted
wireless telecommunications facility is in compliance with the
conditional use permit and all applicable codes, laws, rules and
regulations, then the Board shall issue a recertification conditional use
permit for the wireless telecommunications facility, which may include
any new provisions or conditions that are mutually agreed upon or
required by codes, laws, rules or regulations.
§ 315-161 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-163
305:953
§ 315-164. Extent and parameters of conditional use permits.
The extent and parameters of a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall be as follows:
§ 315-165. Performance security.
The applicant and the owner of record of any property on which there is
a proposal to site a wireless telecommunications facility shall be jointly
required to execute and file with the City a bond, or other form of security
acceptable to the City, in an amount deemed sufficient by the Planning
Board to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this
article and the conditions of any conditional use permit issued pursuant to
this article. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force
and effect throughout the term of the conditional use permit and/or until
the wireless telecommunications facility is removed and any necessary site
restoration is completed. The failure to pay any annual premium for the
C. If the Planning Board does not complete its review, as noted in
Subsection B of this section, prior to the five-year anniversary date of
the conditional use permit, or subsequent fifth anniversaries, then the
applicant for the permitted wireless telecommunications facility shall
receive an extension of the conditional use permit, for up to six months,
in order for the Board to complete its review.
D. If the holder of a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility does not submit a request for
recertification of such conditional use permit within the time frame
noted in Subsection A of this section, or if the Planning Board finds that
the wireless telecommunications facility has been moved, relocated,
rebuilt or otherwise modified without approval of such having been
granted by the Planning Board under this article, then such conditional
use permit and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease to
exist on the date of the fifth anniversary of the original granting of the
conditional use permit, or subsequent fifth anniversaries, unless the
holder of the conditional use permit adequately demonstrates to the
Planning Board that extenuating circumstances prevented a timely
recertification request. If the Planning Board agrees that there were
legitimate extenuating circumstances, then the holder of the
conditional use permit may submit a late recertification request.
A. Such conditional use permit shall be nonexclusive.
B. Such conditional use permit shall not be assignable or transferable
without the express written consent of the Planning Board, and such
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
C. Such conditional use permit may be revoked, canceled or terminated
for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the conditional use
permit for a wireless telecommunications facility or for a material
violation of this article.
§ 315-163 TRENTON CODE § 315-165
305:954
renewal of any such security shall be a violation of the provisions of the
conditional use permit and shall entitle the Planning Board to revoke the
conditional use permit after prior written notice to, and an opportunity to
be heard by, the holder of the permit.
§ 315-166. Reservation of authority to inspect facilities.
§ 315-167. Annual NIER certification.
The holder of the conditional use permit shall, annually, cause an engineer
with at least five years of experience in the field to certify to the City that
nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) levels at the site are within
the threshold levels adopted by the FCC. The certifying engineer need not
be approved in advance by the City but must submit evidence of experience
along with the required certification.
§ 315-168. Liability insurance.
A. In order to verify that the holder of a conditional use permit for a
wireless telecommunications facility and any and all lessees, renters
and/or licensees of a wireless telecommunications facility place and
construct such facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance
with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building and zoning codes,
laws, rules and regulations and other applicable requirements, the City
may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or
licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of
such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and
buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted
site.
B. The City shall pay for costs associated with such an inspection, except
for those circumstances occasioned by said holder's, lessee's or
licensee's refusal to provide necessary information or necessary access
to such facilities, including towers, antennas and appurtenant or
associated facilities, or refusal to otherwise cooperate with the City
with respect to an inspection, or if violations of this article are found to
exist, in which case the holder, lessee or licensee shall reimburse the
City for the cost of the inspection.
C. Payment of such costs shall be made to the City within 30 days from the
date of the invoice or other demand for reimbursement. In the event
that the finding(s) of violation is/are appealed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this article, said reimbursement payment must
still be paid to the City and the reimbursement shall be placed in an
escrow account established by the City specifically for this purpose,
pending the final decision on appeal. In the event the appeal is
successful, the funds held in escrow shall be returned to the permit
holder.
A. A holder of a conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications
facility shall secure, and at all times maintain, public liability insurance,
§ 315-165 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-168
305:955
§ 315-169. Indemnification.
Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to this article shall contain a
provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the
holder of the conditional use permit, to the extent permitted by the law, to
at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless and exempt the
City, officials of the City and its officers, agents, servants and employees
from any and all penalties, damages or charges arising out of any and all
claims, suits, demands, causes of action or awards of damage, whether
compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in
equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the construction, erection,
modification, location, product performance, operation, maintenance,
repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of a wireless
telecommunications facility within the City. With respect to the penalties,
damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable fees of attorneys,
consultants and expert witnesses are included in those costs that are
recoverable by the City.
§ 315-170. Violations and penalties.
property damage insurance and umbrella insurance coverage for the
duration of the conditional use permit in the following amounts:
(1) Commercial general liability:
(a) Per occurrence: $1,000,000.
(b) Aggregate: $2,000,000.
B. The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the City and its officials, employees and agents as additional
insureds.
C. The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of
an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey.
D. The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the City with at least 30 days' written
notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
E. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
City at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance which such
policies are to renew or replace.
F. Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facility
is initiated, the holder of the conditional use permit shall deliver to the
City a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the
insurance in the required amounts.
A. Civil sanctions. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $3,000 for
§ 315-168 TRENTON CODE § 315-170
305:956
§ 315-171. Default and/or revocation.
every such violation. Each consecutive day of violation will be
considered a separate offense. Such civil penalty may be released
or compromised by the City. In addition, the City shall have power,
following a hearing, to direct the violator to comply with the provisions
of this article.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person, firm or corporation who willfully
violates any of the provisions of this article or permits promulgated
thereunder, excluding provisions set forth in the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof of the first offense
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than $500
and not more than $1,000 and, for a second offense and each
subsequent offense, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of
not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000, or a term of imprisonment
of not more than 15 days, or both. Each consecutive day of violation will
be considered a separate offense.
C. Notwithstanding anything in this article, the holder of the conditional
use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility may not use the
payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties, to evade or
avoid compliance with this article or any section of this article. An
attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the conditional use permit to
termination and revocation of the conditional use permit.
D. The provisions for civil and criminal penalties contained herein shall
not be exclusive, and the City may seek such other relief as may be
available, including injunctive relief to prevent the threatened or
continued violation of this article.
A. If a wireless telecommunications facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed,
moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent
or not in compliance with the provisions of this article or of the
conditional use permit, then the Building Department shall notify the
holder of the conditional use permit, in writing, of such violation. Such
notice shall specify the nature of the violation or noncompliance and
that the violations must be corrected within seven days of the date of
the postmark of the notice, or of the date of personal service of the
notice, whichever is earlier. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in this subsection or any other section of this article, if the violation
causes, creates or presents an imminent danger or threat to the health
or safety of lives or property, the Building Department may, at its sole
discretion, order the violation remedied within 24 hours.
B. If, within the period set forth in Subsection A above, the wireless
telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance with the
provisions of this article or of the special use permit, or substantial
steps are not taken in order to bring the affected wireless
telecommunications facility into compliance, then the Planning Board
may revoke such special use permit for a wireless telecommunications
§ 315-170 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-171
305:957
§ 315-172. Removal of facilities; restoration of site.
facility and shall notify the holder of the special use permit within 48
hours of such action.
A. Under the following circumstances, the Planning Board may determine
that the health, safety and welfare interests of the City warrant and
require the removal of a wireless telecommunications facility:
(1) A wireless telecommunications facility with a permit has not been
used as a wireless telecommunications facility for a period
exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any threehundred-
sixty-five-day period, except for periods caused by force or
acts of God.
(2) A permitted wireless telecommunications facility falls into such a
state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard.
(3) A wireless telecommunications facility has been located,
constructed or modified without first obtaining the required
conditional use permit or any other necessary authorization.
(4) A wireless telecommunications facility, which does not meet the
current FCC standards, shall be removed within six months of the
implementation of such new standards, unless the facility is made
compliant.
B. If the Planning Board makes such a determination as noted in
Subsection A of this section, then the Board shall notify the holder of
the conditional use permit for the wireless telecommunications facility
within 48 hours that said wireless telecommunications facility is to be
removed. The Planning Board may approve an interim temporary use
permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications
facility.
C. Upon a determination by the Planning Board that a wireless
telecommunications facility should be removed, the holder of the
conditional use permit or the owner of the site shall dismantle and
remove such wireless telecommunications facility and all associated
structures and facilities from the site and restore the site to as close to
its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only
by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of
written notice from the Planning Board.
D. If a wireless telecommunications facility is not removed or substantial
progress has not been made to remove the wireless
telecommunications facility within 90 days after the permit holder or
owner of the site has received notice, then the City may remove the
wireless telecommunications facility at the sole expense of the owner
and/or permit holder.
§ 315-171 TRENTON CODE § 315-172
305:958
§ 315-173. Waiver of application requirements and permit
conditions.
§ 315-174. Adherence to state and federal rules and regulations.
E. If the City removes or causes to be removed a wireless
telecommunications facility and the owner of the wireless
telecommunications facility does not claim the property and remove the
facility from the site to a lawful location within 10 days, then the City
may take steps to declare the facility abandoned and sell it and its
components.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the Planning
Board may approve a temporary permit for the wireless
telecommunications facility for no more than 90 days, during which
time a suitable plan for removal, conversion or relocation of the
affected wireless telecommunications facility shall be developed by the
holder of the permit, subject to the approval of the Planning Board, and
an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the permit
and the City. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed
within the ninety-day time period, then the City may take possession of
and dispose of the affected wireless telecommunications facility in the
manner provided in this section.
A. Any applicant can request a waiver of application requirements that are
inapplicable to its permit application. Such request shall be in writing.
Requests should be discussed at the preapplication meeting. The
applicant shall have the burden of supporting such requests.
Determinations as to applicability of application requirements shall be
made by the Planning Board.
B. In determining permit conditions, the Planning Board can waive
inapplicable permit requirements, consistent with the policy goals and
priorities of this article. The applicant shall have the burden of
supporting such requests. Determinations as to applicability of permit
condition requirements shall be made by the Planning Board.
A. To the extent that the holder of a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility has not received relief or is not otherwise
exempt from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or
regulations, then the holder of such a conditional use permit shall
adhere to and comply with all applicable rules, regulations, standards
arid provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited
to the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are
any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical
and RF emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to
the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting and security, are changed and/or
§ 315-172 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-174
305:959
§ 315-175. Conflict with other laws.
Where this article differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations,
unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the county, state or
federal government, the more restrictive or protective of the City and the
public shall apply.
§ 315-176. Severability.
If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion
of this article or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then such word,
phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion, or the
proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this article, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 315-177. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted by local law pursuant to Municipal Land Use Law.117
This article shall supersede the provisions of City law or other statute to the
extent that it is inconsistent with the same and to the extent permitted by
the New Jersey State Constitution, Municipal Land Use Law or any other
applicable statute.
are modified during the duration of a conditional use permit for a
wireless telecommunications facility, then the holder of such a
conditional use permit shall conform the wireless telecommunications
facility to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation,
standard or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective
date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation,
standard or provision, or sooner as may be required by such rule,
regulation, standard or provision.
117. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 315-174 TRENTON CODE § 315-177
305:960
ARTICLE XXIV
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading
§ 315-178. Plan required; issuance of occupancy permits;
encroachment of parking spaces prohibited.
Off-street parking, unloading and service requirements of this article shall
apply and govern in all present and future zoning districts within the City.
Except as provided in this article, no application for a building permit
shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building,
improvement or use a plot plan showing the required space for off-street
parking, unloading and service facilities. Occupancy permits shall not be
given unless the required off-street parking, unloading and service facilities
have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan.
No off-street parking area shall be reduced in size or encroached upon by
buildings, vehicle storage, loading or unloading, or any other use where
such reduction or encroachment will reduce the off-street parking and
loading spaces below that are required by these regulations. The above
provisions shall not apply to one-family dwellings.
§ 315-179. Existing uses.
Any building, improvement or use in operation on the effective date of this
chapter, _____118 is not affected by the provisions of this article until such
time as the existing building, improvement or use is enlarged.
§ 315-180. Design standards.
A. Size of parking space. Each ninety-degree and parallel parking space
shall not be less than 180 square feet nor less than nine feet wide nor
less than 20 feet deep. Where cars overhang concrete curbing, then the
depth of a space shall be not less than 18 feet.
B. Compact spaces. At the discretion of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as applicable, as part of site plan review, up to
30% of required parking spaces may be designated for compact car use.
Such spaces shall not be less than eight feet wide, not less than 17 feet
deep, except in areas where cars overhang curbing, then the depth of
space shall not be less than 16 feet.
C. Driveways for residential dwelling structures. Whenever possible,
parking shall be located at the rear of a residential structure, via a
common driveway or alley. The parking of vehicles in front yards in
front of the front building line is prohibited. Driveways must be located
at the rear of the building or on side yards and extend at least 18 feet
beyond the front building line, and be a minimum of eight feet in width
on a side yard of at least 10 feet in width. The maximum width of a
driveway shall be 12 feet in the front and side yards. When a site plan is
prepared for development of more than one residential unit, the plan
118. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 315-178 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-180
305:961
shall place driveways in such a manner so as to minimize curb cuts and
the loss of on-street spaces.
D. When a garage door is proposed to be located on the front facade of a
residential structure, the residential structure must be at least 20 feet
wide and the garage door must not comprise more than 40% of the
front facade. Such door must be incorporated into the ground floor
facade in such a manner as to provide the appearance of residential
living space on the ground floor level.
E. Interior driveways for parking lots. The following driveway widths shall
apply:
(1) For ninety-degree parking: 22 feet to 24 feet wide.
(2) For sixty-degree parking: 18 feet wide.
(3) For thirty-degree and forty-five-degree parking: 14 feet wide.
(4) Where used with parallel parking or where there is no parking: at
least 14 feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 24 feet
wide for two-way traffic movement.
F. Driveway location. At the intersection of streets, no driveway providing
access to parking for five or fewer residential dwelling units shall be
located closer than 20 feet to the intersection of two curblines. Any
driveway providing access for more than five residential dwelling units
or for any commercial use shall be located no closer than 100 feet to the
intersection of two curblines.
G. Handicapped parking spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with state requirements.
H. Separation from walkways and streets. All off-street parking, off-street
loading and services areas shall be separated from sidewalks, streets or
alleys by appropriate protective and screening devices, including
attractive walls and/or coniferous plantings along the street edge, in
accordance with § 315-210.
I. Landscaping and lighting of parking lots. Landscaping and lighting of
parking lots shall be required, in accordance with Article XXVI
(§ 315-208 et seq.).
J. Multistory parking garages. Multistory parking garage facades shall
meet the following design requirements:
(1) Provide for vertical breaks along any street frontage.
(2) Incorporate brick or other aesthetically attractive material
acceptable to the Planning Board on street-facing facades and
mask the view of parked vehicles from the street to the greatest
extent practicable. Provide for the appearance of fenestration as
viewed from any public street.
§ 315-180 TRENTON CODE § 315-180
305:962
§ 315-181. Other uses prohibited.
No off-street parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair,
dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
§ 315-182. Responsibility of owners.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to properly
maintain all off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, service areas,
driveways, aisles and accessways in good condition, free of potholes, cracks
and sagging conditions creating drainage problems. All lighting, curbs,
bumpers, markings, signs, drainage and landscaping shall be similarly
maintained in workable, safe and good condition. If the owner fails to
undertake needed repairs and general maintenance and after proper
(3) Locate entrances towards the side or rear of the property whenever
possible.
(4) In the Downtown District, garages must provide for street-level
retail uses as specified by Capital City Redevelopment Corporation
Renaissance Plan, 1988.
(5) In BA Districts, single-use parking structures must be designed to
allow for potential future conversion of the ground floor level into
retail business uses.
K. Paving of driveways and/or off-street parking areas.
(1) All new driveways and/or off-street parking areas required by
ordinances shall be paved with impervious materials, including
brick, asphalt, concrete or driveway pavers, or pervious paving
materials that increase stormwater infiltration, including gravel,
crushed stone, open paving blocks or pervious paving blocks in
accordance with the specification of the Construction Official or the
Planning Board's consultant engineer.
(2) Driveways for single-family dwelling units shall be permitted the
option of having paving surface provided only under the vehicular
tire treadway. Each treadway shall have a minimum width of two
feet, with a maximum unpaved area of three feet in width down the
middle. The unpaved central strip shall have gravel or be seeded.
L. Paving of on-site walkways. All new on-site walkways leading from a
sidewalk, driveway, street or alley to the primary structure on the
property shall be paved with impervious materials, including brick,
pavers or concrete, or pervious paving materials that increase
stormwater infiltration, including gravel, crushed stone, open paving
blocks or pervious paving blocks, in accordance with the specifications
of the Construction Official or the Planning Board's consultant
engineer. Asphalt material may be used for walkways located in the rear
yard of the property.
§ 315-180 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-182
305:963
notification by the Zoning Officer, the City Council may authorize repairs to
be made at the owner's expense.
§ 315-183. Meeting requirements through other space.
Garage space or space within a building, in basements or on the roofs
of buildings may be used to meet off-street parking requirements of this
chapter, provided that such space is designated to serve as off-street
parking space. Required parking spaces may be provided within 1,000
linear feet, or as otherwise specifically provided in this article, of the main
entrance to the building or other establishment to be served for such
purposes, or adequate shuttle service must be available. If the applicant
is not the owner of the off-site space designated to meet the off-street
requirement, the applicant shall provide evidence to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the designated off-street space is available for use by
the applicant's site.
§ 315-184. Continuing obligation.
The requirements in these regulations for off-street parking space shall be
a continuing obligation. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any land or
building affected by these regulations to discontinue, change or dispense
with such off-street parking or loading facilities which comply with the
requirements of these regulations. If the owner has met its off-street
obligation through off-site off-street parking that becomes unavailable, it
shall be the owner's responsibility to provide alternative parking of like
kind or, in the alternative, and at the discretion or direction of the Planning
Board, to provide a fee in lieu of provision of such replacement parking.
§ 315-185. Parking requirements for downtown parking districts.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose. Parking requirements in the Trenton downtown districts
are provided to support downtown development. Criteria are
provided to ensure that the demand for parking will be managed
and that negative effects of parking are minimized, while still
providing sufficient parking to meet the goals of the City of Trenton
for the downtown.
(2) Number and location of downtown parking districts:
(a) There are 10 downtown parking districts:
[1] West State Street.
[2] State/Hanover.
[3] State House Area.
[4] Downtown.
[5] State Offices.
§ 315-182 TRENTON CODE § 315-185
305:964
[6] Academy.
[7] East State.
[8] Mercer-Jackson.
[9] Ewing-Carroll.
[10] Train Station.
(b) Each of the parking districts is identified and located in Figure
1.119
B. Parking requirements for individual uses. Parking requirements for the
downtown are based on which of the 10 parking districts the proposed
development/redevelopment is situated. Section 315-185, Table 1,
provides minimum, maximum and bicycle parking requirements for
each land use in each parking district.120
(1) Minimum parking requirements have been established to ensure
that there is sufficient parking to meet the goals of the City of
Trenton for Downtown development and redevelopment.
(2) Maximum parking requirements have been established and are
intended to:
(a) Preserve open space and limit impervious surfaces;
(b) Reduce congestion;
(c) Encourage attractive, pedestrian-friendly urban design;
(d) Promote nonautomobile modes of transportation.
(e) Minimize costs for parking construction, operations and
maintenance;
(f) Reduce traffic and traffic-related costs; and
(g) Operate with a greater floor-to-area ratio, increasing leasable
space.
(3) Bicycle parking requirements have been established to make the
use of bicycling a more convenient and accessible alternative in the
Trenton Downtown.
(a) Off-street parking for bicycles shall include provision for
secure storage of bicycles. Such facilities shall provide
lockable enclosed lockers or racks or equivalent structures in
or upon which a bicycle may be locked by the user.
119. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
120. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-185 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-185
305:965
(b) Structures that require a user-supplied locking device shall be
designed to accommodate both chain and U-shaped locking
devices and shall support the bicycle frame at two locations
(not just the wheel).
(c) All lockers and racks must be securely anchored to the ground
or the building structure to prevent the racks and lockers from
being removed from the location.
(d) The surfacing of such facilities shall be designed and
maintained to be mud- and dust-free. The use of rock or gravel
areas for bicycle parking is permitted, provided that edging
materials, such as landscape timbers, are used so that the
bicycle parking area is clearly demarcated and the rock
material is contained.
(e) Bicycle parking facilities shall be sufficiently separated from
motor vehicle parking areas to protect parked bicycles from
damage by motor vehicles. The separation may be
accomplished through grade separation, distance or physical
barrier, such as curbs, wheel stops, poles or other similar
features.
(f) Required bicycle parking spaces shall be at least two feet by
six feet per bicycle.
(g) An aisle a minimum of five feet wide shall be provided behind
bicycle parking facilities to allow for maneuvering.
(h) A minimum of 24 inches shall be provided beside each parked
bicycle to allow access. This access may be shared by adjacent
bicycles. Racks shall be installed a minimum of 24 inches from
any wall or other obstruction.
(i) Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in a clearly
designated, safe and convenient location. Whenever possible,
the bicycle parking shall be placed within 50 feet of building
entrances and in well-lit areas.
(j) It is recommended that half of the bicycle parking spaces be
provided as long-term parking, safe and secure from vandalism
and theft, and protected from the elements. The other half
should be provided as short-term (customer or visitor) parking,
and it is recommended that these parking spaces be visible and
convenient to the building entrance.
(4) Parking requirement adjustments for individual uses. A developer
may make adjustments to its minimum parking requirement
through the following conditions:
(a) Shared-use parking. An applicant shall be entitled to reduce its
minimum parking requirement, provided that the applicant can
§ 315-185 TRENTON CODE § 315-185
305:966
demonstrate that it has entered into an agreement to share
parking in a parking facility with other developments.
Allowable deduction for parking based on shared use shall be
determined as follows:
[1] The minimum parking requirement shall be determined for
each user intending to share parking based on the
minimum rates for each respective use in accordance with
§ 315-185, Table 1, Minimum, Maximum and Bicycle
Parking Requirements for the Trenton Downtown, for the
applicable parking district. (NOTE: Where shared users
are located in more than one parking district, the
minimum rates of the district where the parking is located,
or where a majority of the parking is located, shall prevail.)
[2] The minimum parking requirement for each use shall be
multiplied by an "occupancy rate" as determined in
§ 315-185, Table 2, Parking Occupancy Rates for Shared-
Use Parking Assessment, for each use for the weekday
night, daytime and evening periods, and weekend night,
daytime and evening periods, respectively.
(b) Adjustment based on proximity to transit. An applicant shall be
entitled to reduce its minimum parking requirement by 10%
for projects located within 600 feet of the Trenton Train
Station or any Light Rail Transit Station.
(c) Adjustment based on public accessibility to parking. An
applicant whose minimum parking requirement is in excess of
50 spaces shall be entitled to reduce its minimum parking
requirement by 10% by entering into an agreement with the
City to permit shared-use parking on its property with a
compatible development. This reduction will be permitted only
if the applicant is able to demonstrate to City planning staff
satisfaction that there are periods where the parking will not
be occupied by the proposed development.
(d) Adjustment for additional bicycle parking. An applicant shall
be entitled to reduce its minimum parking requirement by one
space for every additional five bicycle parking spaces provided
on its site above the minimum number required under the
provisions of § 315-185, Table 1, Minimum, Maximum and
Bicycle Parking Requirements for the Trenton Downtown.
(e) Adjustment for unbundled/priced parking. An applicant shall
be entitled to reduce its minimum parking requirement by 10%
of the total required spaces by agreeing to sell or rent its
parking spaces separately from a lease or sale of building
space.
(f) Adjustment for housing tenure. An applicant shall be entitled
to reduce its minimum parking requirement for residential
§ 315-185 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-185
305:967
parking by up to 10% of the total required spaces for the
housing that is constructed for rental versus owner-occupied
housing. The amount of the reduction shall be calculated by
multiplying 10% by the fraction consisting of the square
footage of residential units for rental use divided by the total
square footage of all residential housing units developed.
(g) Adjustment for car share program. An applicant whose
minimum parking requirement is in excess of 20 spaces shall
be entitled to reduce its minimum residential parking
requirement 5% if a car-sharing service is located within 1,200
feet of the development or to reduce four parking spaces for
each car-share vehicle it locates in a residential building.
C. Parking requirements for mixed-use projects. Mixed-use projects shall
determine parking using the following procedure:
(1) Determine minimum parking requirement for each individual use of
the mixed-use development based on the minimum rates provided
in § 315-185 Table 1 for the applicable parking district.
(2) Adjust for shared parking. The minimum parking requirement for
each use shall be multiplied by an "occupancy rate" as determined
in § 315-185, Table 2, Parking Occupancy Rates for Shared-Use
Parking Assessment, for each use for the weekday night, daytime
and evening periods, and weekend night, daytime and evening
periods, respectively.
(3) Tabulate minimum parking requirement for each time period. Sum
up the adjusted minimum parking requirements of each land use
for each of the six time periods to determine an overall project
minimum parking requirement for each time period.
(4) Determine minimum parking requirement for the project. The
highest of the six time period totals shall be the minimum parking
requirement for the mixed-use project prior to the application of
reduction factors as provided in Subsection B for single use.
(5) One hundred percent of the parking supply shall be provided within
600 feet of an entrance to the proposed building(s) it will serve
unless waived via terms of Subsection C(6).
(6) Other parking spaces in the vicinity of the project may be used to
satisfy portions of the minimum parking requirement if the
applicant can secure such parking through lease of at least or other
such similar arrangement,121 for a term of at least 10 years, or if it
can be demonstrated through study that certain public parking
areas are typically vacant during the peak demand period of the
project or will become vacant as a result of removals or demolition,
all subject to the approval of the City.
121. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 315-185 TRENTON CODE § 315-185
305:968
D. Parking district specific provisions.
(1) The following specific criteria are defined for each parking district
in the Downtown:
(a) Surface parking limitations. Certain areas of the downtown are
intended for high-density development and therefore are
restricted from meeting minimum parking criteria through the
creation of surface parking lots. The level and nature of surface
parking restriction is identified for each parking district.
(b) Curb cut restrictions.
[1] On-street parking is an important resource to a vibrant
downtown. On-street parking is a City asset and has a
tangible value to the City. During any given day, if properly
managed, one on-street parking space can accommodate
from three to five visitors to the downtown. Therefore, in
addition to breaking up pedestrian flow and increasing the
number of pedestrian and vehicle conflicts, the
introduction of curb cuts for driveways diminishes a City
asset and displaces three to five visitors who must seek an
alternative parking accommodation.
[2] For these reasons, where there is on-street parking on a
street in the downtown, the introduction of curb cuts for
driveways should be limited and located to minimize their
impact to available on-street parking.
[3] For each district, the minimum required off-street parking
creation per curb cut is identified. The applicant will be
required to demonstrate that it has provided the
designated number of off-street spaces to replace each onstreet
space that is removed because of the introduction of
the curb cut or driveway. This requirement not only must
address the on-street area directly in front of the
depressed curb created by the driveway but must also take
into consideration and replace by the designated number
the spaces eliminated because of the driveway's placement
(e.g., the location of two residential driveways eliminating
a third parking space in the area between).
[4] At the discretion of the City Planning or Zoning Board, the
applicant may be permitted to construct a driveway if
fewer than the designated number of replacement spaces
are created, provided that the applicant pays a fee for each
replacement space not created, in accordance with the
then applicable parking fee in lieu of minimum spaces for
the district in which the driveway is located. This fee will
be deposited into the Trenton Parking Improvement Fund
exclusively for the development, improvement or
maintenance of public shared parking in the Downtown.
§ 315-185 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-185
305:969
(c) Restrictions on location of parking. To preserve the urban
streetscape, some parking in the downtown districts, whether
surface or garage, is to be located at the rear of the
development. Specific parking location restrictions are
identified for each parking district. These requirements also
address if minimum parking requirements can be addressed off
site and the maximum distance that the off-site parking can be
located.
(d) Parking fee in lieu of minimum spaces. If the individual or
mixed-use minimum parking requirement, or portions of the
parking requirement, cannot be met, developers may purchase
relief through the parking fee in lieu of minimums, at the rates
per parking space provided in accordance with the In Lieu of
Parking Fee Schedule maintained by the City of Trenton
Planning Office. This fee will be deposited into the Trenton
Parking Improvement Fund to be used exclusively for the
development, improvement or maintenance of public shared
parking in the Downtown. Differences in the parking-in-lieu-of
fees between districts reflect the differences in cost of
constructing surface parking versus structured parking and
may reflect the difference in land costs in different downtown
parking districts.
(2) Provisions for specific parking districts.
(a) Parking District 1: West State Street.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
may be addressed through creation of surface parking lots
in Parking District 1.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 600 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of two off-street parking spaces on the site must
be provided per each on-street parking space removed by
the applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 1 is $6,000 per space.
(b) Parking District 2: State/Hanover.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
may be addressed through creation of surface parking lots
in Parking District 2.
§ 315-185 TRENTON CODE § 315-185
305:970
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 1,200 feet of site. Parking
must be located at the rear of the site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of two off-street parking on the site must be
provided per each on-street parking space removed by the
applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 2 is $15,000 per space.
(c) Parking District 3: State House Area.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
may be addressed through creation of surface parking lots
in Parking District 3.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 1,200 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of four off-street parking spaces on the site must
be provided per each on-street parking space removed by
the applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 3 is $15,000 per space.
(d) Parking District 4: Downtown.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
must be addressed through structured parking. Parking
requirements may not be addressed through creation of
surface parking lots in District 4.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 1,200 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of four off-street parking spaces on the site must
be provided per each on-street parking space removed by
the applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 4 is $15,000 per space.
§ 315-185 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-185
305:971
(e) Parking District 5: State Offices.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
must be addressed through structured parking. Parking
requirements may not be addressed through creation of
surface parking lots in District 5.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 1,200 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of four off-street parking spaces on the site must
be provided per each on-street parking space removed by
the applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 5 is $15,000 per space.
(f) Parking District 6: Academy.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
may be addressed through creation of surface parking lots
in Parking District 6.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 600 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of three off-street parking spaces on the site
must be provided per each on-street parking space
removed by the applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 6 is $6,000 per space.
(g) Parking District 7: East State Street.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
may be addressed through creation of surface parking lots
in Parking District 7.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 1,000 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of three off-street parking spaces on the site
must be provided per each on-street parking space
removed by the applicant.
§ 315-185 TRENTON CODE § 315-185
305:972
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 7 is $6,000 per space.
(h) Parking District 8: Mercer-Jackson.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
may be addressed through creation of surface parking lots
in Parking District 8.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 600 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of three off-street parking spaces on the site
must be provided per each on-street parking space
removed by the applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 8 is $6,000 per space.
(i) Parking District 9: Ewing-Carroll.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
may be addressed through creation of surface parking lots
in Parking District 9.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 600 feet of site.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of three off-street parking on the site must be
provided per each on-street parking space removed by the
applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 9 is $6,000 per space.
(j) Parking District 10: Train Station.
[1] Parking type. Applicant's off-street parking requirement
must be addressed through structured parking. Parking
requirements may not be addressed through creation of
surface parking lots in District 10.
[2] Location of parking. Minimum parking requirements may
be met at off-site facilities within 600 feet of site.
§ 315-185 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-185
305:973
§ 315-186. Parking requirements for Business A District.
[3] Curb cut requirements for removal of on-street parking. A
minimum of four off-street parking spaces on the site must
be provided per each on-street parking space removed by
the applicant.
[4] Parking-in-lieu-of fee. Applicant may pay a per-space fee in
lieu of providing the minimum parking requirement for the
proposed development. The initial per-space fee for
District 10 is $15,000 per space.
A. Requirements. The following requirements shall apply to any Business
A District area not covered under the provisions of § 315-185, Parking
requirements for downtown parking districts:
Use Space Requirement
Residential development:
Up to 10 units No parking requirement
From 11 units and above 1/2 space for each unit in excess of
10 units rounded up to the nearest
whole number
Nonresidential development:
Under 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area
No parking requirement
Over 5,000 square feet 1 space per 500 square feet of gross
floor area in excess of 5,000 square
feet.
Note:
Surface parking lots are not a permitted use in this district.
B. Waiver. In lieu of providing the required structured parking spaces, the
applicant for preliminary site plan approval may request the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to waive the requirement for the
parking spaces because of building design and site limitations. If, in the
opinion of the Board, the parking cannot reasonably be implemented in
conjunction with the site plan, the applicant shall be required to pay the
City a sum equal to the then current Parking-in-Lieu Fee Schedule
provided for the downtown parking district in § 315-185 of this article.
These funds shall be dedicated to a special City parking fund for the
purpose of constructing public parking garages within the Business A
Zone of the City. Such payment is to be made by the applicant prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 315-185 TRENTON CODE § 315-187
305:974
§ 315-187. Parking requirements for all districts except downtown
parking districts and Business A District.
The following parking requirements shall apply for all districts except
downtown parking districts and the Business A District:
Use Minimum Space Requirements
Assembly hall or auditorium 1 for each 150 feet of gross floor area or 1
for each 4 seats, whichever is greater
Automobile and gasoline
service and auto repair shop
4 for each service bay and 1 for each
pump, plus 1 for each vehicle used directly
in the conduct of the enterprise
Bank 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area, or 5 spaces for each non-driveup
teller window, plus 2 spaces for each
automatic teller machine, whichever is
greater. Banks with drive-up facilities shall
provide an additional space for each driveup
teller window.
Bowling alley 2 for each lane
Church or other house of
worship
1 for each 4 seats
Clubhouse or community
center
1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Commercial, retail or personal
service establishment
1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor
area in excess of 1,000 square feet
Community residence/shelter 1 for every 5 residents and 1 per staff
member
Educational institution, public
or private
1 for each 2 teachers and other
employees. Sufficient off-street parking
space for the safe and convenient loading
and uploading of students. Additional
facilities for student parking, taking into
consideration the total number of students
driving automobiles. The requirements for
a stadium or gymnasium shall be in
addition to these requirements.
Home professional office 1 for each employee, plus 1 for each
dwelling unit and 1 for each 50 square
feet of office waiting room or reception
space
Hospital/health care facility 1 for each 3 beds, plus either 2 for each
full-time professional staff and
administrative member on maximum shift
or plus 1 for each 500 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is greater
§ 315-187 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-187
305:975
Hotel 1 for each room. The requirements for
banquet and meeting facilities shall be in
addition to these requirements.
Housing for elderly consisting
of 10 or more dwelling units,
developed for occupancy
exclusively by persons 55
years or older
1 for each 3 dwelling units
Industrial or manufacturing
establishment, lab use or used
storage warehouse
1 for each employee on maximum shift,
plus 1 visitor space for each 8 managerial
personnel and 1 for each vehicle used
directly in the conduct of the enterprise
Medical or dental office 5 spaces for each professional person
Motel 1 for each guest or sleeping room
Nursing homes 1 for each 3 beds
Offices, professional and
general
3 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area
Residential use, excluding
housing for elderly:
Single-family (detached,
semidetached and
rowhouse attachment)
2 spaces per unit
Multifamily:
Studio 1 space
1 bedroom 1.25 spaces
2 bedrooms 1.5 spaces
3+ bedrooms 1.75 spaces
Restaurant, bar or other
similar establishment
1 for each 4 seats provided in excess of 40
seats
Stadium and other outdoor
sports arenas, theater,
auditorium and indoor sports
arenas
1 for each 4 seats
Any use not specifically
provided for herein
1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 315-188. Off-street parking requirements for combination of uses.
A. The parking requirement for each use shall be computed separately,
and then such requirements shall be added together to compute the
total number of required parking spaces. In all questionable or doubtful
cases, or for uses not enumerated, the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, in conjunction with a use variance, shall
§ 315-187 TRENTON CODE § 315-188
305:976
§ 315-189. Off-street loading requirements.
determine the required number of spaces, utilizing as a standard the
requirements for the uses which are specifically enumerated.
B. Shared parking arrangements for up to 20% of the parking requirement
for separate uses with different peak-hour activity may be considered
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as part of site
plan review. Consideration of shared parking arrangements shall
require submission of a shared parking analysis by the applicant for
review by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
appropriate. The shared parking analysis should utilize recognized
transportation planning methodologies such as those published by the
Urban Land Institute in Shared Parking, Second Edition (2005), or
similar standards, or any official shared parking guidelines adopted by
the State of New Jersey.
A. In any zone, in connection with every building addition, building or
building group, or part thereof hereafter erected which is to be
occupied by industrial, office and laboratory or commercial uses, or
distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be
provided and maintained on the same lot with such building off-street
loading berths in accordance with the requirements set forth below.
B. Each loading space shall be no less than 12 feet in width, 40 feet in
length and 14 feet in height, and no loading space may occupy any part
of any required front, side or rear yard. However, on lots on which the
rear or side yard abuts a limited-access highway or a railroad, such
loading space may occupy the rear or side yard up the rear property
line.
Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
Uses
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Required
Berths
Apartment buildings 25,000 to 100,000 1
Auditoriums 10,000 to 100,000 1
Funeral parlors 5,000 or more 1
Hospitals and nursing 10,000 to 100,000 1
homes (in addition to space
for ambulances)
Each additional 100,000
or additional fraction
thereof
1
Hotels and offices 10,000 to 100,000 1
100,000 to 200,000 2
5,000 to 40,000 1
40,000 to 80,000 2
Industrial, manufacturing
establishment warehouse,
research or lab use
80,000 to 120,000 3
§ 315-188 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-189
305:977
§ 315-190. Joint facilities for parking or loading.
Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided
jointly if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum
of the maximum joint demand of the separate requirements for each use,
provided that all regulations governing the location of accessory spaces in
relation to the uses served are adhered to. Further, no accessory space
or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use,
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as provided herein in accordance with the purposes and
procedures set forth herein.
§ 315-190.1. Waiver of parking or loading requirements.
If any applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Planning Board that,
because of the nature of his/her operation or use, the parking or loading
requirements of this article are unnecessary or excessive, the Planning
Board shall have the power to approve a site plan showing less paved
parking or loading area than is required by this article. The Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment may require that a landscaped area of
sufficient size to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and reserved for the
purpose of meeting future off-street parking or loading requirements in the
event that a change of use of the premises shall make such additional offstreet
parking or loading facilities necessary.
Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
Uses
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Required
Berths
10,000 to 25,000 1
25,000 to 50,000 2
50,000 to 80,000 3
Retail, commercial
restaurants and services
80,000 to 120,000 4
School 15,000 to 100,000 1
§ 315-189 TRENTON CODE § 315-190.1
305:978
ARTICLE XXV
Signs
§ 315-191. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of these sign regulations to permit such signs
that will not, by their aggregate number, size, location, construction or
manner of display, confuse or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety
or otherwise endanger public health, safety and welfare and to regulate
signs in such a way as to protect property values, improve the physical
appearance of commercial areas and preserve and enhance the aesthetics
of the community.
§ 315-192. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the defined terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this
section.
BILLBOARD — A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than
the premises on which the sign is located.
FACADE SIGN — A sign located on or attached to the facade of the principal
structure on each street frontage.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign designed to be seen from outside a
building that advertises activities, goods, products, services or facilities
available on site that is not attached to a building and is supported by its
own structure.
NAMEPLATE/IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign located on the front facade
of a residential property indicating the name and/or address of the occupant
of that property.
NONCOMMERCIAL ADVERTISEMENT AND INFORMATION SIGN — An
advertisement or informational sign of a public or semipublic nature, which
may only be used to display the following:
The name or location of a hospital, nursing home, day-care center,
clubhouse, funeral parlor, community center, public or private school,
YMCA, YWCA, church, synagogue or other place of worship. Not more
than one sign shall be placed on each property, unless such property
fronts on more than one street, in which case one such sign may be
erected on each street frontage.
A.
The name or place of meeting of an official or civic body, such as the
Chamber of Commerce, Board of Trade or service club. Not more than
one such sign shall be placed on each property unless such property
fronts on more than one street, in which case one such sign may be
erected on each street frontage.
B.
§ 315-191 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-192
305:979
ON-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Customary signs identifying parking
areas, loading zones, entrances, exits and similar locations. Such signs may
include a business name or professional name but shall not include any
advertising message.
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign of a public nature related to elections and
campaigns.[Added 11-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-70; amended 11-21-2017
by Ord. No. 17-74; 4-5-2018 by Ord. No. 18-16]
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or printed or represented directly or indirectly on a building,
structure or parcel of land, and which directs attention to a person,
institution, organization, activity, place, object, product or business. Any
structure, device, letter, word insignia, or representation that is designed
to be seen from outside a building advertising activities, goods, products,
services or facilities available on the premises. This definition includes
signs attached onto the facade of buildings, in windows, or doors, on
canopies, marquees and awnings, but does not include window displays
of merchandise or signs incidental to the display of merchandise. The
display of official public notices or the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation,
political unit or temporary displays are not included in this definition. Signs
indicating operating hours of a commercial business and credit cards which
are accepted are also not included in this definition.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign constructed or intended for use during a
limited period of time.
WARNING/TRESPASSING SIGNS — Customary warning, trespassing and
posted signs that indicate the private nature of a driveway or property.
§ 315-193. Compliance required; firesafety considerations; owner's
name on sign.
All signs within the City shall be erected, constructed or maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this article. No existing sign shall be
An event of public interest, such as a church or public meeting, local,
county or state fair, Volunteer Fire Department fair, special events of
service clubs and nonprofit organizations and other similar community
activities. Such signs shall be removed by the person, organization or
property owner within 15 days of the date specified for the event.
C.
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A sign erected on a site during
the period of construction to announce the name of the project, owner
or developer, contractor, architect, landscape architect or engineer.
A.
TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign advertising the real estate
upon which the sign is located as being for lease or sale.
B.
TEMPORARY MECHANIC, PAINTER AND OTHER ARTISAN SIGN —
A sign erected only on a property where work is being performed to
announce the name and contact information of the mechanic, painter or
other artisan conducting the work on the site.
C.
§ 315-192 TRENTON CODE § 315-193
305:980
enlarged, rebuilt, structurally altered or relocated except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a permit shall not relieve
the owner or lessee of the premises from the duty of maintaining safely
any such structures. No sign of any description shall be installed, erected,
constructed or maintained in such manner as to obstruct any fire escape or
any window or door, nor shall any sign be attached in any manner to a fire
escape. Every sign constructed or maintained shall be plainly marked with
the name of the person, firm or corporation erecting or maintaining such
sign.
§ 315-194. Traffic safety.
No sign shall be erected in the City that would:
§ 315-195. Health, safety, light and air; extension above roof
prohibited.
No sign shall be erected or constructed that will violate any of the
regulations as to health, required light, safety or air, as defined in the
Building Code of the City.122 Signs shall not extend above the roof level of
the building to which they are attached.
§ 315-196. Order to make safe or remove.
Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe, endangers the safety of the
building or endangers the public safety, the Zoning Officer shall order that
such sign be made safe or removed. Such order shall be complied with
within 10 days of the receipt thereof by the person owning or using the sign
or the owner of the building or premises on which the unsafe sign is affixed
or erected. Failure to obey such orders shall be a violation of this section.
§ 315-197. Mechanical contrivances.
No sign shall contain flashers, animators or mechanical movement or
contrivances of any kind, except clock-and-temperature-stating devices.
A. Obstruct the sight distance at an intersection along a public right-ofway.
B. Would tend by its location, color, shape, message or nature to be
confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or traffic signals by
motorists or pedestrians.
C. Use admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger," etc., which
might be confused with traffic directional signs.
D. Other than official traffic control devices or street signs, be erected
within, or encroach upon, the right-of-way lines of any street, unless
specifically authorized by other ordinances or regulations of the City.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Building Construction.
§ 315-193 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-198
305:981
§ 315-198. Illumination.
Illumination devices, such as, but not limited to, floodlights or spotlights,
shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays of illumination
thereof from being cast into neighboring properties and approaching
vehicles.
§ 315-199. Computing sign area.
The area of a permitted sign shall be determined by multiplying the greatest
horizontal dimension by the greatest vertical dimension, including spaces
between open-type letters and figures and including the background
structure or other decoration or addition which is an integral part of the
sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining the area of a sign. Only
one side of a double-faced sign structure shall be used in computing total
sign area.
§ 315-200. Movable signs.
No sign device in the nature of an advertisement or announcement so
constructed as to be movable, or which shall be placed on a standard sitting
upon the ground, shall be placed or permitted to remain on any part of any
street, sidewalk, parkway, curb or other public place.
§ 315-201. Temporary signs. [Amended 11-2-2017 by Ord. No.
17-70]
Temporary signs shall not remain in place for a period exceeding six months
with the following exception:
§ 315-202. Appeal of decision of Zoning Officer; filing of application
for permit.
A. Temporary real estate signs.
A. Administration. The Zoning Officer shall only issue an approval for the
erection or construction of a sign which meets the requirements of this
article. Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Zoning
Officer by filing such appeal with the Zoning Board of Adjustment on
forms provided therefor.
B. Filing procedures. Application for a permit to erect, hang or place a
sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the Zoning Officer.
Each application shall be accompanied by plans showing the area of the
sign, size and character, method of illumination, if any, the exact
location proposed for such sign and, in the case of a projecting sign, the
proposed method of fastening such sign to the building structure, the
vertical distance between such sign and the finished grade and the
horizontal distance between such sign and the curb and also between
such sign and the right-of-way line.
§ 315-198 TRENTON CODE § 315-202
305:982
§ 315-203. Signs which do not require a permit.
The following signs may be erected, constructed, placed and maintained
without a permit:
§ 315-204. Signs which require permits.
No sign, except those listed in § 315-203 above, shall be erected,
constructed, placed or structurally altered without a permit from the Zoning
Officer.
§ 315-205. Signs in residential districts.
§ 315-206. Signs in MU, BA, BB and DD Districts.
C. Additional information. Each applicant shall, upon the request of the
Zoning Officer, submit any additional information deemed necessary.
A. Temporary real estate signs. Such signs shall not be illuminated nor
exceed four square feet.
B. Temporary construction signs. Such signs shall not be illuminated and
shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be removed promptly
upon completion of the work.
C. Temporary signs of tradespeople, mechanics, painters and other
artisans. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet and shall be
removed promptly upon completion of the work.
D. Warning and trespassing signs. Such signs shall not exceed three
square feet.
E. On-site directional signs. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in
area.
F. Advertisement and informational signs. Such signs shall not exceed
eight square feet in area.
G. Political signs. Such signs shall not be limited as to size.
A. Only the following types of signs shall be permitted in residential
districts:
(1) Signs not requiring a permit, as specified in § 315-203 above.
(2) Nameplate and identification signs. Such signs shall be no larger
than one square foot.
B. Number of signs. Unless otherwise specified herein, not more than one
such sign shall be placed on any property, unless that property fronts on
more than one street, in which event not more than one sign may be
erected on each street frontage.
§ 315-202 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-206
305:983
§ 315-207. Signs in Industrial Districts.
A. Only the following type of signs shall be permitted in the MU, BA and
BB Districts:
(1) Signs not requiring a permit as specified in § 315-203 above.
(2) Signs permitted in residential district as specified in § 315-205
above.
(3) Facade signs. Such sign shall not project more than 18 inches
beyond the building and shall not exceed an area equal to either
10% of the front wall area of the ground floor, including window
and door areas, or 25 square feet in an MU District or 50 square
feet in BA and BB Districts, whichever is smaller. Such sign shall
not be closer than eight feet to the ground level of the building and
shall not have a vertical dimension in excess of two feet in an MU
District or 2 1/2 feet in BA and BB Districts.
(4) Noncommercial advertisement and information signs.
(a) Only signs bearing a noncommercial message shall be
permitted.
(b) No sign shall be permitted which bears a commercial message
advertising an activity, service or product conducted or
available on the premises upon which the sign is located.
B. Number of signs. Unless otherwise specified herein, not more than one
facade sign shall be permitted for each commercial use on any property,
unless the property fronts on more than one street, in which event not
more than one facade sign may be erected for each commercial use on
each street frontage.
C. Signs in DD Districts. Signs permitted in DD Districts shall be as
specified in § 315-115.
A. Only the following signs shall be permitted in industrial districts.
(1) Signs not requiring a permit as specified in § 315-203 above.
(2) Signs permitted in residential districts as specified in § 315-205
above.
(3) Facade signs. Such sign shall not project more than two feet
beyond the building and shall not exceed an area equal to either
20% of the front wall area of the ground floor, including window
and door areas, or 100 square feet, whichever is smaller. Such sign
shall not be closer than eight feet to the ground level of the building
and shall not have a vertical dimension in excess of four feet.
(4) Freestanding signs. Such signs shall not exceed a height of 25 feet,
measured from the ground level to the top of the structure. The
§ 315-206 TRENTON CODE § 315-207
305:984
bottom edge of the sign shall not be less than 10 feet above ground
level. The area of such sign shall not exceed 75 square feet and may
be interior-lighted with nonglaring lights or may be illuminated by
shielded floodlights.
(5) Billboards.
(a) A billboard is a permitted use, provided that:
[1] The maximum size of the billboard does not exceed 300
square feet.
[2] The billboard is not located within 500 feet of a residential
or mixed-use zone district.
[3] The billboard is not located within 1,000 feet of the D&R
Canal.
[4] No billboard shall extend over a public sidewalk or other
public area.
[5] No billboard or billboards shall be stacked over or placed
next to any billboard.
(b) A billboard is a conditional use if the advertising area,
including any trim, of the billboard exceeds 300 square feet,
but is no more than 672 square feet in size; or if the billboard is
located within 500 feet of a residential or mixed-use zone. See
Article XXII, Conditional Uses (§ 315-132 et seq.).
B. Number of signs.
(1) Unless otherwise specified herein, not more than one facade sign
shall be permitted for each commercial use on any property, unless
the property fronts on more than one street, in which event not
more than one facade sign may be erected for each commercial use
on each street frontage.
(2) Unless otherwise specified, not more than one freestanding sign
shall be placed on any property unless the property fronts on more
than one street, in which event not more than one freestanding sign
may be erected on each street frontage.
§ 315-207 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-207
305:985

ARTICLE XXVI
Lighting and Landscaping
§ 315-208. Lighting guidelines.
All site plan applications shall include a lighting plan. The lighting plan
shall include the location, type and height of light, standard, radius of
light, manufacturer's specification sheet and intensity in footcandles for all
proposed exterior lighting. All parking, loading and unloading areas and
walkways thereto shall be adequately illuminated during the hours between
sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation.
§ 315-209. Lighting design standards.
A. Lighting shall be designed so as not to create a hazard or nuisance to
adjoining properties or the traveling public. It shall be designed so as to
avoid light spillage beyond the property as as light pollution and glare
above the property.
B. The use of energy-efficient light fixtures and bulbs shall be encouraged.
C. The following design standards shall be followed:
(1) The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the principal building within the area of
development.
(2) The base of the light fixture shall be as close to grade as possible.
(3) The maximum height of freestanding lights shall be the same as the
principal building, but not exceeding 25 feet.
(4) All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of
the cone of illumination to 150°.
(5) Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent
residents, the lights shall be appropriately shielded.
(6) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings should be avoided.
(7) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being
easily damaged by vehicles.
(8) Lighting should be located along streets, parking areas, at
intersections and where various types of circulation systems
merge, intersect or split.
(9) Pathways and sidewalks shall be lighted.
(10) Stairways, sloping or rising paths and building entrances and exits
shall be illuminated.
(11) The following intensity in footcandles shall be provided:
§ 315-208 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-209
305:987
§ 315-210. Landscaping.
(a) Parking lots: a minimum of 0.5 footcandle throughout.
(b) Intersections: 1.0 footcandle.
(c) Maximum at property lines: 1.0 footcandle.
A. All site plans shall include a landscape plan. The landscape plan shall be
professionally prepared and shall identify existing and proposed trees,
shrubs, bushes, plant material, ground cover and natural features.
Existing trees and mature landscape features on a site should be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable. When existing natural
growth is proposed to be retained, the application shall include in the
plans proposed methods to protect the existing trees and growth during
and after construction. These shall include fences, berms, curbing, tree
wells and similar devices.
B. Proposed landscaping on a site shall accomplish the following
objectives: shading of parking areas and walkways; ground cover
consisting of planted materials or usable features such as seating,
plazas or similar areas; erosion control; and attractive streetscapes and
common areas.
C. The following landscape design standards shall be followed in the
preparation of the landscape plan:
(1) Landscaping shall be located to provide for climate control. For
example, shade trees on the south to shield the summer sun and
evergreens on the north for wind breaks.
(2) Landscaping shall be used to accent and complement buildings.
(3) Landscaping shall be provided in public areas, recreational sites
and adjacent to buildings and shall incorporate seating
opportunities.
(4) Vines and climbing plants shall be considered for large expanses of
walls.
(5) Massing trees at critical points rather than in a straight line at
predetermined intervals along streets and varying tree types by
neighborhood shall be considered.
(6) Smaller trees shall be used on narrow streets and drives.
(7) Ground cover shall be used to prevent erosion on slopes.
(8) A variety and mixture of landscaping shall be provided. The variety
should consider susceptibility to disease, colors, seasons, textures,
shapes, blossoms and foliage.
(9) Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered in
the choice of landscaping.
§ 315-209 TRENTON CODE § 315-210
305:988
(10) The impact of any proposed landscaping plan at various time
intervals shall be considered. For example, shrubs may grow and
eventually block sight distances and foundation plants may
eventually block window openings.
(11) Providing fewer larger specimens instead of more smaller ones
shall be considered.
(12) Deciduous trees shall have straight single trunks of at least 2 1/2
inches caliper at planting, as measured three feet above ground
level, and with the lowest branches at least four feet to six feet
above the ground. Evergreens shall be at least four feet tall, and
shrubs shall be at least two feet tall at planting. All trees shall be
balled and burlapped.
(13) Street trees shall be planted in a minimum of a four-foot-square
open base at intervals depending on the type:
(a) Large trees: interval of 40 feet to 50 feet.
(b) Medium trees: interval of 30 feet to 40 feet.
(c) Small and ornamental trees: interval of 20 feet to 30 feet.
(14) Entrances to site shall have special landscaping treatment.
(15) Existing large trees shall be saved by not varying the grade around
the trees by more than six inches to 12 inches through the use of
tree wells and by erecting protective fences. Maximum effort shall
be made to save mature trees.
(16) In parking lots, at least 5% of the parking area shall be landscaped,
and one tree for each 10 spaces shall be installed. The landscaping
should be located in protected areas, along walkways, center
islands and at the end of bays. In narrow islands, low spreading
plants are appropriate.
(17) Landscaped screening and/or attractive fencing shall be provided
as a buffer between off-street parking, loading and service areas
and sidewalks, streets and alleys.
(18) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as not
to obstruct vision. A variety of different types of trees shall be
grouped to break up the mass of cars.
§ 315-210 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-210
305:989

ARTICLE XXVII
Open Space and Public Art
§ 315-211. Applicability.
§ 315-212. Open space area requirements.
A. Nonresidential development.
(1) Any development application for new construction for
nonresidential or nonindustrial use, where the gross floor area or
lot area exceeds 5,000 square feet, if located within the Downtown
District or the Business A District, or exceeds 20,000 square feet, if
located elsewhere, shall meet the requirements of this section.
(2) The applicant shall be required to submit, as part of an application
for preliminary site plan approval, an open space plan, which shall
be in compliance with this chapter. No development application for
preliminary site plan approval shall be deemed complete unless an
open space plan has been provided or a waiver thereof has been
obtained.
B. Residential development.
(1) Any application for new residential development, and the
conversion of nonresidential buildings into residential space with
10 or more units in one structure, and located in any zone district,
shall meet the requirements of this subsection.
(2) The applicant shall be required to submit, as part of an application
for preliminary site plan approval, an open space plan, which shall
be in compliance with this chapter. No development application for
preliminary site plan approval shall be deemed complete unless an
open space plan has been provided or a waiver thereof has been
obtained.
A. Nonresidential development.
(1) A minimum open space area equal to two square feet for every 100
square feet of new or rehabilitated gross floor area shall be
provided.
(2) Required open space may be provided, either on the exterior or
interior of the building, or both, and may consist of one or two
areas on the building site or on sites adjacent to the building site.
(3) The open space, both interior and exterior, shall be accessible to
the public for a minimum of 50 hours per week.
B. Residential development.
(1) A minimum open space area equal to 120 square feet for every
dwelling unit shall be provided.
§ 315-211 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-212
305:991
§ 315-213. Open space plan waiver.
In lieu of submitting an open space plan, the applicant for preliminary site
plan approval may request the Planning Board to waive the requirement
for an open space plan because of building design and site limitation. If, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, an open space plan cannot reasonably
be implemented, the applicant shall be required to pay to the City a sum of
$0.50 per gross square foot for nonresidential development and $500 per
dwelling unit for residential development. These funds shall be dedicated to
a special fund for the purpose of enhancing open public spaces within the
City of Trenton in accordance with an approved budget by the City Council.
Such payment is to be made by the applicant prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 315-214. Open space plan requirements.
(2) Required open space shall be provided on the building site but need
not be open to the public.
A. The open space plan required under this chapter shall indicate the size
and configuration of exterior or interior public open space having
appropriate landscaping features, such as trees and shrubbery, sitting
areas, plazas and similar open space, designed chiefly for public
pedestrian enjoyment. If such plan includes interior space, the ceiling
height shall be a minimum of 20 feet and be on the first floor of the
building with natural light as a primary source of lighting through
skylights or similar window design.
B. The Planning Board shall, in determining the sufficiency of an open
space plan, consider the following factors:
(1) Reasonable access to the open space area from the public sidewalk
on the building site.
(2) The availability of natural daylight as a primary source of daytime
light for the open space.
(3) Reasonable spacing and selection of trees and shrubbery to
enhance the area visually and to provide for convenient pedestrian
access throughout the open space.
(4) Adequacy and design of trash receptacles for placement of litter.
(5) Appropriateness of the size of an open space area with respect to
its particular function.
C. The maintenance of the open space shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Failure to properly maintain and keep free of litter open space
approved under this chapter shall make the owner subject to penalties
a set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the
City of Trenton.
§ 315-212 TRENTON CODE § 315-214
305:992
§ 315-215. Public art requirement.
D. Refer to Article XXVI (§ 315-208 et seq.) of this chapter for additional
lighting and landscaping requirements.
A. In addition to meeting the open space requirements set forth herein,
any application for a project which comprises a nonresidential or
nonindustrial building having in excess of 50,000 gross square feet
shall include publicly visible works of art of such medium, dimensions
and placement as shall be deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
B. The provision of such art shall not exceed an amount equal to $0.50 per
square foot of construction or 5% of the total cost of construction,
whichever is greater. In lieu of the aforementioned expenditures for the
provision of art, the developer shall have the option of contributing to
an Arts Development Fund an amount equal to $0.50 per square foot of
construction or 0.5% of the total costs of construction, whichever is
greater.
C. The initial art proposal shall be submitted as part of the preliminary site
plan application.
D. Payment of the in-lieu-of funds shall be made within 60 days following
the grant of final site approval.
§ 315-214 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-215
305:993

ARTICLE XXVIII
Performance and Improvement Standards
§ 315-216. Performance standards.
A. Electrical or electronic devices. All electrical or electronic devices shall
be subject to the provisions of Public Law 90-602, 90th Congress, HR
10790, dated October 18, 1968, entitled "An Act for the Protection of
Public Health and Safety from the Dangers of Electronic Product
Radiation." Radiation products, as defined in DHEW Publications No.
(FDA) 75-8003, shall be so limited and controlled so that no measurable
energy can be recorded at any point beyond the property boundaries.
The applicant, upon request, shall produce certified data wherein
measurements made in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in the DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003 adequately
demonstrate compliance with the minimum standards established by
the Act.
B. Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of a
strong, dazzling light or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall
be shielded, buffered and directed so that glare, direct light or
reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties, adjoining
units, adjoining districts or streets.
C. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
Further, no use shall be permitted which could cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any body of water, except that this provision shall not
apply to any sewerage treatment plant which has received approval by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Noise. No use shall produce noise levels greater than those permitted
by local regulations or those rules established by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, as they may be adopted and
amended, whichever is more restrictive.
E. Odor. Odors shall not be discernible at the lot line or beyond.
F. Storage and waste disposal. No provision shall be made for the
depositing of materials or waste upon a lot where they may be
transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, where they can
contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise render such an
underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or
recreation, or where they will destroy aquatic life. Provision shall be
made for all material or waste which might cause fumes or dust, which
constitute a fire or toxic hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents and insects to be enclosed in appropriate
containers to eliminate such hazards.
G. Ventilation. No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent
uses nor contaminate the air with excessive heat or odor. Further, no air
conditioners or exhaust fans shall be permitted to discharge exhausted
§ 315-216 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-216
305:995
§ 315-217. Improvement standards.
Site plans for all proposed street improvements, water and sewer facilities,
public utilities and stormwater drainage shall be designed in accordance
with improvement standards prepared by the City Department of Public
Works. In those instances where such standards are not available or
applicable, the applicant shall use the improvement standards contained
in the publication entitled "Model Subdivision and Site Ordinance" and
published by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division
of Housing and Development, Office of Program Analysis, CN800, Trenton,
New Jersey, and dated January 1987, or the latest revision thereof.
air unless set back from all property lines 10 feet or equipped with
baffles to deflect the discharged air away from the adjacent use.
H. Explosive and inflammable matter. No use shall create an imminent
hazard in regard to explosivity and inflammability. All uses must be in
conformance with the City Fire Code.123
I. Emissions. All fuel-generated industries shall comply with the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection standards for
emissions, and specifically with the standards of the Clean Air Act.
J. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the immediate lot.
K. Screening. There shall be adequate screening of any unsightly
condition created in conjunction with a permitted use.
L. Drainage. No stormwater or natural drainage which originated on the
property, or water generated by an activity, such as air conditioners or
swimming pools, shall be diverted across property lines, unless
transported in an approved or existing drainage system.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 97, Fire Prevention.
§ 315-216 TRENTON CODE § 315-217
305:996
ARTICLE XXIX
Historic Landmark Site Regulations
§ 315-218. Restoration permit required.
§ 315-219. Development application.
§ 315-220. Review of application not requiring review by Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, paint or restore a
structure, or move a structure into or within an historic district, nor
shall any person cause any such work to be performed, nor shall any
construction permit for such work be issued by the Construction
Official, unless a restoration permit has been approved by the Historic
Landmarks Commission or, in the case of a development application, by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. When emergency repairs are required, the Construction Official shall
notify the Chairperson of the Landmarks Commission or the City's
Historic Preservation Officer and a recommendation regarding
emergency repairs shall be made within 48 hours. The Construction
Official may allow temporary repairs to an historic site prior to the
Landmarks Commission's review when these repairs are necessary for
the building's occupancy or for public safety. Such emergency repairs
shall be made to conform to the provisions of this section within 90
days.
A. In the event that the proposed activities described in § 315-218 are
included in a development application submitted for the approval of a
subdivision, site plan, conditional use, variance or change of use, the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make available
to the Historic Landmarks Commission an informational copy of the
application. However, failure to make the informational copy available
shall not invalidate any hearing or proceedings.
B. The Historic Landmarks Commission may provide its advice through a
written report submitted by the Commission or by the oral testimony of
its staff or one of its members at the hearing on the application. The
Commission shall make any recommendations within 45 days of an
application for a restoration permit.
C. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall review any
such development application to determine whether the proposed
activity conforms with the design criteria and guidelines set forth in
§§ 315-224 to 315-227 below. In the event that the proposed activity
conforms with such criteria and guidelines, the Board shall approve a
restoration permit when it issues the other required approvals.
A. In the event that the proposed activities described in § 315-218 above
are not included in a development application requiring review by the
§ 315-218 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-220
305:997
§ 315-221. Review of other activities.
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, then prior to the
issuance of a construction, zoning, demolition or sign permit, the
Construction Official shall immediately refer such application to the
Historic Landmarks Commission for a written report on the application.
B. The Commission shall complete its review of the application for a
construction, zoning, demolition or sign permit and shall submit its
report to the Construction Official within 45 days of his/her referral of
the application setting forth its findings of whether the proposed
activity conforms with the criteria and guidelines set forth in §§ 315-224
to 315-227 below. In the event that the proposed activity conforms with
such criteria and guidelines, the Commission shall approve a
restoration permit for such activity. The Commission shall notify the
Construction Official, in writing, of its action. Failure of the Commission
to report within the forty-five-day period shall constitute a report in
favor of issuance of the permit. If the Commission recommends to the
Construction Official against the issuance of a permit or recommends
conditions to the permit to be issued, the Construction Official shall
deny the issuance of the permit or include conditions in the permit as
the case may be.
A. In the event that the proposed activities described in § 315-219 above
are not included in a development application, as set forth in § 315-218
above, or subject to the issuance of a permit, as set forth in § 315-220
above, and application shall be made to the Historic Landmarks
Commission or the Construction Official for the issuance of a
restoration permit. The Construction Official shall immediately refer
the application to the Historic Landmarks Commission.
B. The Commission shall complete its review of the application for a
restoration permit and shall submit its report to the Construction
Official within 45 days of his/her referral of the application and shall
determine whether the proposed activity conforms with the criteria and
guidelines, set forth in §§ 315-224 to 315-227 below. In the event that
the proposed activity conforms with such criteria and guidelines, the
Commission shall approve a restoration permit for such activity. The
Commission shall notify the Construction Official, in writing, of its
action. Failure of the Commission to report within the forty-five-day
period shall constitute a report in favor of the issuance of the permit. If
the Commission recommends to the Construction Official against the
issuance of a permit or recommends conditions to the permit to be
issued, the Construction Official shall deny the issuance of the permit or
include the conditions in the permit as the case may be.
C. Applications for restoration permits involving only paint and color
selection can be approved by the City's historic preservation specialist,
without review by the Commission.
§ 315-220 TRENTON CODE § 315-222
305:998
§ 315-222. Commission advice on any development application.
The Historic Landmarks Commission may provide its advice pertaining
to any development application or other application pending before the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Such advice may be
conveyed through the Commission's delegation of one of its members or
staff to testify orally at the hearing on any application and to explain any
written report that the Commission may have submitted.
§ 315-223. Review by Council of negative recommendations of
Commission.
In the case of a decision of the Historic Landmarks Commission constituting
a denial or negative recommendation, the applicant may, within 10 days
thereof, request a reconsideration, review or reversal of such decision by
filing a written request for same with the City Clerk. Upon timely filing of
such request, the City Clerk shall set the matter down for a hearing before
City Council. No decision or recommendation of the Historic Landmarks
Commission, to which timely objections have been filed, shall be final until
reviewed and approved by City Council at such hearing. If, after a hearing,
the City Council shall determine to reverse the decision under review, in
whole or in part, or otherwise to withhold approval of any such decision, it
shall so state and return the matter to the Historic Landmarks Commission
with a summary of its findings and with direction to reissue its decision
in conformance with the decision of City Council, or to clarify, reconsider
or otherwise dispose of the issue before it within 15 days of the Council's
decision, or such other time as may be necessary to avoid undue delay or
hardship, in default of which the application shall be deemed granted as
applied for.
§ 315-224. General criteria and guidelines.
The Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Historic
Landmarks Commission or the Construction Official, as the case may be,
shall approve a restoration permit only if the activity as proposed, or as
modified by conditions imposed by either the Board or the Commission, as
the case may be:
§ 315-225. New construction; additions; moving of structures.
A. Is consistent with the additional criteria of this article and with the
purposes of this chapter.
B. Would not adversely affect the character and appearance of the Historic
District, the relationships among structures or the appearance between
structures and public ways in the district.
C. Would not adversely affect the exterior architectural features and
setting of the structure and its historical and architectural interest.
§ 315-222 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-225
305:999
A. A certificate of appropriateness to permit the construction of new
structures or additions to existing structures, to move structures into or
within an historic district, or involving proposed activities pertaining to
outbuildings shall be approved only if the activity as proposed, or as
modified by conditions imposed by the Planning Board, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Historic Landmarks Commission:
(1) Is not incongruous with the existing streetscapes of the Historic
District; and
(2) Is visually compatible with the structures and places to which it is
visually related, as determined by the following standards:
(a) The height of the proposed structure shall be visually
compatible with the adjacent structures.
(b) The relationship of the width of the proposed structure to the
height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with
structures and places to which it is visually related.
(c) The relationship of the width of windows to the height of
windows in a proposed structure shall be visually compatible
with the structures and places to which it is visually related.
(d) The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a
proposed structure shall be visually compatible with the
structures and places to which it is visually related.
(e) The relationship of the proposed structure to the open space
between it and adjoining structures shall be visually
compatible with the structures and places to which it is visually
related.
(f) The relationship of entrance and porch projections to the
street shall be visually compatible with the structures and
places to which it is visually related.
(g) The relationship of materials and textures of the facade and
roof of a proposed structure shall be visually compatible with
the predominant materials used in the structures to which it is
visually related.
(h) The roof shapes of a proposed structure shall be visually
compatible with structures to which it is visually related.
(i) Appurtenances, such as walls and open-type fencing, shall
form cohesive walls of enclosure along the street to the extent
necessary to maintain visual compatibility of the main
structure with the structures and places to which it is visually
related.
(j) The size of the proposed structure, the mass of the proposed
structure in relation to open spaces, the windows, door
§ 315-225 TRENTON CODE § 315-225
305:1000
§ 315-226. Activities involving existing structures, other than
demolition or removal.
openings, porches and balconies shall be visually compatible
with the structure and places to which it is visually related.
B. It is not the intent of this chapter to discourage contemporary
architectural expression or solely to encourage new construction that
simply emulates existing buildings of historic or architectural interest
of a certain period or specific architectural style but to preserve the
integrity and authenticity of the Historic District, to ensure the
compatibility of the new structures therein to the greatest extent
possible, and to encourage diverse but compatible architecture. If past
architectural styles are to be used, a copy of a specific structure is
preferable to an amalgam of building types and styles.
A. A restoration permit for proposed activities pertaining to existing
structures, other than when such proposed activity is the construction
of an addition to a structure, the alteration of an outbuilding or the
demolition or removal of such structure from the Historic District, shall
be approved only if the activity as proposed, or as modified by
conditions imposed by the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the Historic Landmarks Commission or the administrative
officer, as the case may be:
(1) Preserves or enhances the historical or architectural value and
character of the structure; or
(2) Seeks to return the structure, or the part covered by the
application, to a known or reasonably conceived previous
appearance, except that modifications of structures lacking
architectural merit and not in character with the Historic District
may be considered when the modifications make the building more
compatible.
B. In determining whether the applicant's proposal will restore the
authenticity of the structure, as hereby required, the following
guidelines, among other appropriate factors, shall when feasible be
followed:
(1) Existing materials, if they are the original materials of the original
structure or remodeling that is being restored, should be
maintained and repaired rather than replaced.
(2) Distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site, and its environment, should not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material, distinctive
architectural feature or examples of skilled craftsmanship should
be avoided.
(3) Architectural details of the original construction or remodeling that
is being restored or altered should be retained. This includes, but is
§ 315-225 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-226
305:1001
§ 315-227. Demolition or removal of structures.
not limited to, cornices and their brackets; window trims, such
as molded lintels; porch elements, such as posts, balustrades and
spindles; doors and windows, particularly their size and the
number and size of the individual panes.
(4) Structures and sites in an historic district shall be recognized as
products of their own time. Alterations that have no historic basis
and that seek to create an earlier or later appearance should be
discouraged.
(5) If an element must be replaced rather than repaired, a copy of the
original is preferable to a similar or conjectural piece.
(6) If a copy of a missing piece cannot be obtained, similar or
conjectural items are preferable to none at all.
(7) In the event replacement of original materials is necessary, the new
materials should match the material being replaced in design,
color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of
missing architectural features should be based on accurate
duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical or
pictorial evidence to the extent possible, rather than conjectural
designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings.
(8) The original siding and roofing material should be maintained or
repaired, and if replacement is needed, it should be of the same
material and size. If the same material is not available, a substitute
material should be of the same shape, size and texture.
(9) Storm windows and doors should be as unobtrusive as possible.
(10) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
A. The Historic Landmarks Commission may deny the issuance of a
restoration permit for the demolition or removal of a structure. The
Historic Landmarks Commission shall consult civic groups and public
agencies and officials to ascertain how the City may preserve the
building or premises. The Commission shall attempt, with the owner, to
establish feasible plans for preservation of structures where moving or
demolition thereof would be a significant loss to the public and the City.
B. In regard to an application to demolish any structure within an historic
district, the following matters shall be considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural and cultural significance.
§ 315-226 TRENTON CODE § 315-227
305:1002
§ 315-228. Completion of activities under restoration permit.
(2) Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted in the
zoning provisions of this chapter.
(3) Its importance to the City and the extent to which its historical,
architectural or cultural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it cannot be reproduced or
could be reproduced only with great difficulty and cost.
(5) The extent to which its retention or rehabilitation would promote
the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate
values, generating business, creating new jobs, attracting visitors,
students, historians, artists and artisans, attracting new residents,
encouraging study and interest in American history, stimulating
study in architecture and design, educating citizens in American
culture and heritage or making the City a more attractive and
desirable place in which to live.
(6) If it is within an historic district, the probable impact of its removal
upon the character of the district.
C. The purpose of this section is to encourage the preservation of
historical buildings and to offer the City, interested persons, historical
societies or other organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange
for the preservation of buildings.
D. In regard to the application to move any structure from a district to a
location outside the district, the following criteria shall be considered:
(1) The historic or architectural loss to the site of the original location
and the district as a whole.
(2) The compelling reasons for not retaining the structure at its
present site.
(3) The probability of significant damages to the structure at its
present site.
A. Activities authorized by a restoration permit shall be completed within
12 months of the date of issuance thereof, unless the term is extended
by the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Historic
Landmarks Commission, as the case may be.
B. A restoration permit may be approved, with or without conditions, even
though the application does not conform with criteria and guidelines
set forth in §§ 315-224 to 315-227 above, if the Board or the
Commission, as the case may be, determines that applying such
standards to the application is impracticable or will result in undue
§ 315-227 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-228
305:1003
§ 315-229. Designated landmarks and historic sites.
The following districts and buildings have been designated historic sites
and districts to which the provisions governing historic preservation apply
and, pending review and recommendation of the Planning Board of any
modifications thereof, shall remain as designated and subject to the
regulations and restrictions hereof:
Individual Landmarks and Sites
Site Location
204 West State Street, Interior 120 North Warren Street
222 West State Street, Interior 222 West State Street
Ackerman Building 210 East Hanover Street
Adams and Sickles Building One West End Avenue
Cadwalader Park Parkside and Bellevue Avenues
Carver Center 36-44 Fowler Street
Champale Office 1024 Lamberton Street
Delaware-Raritan Canal House 1 Prospect Street
Delaware-Raritan Canal City-wide
Dickinson House 701 Clinton Avenue
Douglas House Front and Montgomery Streets
Elks Lodge No. 105 120 North Warren Street
Ellarslie Mansion Cadwalader Park
Emlan House 312 West State Street
First Presbyterian Church 120 East State Street
Friends Meeting House Montgomery and East Hanover
Streets
Golden Swan 101-103 South Warren Street
Grinslade's Blacksmith 334 North Olden Avenue
The Hermitage 46 Colonial Avenue
Site of Hunterdon County Courthouse 16 South Warren Street and Prison
Wall
John T. Nixon School 20 Bellevue Avenue
Kelsey Building 101 West State Street
Ladder Company No. 2 Firehouse 1005 South Clinton Avenue
hardship to the owner and that such hardship outweighs the public
interest by denying the application.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any activity performed
pursuant to a valid and existing development approval or construction
permit issued prior to the effective date of this chapter (May 25, 1989).
§ 315-228 TRENTON CODE § 315-229
305:1004
Individual Landmarks and Sites
Site Location
Mercer Street Friends Center 151 Mercer Street
Mercer Cemetery 51 South Clinton Avenue
Mount Carmel Guild 73 North Clinton Avenue
Mt. Zion Church 135-137 Perry Street
New Jersey National Bank One West State Street
New Jersey Steel and Iron Co.
Building
501 John Fitch Way
New Jersey State Employees'
Association
15 West State Street
Old Barracks Front and Willow Streets
Old Eagle Tavern 431-433 South Broad Street
Old Mill House School Lane and Mill Road
Old Masonic Temple South Willow and West Lafayette
Streets
Old City Hall 2 North Broad Street
Pentecostal Church 207 North Montgomery Street
Public Library, Interior 130 Academy Street
Reading Freight Station 260 North Willow Street
Rudolph U. Kuser 315 West State Street
Shaky Bridge City Water Works, vicinity Calhoun
Street
St. Michael's Episcopal Church 140-144 North Warren Streets
Trenton City Hall 319 East State Street
Trenton Elk's Lodge No. 105, Interior 120 North Warren Street
Trenton Battle Monument North Broad and North Warren
Streets
Trenton State Prison Warden's House 498 Second Street
Trenton State Prison Administration
Building
392 Third Street
William Trent House 518 South Warren Street
Historic Districts
Berkely Square Historic District
Ewing-Carroll Historic District
Greenwood Hamilton Historic District
Fisher, Richey, Perdicaris Historic District, as described in Ordinance No.
89-85
§ 315-229 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-229
305:1005
Hanover Academy Historic District
Mill Hill Historic District
State House Historic District
§ 315-229 TRENTON CODE § 315-229
305:1006
ARTICLE XXX
Supplementary Provisions
§ 315-230. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
A. The following provisions shall apply to uses and structures which
lawfully existed prior to the adoption of the zoning regulations or any
amendment thereof but which do not presently conform to this article:
(1) Continuation permitted. Any nonconforming use or structure which
lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this chapter or any
amendment thereto may be continued upon the lot or in the
structure so occupied. Any such nonconforming structure may be
restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof, as
provided in Subsection A(5) below.
(2) Subdivisions involving same. No lot containing a nonconforming
use shall be subdivided so as to reduce the lot area of such lot. No
lot containing a nonconforming structure shall be subdivided so as
to increase the degree or extent of the nonconforming condition.
(3) Expansions or alterations. The following provisions shall apply to
the expansion or alteration of nonconforming structures or uses:
(a) Any nonconforming use or structure which is nonconforming
because of use shall not be enlarged, extended or structurally
altered in any manner whatsoever.
(b) No nonconforming structure may be altered if the alteration
would increase the degree or extent of the nonconforming
condition or would create any condition on the property that
would not be in conformance with this chapter.
(c) A nonconforming use or structure changed or altered to a
conforming use or structure may not thereafter be changed
back to a nonconforming use or structure.
(d) A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed or
altered to diminish the nature, degree or extent of the
nonconforming condition in one location while simultaneously
increasing the nature, degree or extent of the nonconforming
condition in another location on the property.
(4) Abandonment of nonconforming uses. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Subsection A(1) above, in the event that there shall be
an abandonment of any nonconforming use, such use shall not be
permitted to continue. For purposes of administering this chapter,
a nonconforming use shall be presumed to be abandoned if such
use shall have ceased to operate for a period of 18 consecutive
calendar months, absent showing by the property owner, and a
finding by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, that the use has not
been abandoned, notwithstanding the cessation of operation.
§ 315-230 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-230
305:1007
(5) Restoration or repairs. Nothing in this section shall prevent
restoration or continuance of a nonconforming building or
structure which is partially destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God,
or of any public enemy, or the like. "Partial destruction" shall be
defined as any destruction of less than 50% of the area or volume,
whichever is more restrictive, of the whole building or structure at
the time of the partial destruction. If, however, any such building or
structure shall be destroyed in excess of 50% of the area or volume
of the whole building or structure at the time of such destruction,
then after any permitted reconstruction, the same may be used
only in such manner as to conform to all the requirements, terms
and conditions of this chapter.
B. The following provisions shall apply to any lot which lawfully existed at
the time of the adoption of the zoning regulations or any amendment
thereto but which presently does not conform to the zoning
requirements for lot area, lot width, lot frontage, or lot location:
(1) Such lots may be used for any use permitted in the district in which
it is located, subject to the following requirements:
(a) At the time of and since the adoption of the zoning regulation
making such lot nonconforming, the owner of the lot shall not
have owned any adjoining property, or the lot must be part of a
recorded subdivision approved by the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment; and
(b) All other applicable zoning regulations besides lot area, lot
width, lot frontage or lot location must be complied with.
(2) Such lots shall not be subdivided so as to increase the degree or
extent of any nonconforming lot condition or so as to prevent
compliance with this chapter by any reasonable future
development on the property.
C. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure
exists may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying
that the use or structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance
which rendered the use or structure nonconforming. The applicant
shall have the burden of proof. Application pursuant hereto may be
made to the administrative officer within one year of the adoption of the
ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming or at any
time to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The administrative officer shall
be entitled to demand and receive for such certificate issued by him a
reasonable fee not in excess of those provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and
54:5-15. The fees collected by the official shall be paid by him to the
municipality. Denial by the administrative officer shall be appealable to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 to 40:55D-75 shall
apply to applications or appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 315-230 TRENTON CODE § 315-231
305:1008
§ 315-231. Height exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to limit or restrict the height
of a church spire, radio or wireless station, belfry, appurtenant structure,
clock tower, chimney flue, water tank, elevator bulkhead, stage tower,
scenery loft or similar structure.
§ 315-232. Yard exceptions.
In all districts, building setback lines established for certain streets by this
chapter in § 315-240 or by special act of City Council or the Planning Board
incident to site plan approval shall have precedence over the setbacks
established in Articles XIII to XXI, § 315-86 et seq.
A. Front yards.
(1) In all districts: When a building extends through from street to
street, the front yard restrictions shall be observed on both streets.
(2) In all districts: When over 50% of structures on a block are set back
a uniform distance from the street, the front yard setback for new
construction shall be consistent with the majority of existing
structures on the street.
(3) In Residence A Districts. In no case shall a building be placed more
than 20 feet back of the front main wall of the nearest building
existing within 200 feet thereof. In the case of a corner lot, any
building other than a detached garage or other outbuilding may be
placed within 16 feet of the side property line.
(4) In Residence B-1, B-2 and B Districts. In no case shall a building be
placed more than 20 feet back of the front main wall of the nearest
building existing within 200 feet thereof. In the case of a corner lot,
any building other than a detached garage or other outbuilding
may be placed within 14 feet of the side property line.
(5) Residential lots on steep slopes. Where the topography is such that
access to a private garage built behind a front building setback
line, as required by this chapter, is impracticable, it shall be
permissible to place such a building, not exceeding one story in
height, within the front yard space, provided that no part of the
structure extends above the first level of a dwelling on an adjoining
premises and within 100 feet thereof, or, if no such dwelling exists
within such specified distance, no part of the structure extends
more than four feet above the mean ground level of the lot on which
it is to be erected, at the established building setback line, and no
part of the structure extends nearer to the street property line than
six feet.
(6) Architectural features. Architectural features may project into a
required front yard a distance not greater than the following:
§ 315-231 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-232
305:1009
(a) Open entrance shelter: four feet.
(b) Cornices and eaves: three feet.
(c) Window sills and belt courses: six inches.
(d) Chimneys: 24 inches.
(7) Fire escapes. Fire escapes are not permitted in front yards.
(8) Open balconies. Open balconies, not covered by a roof or canopy,
which extend above the level of the first floor of the building may be
erected to project into front yards, provided that such structures
are not more than 30 inches in depth.
(9) Porches, platforms or landing places. Open structures, such as
steps, platforms, paved terraces or landing places, which do not
extend above the level of the first floor of the building, having no
wall more than 30 inches high, may project into a required front
yard for a distance not exceeding eight feet, or in accordance with
established same side of street front yard setbacks for such
projections. When the front yard setback for a building is zero feet,
such open structures may encroach on the public right-of-way for a
distance as specified in Chapter 42, Building Construction, of the
City Code.
(10) Awnings; movable canopies. Except as regulated elsewhere, an
awning or movable canopy may project into a required front yard
not more than eight feet. No awning or canopy shall be less than
eight feet above the ground level.
(11) Bay or bow window. A bay or bow window may project into a
required front yard not more than 30 inches.
(12) Hanging of laundry. The hanging of or drying laundry is not
permitted in front yards.
B. Side yards.
(1) Architectural features. Architectural features may project into a
required side yard a distance not greater than the following:
(a) Open entrance shelters: four feet.
(b) Cornices and eaves: three feet.
(c) Window sills and belt courses: six inches.
(d) Chimneys: two feet.
(e) Steps and landings: four feet.
(f) Basement covered stairwells: six inches.
§ 315-232 TRENTON CODE § 315-232
305:1010
§ 315-233. Greenhouses, storage sheds and private garages in
residential zones.
(2) Fire escapes. An open or lattice-enclosed, fireproof, outside fire
escape may project not more than five feet into a required side
yard.
(3) Open balconies. Open balconies, not covered by a roof or canopy,
which extend above the level of the first floor of the building may be
erected to project into side yards not more than 30 inches.
(4) Movable awnings and canopies. A movable awning or canopy may
project into a required side yard not more than five feet.
(5) Bay or bow window. A bay or bow window may project into a
required side yard not more than 30 inches.
C. Rear yards.
(1) Architectural features. Architectural features may project into a
required rear yard a distance not greater than the following:
(a) Cornices and eaves: three feet.
(b) Window sills and belt courses: six inches.
(c) Chimneys: two feet.
(2) Fire escapes. An open or lattice-enclosed, fireproof, outside fire
escape may project not more than eight feet into a required rear
yard.
(3) Open balconies. Open balconies, not covered by a roof or canopy,
which extend above the level of the first floor of the building may be
erected to project into rear yards not more than 30 inches.
(4) Steps, platforms, decks, paved terraces or landing places. Open
structures, such as steps, platforms, paved terraces or landing
places, which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the
building, having no wall more than 30 inches high, may project into
a required rear yard for a distance not exceeding 20 feet.
(5) Awnings and movable canopies. An awning or movable canopy may
project into a required rear yard not more than 30 inches.
(6) Bay or bow windows. A bay or bow window may project into a
required rear yard not more than 30 inches.
A. In Residential A and B-1 Zones, no greenhouse, storage shed, private
garage or other outbuilding shall be placed closer to a side or rear
property line than three feet, or one foot in the case of a property
abutting an alley. If the building is of frame construction, the distance
shall be increased to six feet. For each foot the height of such a building
exceeds 15 feet, the offset from the side and rear property lines shall be
§ 315-232 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-233
305:1011
§ 315-234. Exterior storage of vehicles, trucks and boats in
residential zones.
increased by six inches. No detached garage or other outbuilding shall
be placed closer to a front street property line than a distance equal
to 1/2 the width of the lot, up to a distance that need not exceed
50 feet. The above, however, shall not prevent the construction of a
garage as a structural part of a dwelling, and a one-story garage so
constructed may extend into a rear yard for the entire width or depth
of the structure.
B. In Residential B and MU Zones, the requirements for greenhouses,
storage sheds, private garages or other outbuildings shall be the same
as for Residential A and B-1 Zones, as specified in Subsection A above,
except:
(1) It shall be permissible to build a joint garage on adjoining lots.
(2) An attached garage may extend into a required side yard for a
distance not exceeding four feet, provided that it has no window
opening or openings at the side, does not exceed one story or 14
feet in height, and does not extend nearer to a side lot line than six
feet.
C. No garage or other outbuilding shall be used for dwelling purposes,
except by a person or persons employed on the premises and when no
part of the building is closer to a side or rear property line than 20 feet,
and only when the structure satisfies all other applicable City codes and
ordinances.
D. No portable metal accessory building may be located closer than one
foot from a side or rear property line, provided that the one-foot area is
covered with a concrete weather-resistant covering or similar material
to prevent water from entering into any adjoining property and the
accumulation of debris. The structure shall be properly anchored to a
permanent solid base to prevent upheaval by wind force.
E. Metal accessory buildings shall not exceed seven feet in width, 10 feet
in length and eight feet in height. No metal accessory structure shall be
located closer than three feet to any habitable structure on the same lot
or any adjoining lot.
F. A carport may not be erected closer than one foot from a side or rear
property line. No detached carport shall be located closer than three
feet from any habitable structure on the same lot or any adjoining lot. A
carport shall in no case exceed 12 feet in width for one car, or 22 feet in
width for two cars in the rear yard, 22 feet in length and 15 feet in
height.
A. Business vehicles. Vehicles which are used for business purposes may
not be parked on any private property between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
§ 315-233 TRENTON CODE § 315-234
305:1012
§ 315-235. Trailers and recreational vehicles.
No automobile trailer or recreational vehicle shall be stored in the open for
over one week, except within the rear yard, at least three feet from any
adjoining property line.
and 6:00 a.m., except in enclosed garages or behind the front building
line.
B. Inoperable vehicles. Inoperable motor vehicles shall not be stored on
private property for more than three weeks, except in enclosed
garages.124
C. Boats. Except for canoes and boats of under 20 feet in length, boats
shall not be stored in the open for over one week, except within the rear
yard at least three feet in distance from any adjoining property line.
D. Trucks. To restrict and prohibit the parking of trucks, truck-tractors,
step vans, trailers and buses of registered gross vehicle weight in
excess of 8,000 pounds, or having more than four tiers, in residential
districts between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the following
shall apply:
(1) No person shall park or store any truck, truck-tractor, step van,
trailer or bus having a motor vehicle registration weight in excess
of 8,000 pounds gross weight, according to the registration
requirements of the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New
Jersey, according to the manufacture's design specifications or the
registration requirements of the state of registration, or having
more than four tires, on any street or on any portion of any property
situated within a residential zone, unless fully enclosed in a garage
or parked on an improved parking surface so that all parts of the
vehicle are parked behind the front building line of an existing
building or, in the absence of an existing building, behind the front
building line of the adjacent structure, at any time between 8:00
p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, except when
necessary to the performance of any service or to meet any
temporary need, in which case the owner or operator of the vehicle
shall promptly notify the Police Department of the need for such
parking and shall display a legible notice behind the windshield of
the vehicle indicating the address of the property which is being
serviced by the vehicle.
(2) The foregoing restrictions shall not be construed to apply to
vehicles which are designed and used primarily as recreation
vehicles.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 292, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 315-234 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-236
305:1013
§ 315-236. Fences and masonry walls.
All fences or walls shall have a finished side facing the street or neighboring
property owners. No barbed or razor-edge wire or electrified fencing shall
be permitted on or attached to a building, except on a part of a building
facing the rear yard of a site located in an industrial zone. No barbed or
razor-edge wire or electrified fencing shall be visible from the street.
A. In Residential Districts A and B-1:
(1) A fence or masonry wall of not more than six feet in height is
permitted along the rear lot line and along the side lot line from the
rear lot line to the front building line.
(2) No fence or masonry wall shall be permitted along the side lot line
from the front building line to the front lot line and along the front
lot line. A corner lot has two front yards.
(3) No barbed or razor-edge wire, electrified fence or similar material
shall be permitted to be used.
B. In Residential District B and B-2, Business District BB and MU Mixed
Use District:
(1) A fence or masonry wall of not more than six feet in height is
permitted along the rear lot line and along the side lot line from the
rear lot line to the front building line.
(2) A fence or masonry wall of not more than four feet in height is
permitted along the side lot line from the front building line to the
front lot line and along the front lot line. A corner lot has two front
yards.
(3) No barbed or razor-edge wire, electrified fence or similar material
shall be permitted to be used.
C. In Business District BA and the Downtown District (DD):
(1) Permitted fences and walls along front and side yards shall include
a maximum fifty-percent opaque wall, six feet high, made of vertical
metal posts with a base no higher than two feet and piers of brick
or stucco, or a wall, a maximum of four feet high, made of brick,
cast stone, stone, terra cotta or stucco. No barbed or razor-edge
wire, electrified fence or similar material shall be permitted to be
used.
(2) Rear yard fences may also be constructed using cyclone fences at a
maximum height of six feet. No barbed or razor-edge wire,
electrified fence or similar material shall be permitted to be used.
D. In Industrial Districts A and B: A fence or masonry wall of not more than
10 feet in height shall be permitted along the front lot line and along the
side and rear lot lines. Barbed wire, not to exceed 1 1/2 feet in height,
§ 315-236 TRENTON CODE § 315-236
305:1014
§ 315-237. Temporary permits.
§ 315-238. Swimming pools.
§ 315-239. Tennis courts.
Tennis courts shall be located in rear yards only and may be surrounded by
a fence a maximum of 12 feet in height. Such fence shall be set back from
any lot line by at least six feet.
§ 315-240. Special building setback lines established.
Unless greater building setbacks are established by other sections of this
chapter or by the City Council, the building setbacks for certain streets
and sections of streets shall be as follows, except that this shall not require
placing a building more than 10 feet back of the front main wall of an
adjoining building already existing within 50 feet of and on the same side of
the street with the building to be erected.
shall be permitted to be used on a fence or wall at a height of nine
or 10 feet. No razor-edge, electrified wire or similar material shall be
permitted.
A. Temporary permits may be authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for a period not to exceed one year for nonconforming uses
incident to housing and construction projects, and including such
structures and uses as storage of building materials and machinery, the
processing of building materials, and a real estate office located on the
tract being offered for sale, provided that such permits are issued only
upon agreement by the owner to remove the structure or structures
upon expiration of permit. Such permits are renewable annually, for a
period not to exceed three years.
B. Temporary permits shall be issued by the Planning Board if the use is
part of a site plan.
A. Private residential swimming pools shall be located in rear yards only
and shall conform to required side and rear setbacks. No setback shall
be less than six feet in Residential A and B-1 Districts and three feet in
Residential B and MU Districts. Pools shall be surrounded by a fence at
least four feet, but no more than six feet, in height.
B. In Residential B and MU Districts, aboveground pools shall be a
minimum of two feet from the property line.
§ 315-236 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-240
305:1015
Street Location
Building
Setback
From
Center
Line
(feet)
Right-of-
Way
Existing
Width
(feet)
Right-of-
Way
Ultimate
Width
(feet)
Bellevue
Avenue
Calhoun Street to
North Willow Street
30 50 60
Chambers
Street
Greenwood Avenue to
East State Street
30 50 60
Chauncey
Street
North Willow Street to
North Warren Street
25 30 50
Clinton
Avenue
North East State Street
to Nottingham Way
40 60 70
Clinton
Avenue
South East State Street
to Dye Street
35 50 and 60 70
Greenwood
Avenue
Railroad to east City
line
60 66 80
Hamilton
Avenue
East Canal Street to
South Broad Street
33 60 66
Ingham
Avenue
Burton Avenue to
Parkway Avenue
30 50 60
John Fitch
Way
Entire length 55 70 and 80 70 and 80
Liberty
Street
Chamber Street to
Lalor Street
40 50 60
Montgomery
Street
North East Hanover
Street to Holland
Avenue
25 40 and 45 50
Nottingham
Way
Mulberry Street to City
limit
40 50 70
Parkside
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue to
Parkway Avenue
50 50 and 60
Parkway
Avenue
Pennington Avenue to
Hillcrest Avenue
45 50 70
Perry
Street
North Clinton Avenue
to Penna. RR Branch
45 66 74
Perry
Street
Penna. RR Branch to
North Warren Street
37 66 74
Southard
Street
Jefferson Street to
Brunswick Avenue
35 50 and 60 60
§ 315-240 TRENTON CODE § 315-240
305:1016
Street Location
Building
Setback
From
Center
Line
(feet)
Right-of-
Way
Existing
Width
(feet)
Right-of-
Way
Ultimate
Width
(feet)
Spring
Street
Prospect Street to
North Willow Street
37 66 74
State
Street
East Armory Drive to
Stockton Street
33 56 66
State
Street
East Stockton Street to
Montgomery Street
30 56 and 57 60
State
Street
West Richey Place to
Calhoun Street
55 60 76
Stockton
Street
North East State Street
to Academy Street
33 50 66
Stockton
Street
South East State Street
to Market Street
33 50 and 54 66
Sullivan
Way
Sanhican Drive to
Penna. RR
55 50 66
Sullivan
Way
Penna. RR to City limits 65 50 66
Sylvester
Avenue
New York Avenue to
Brunswick Avenue
45 50 60
Willow
Street
North Spring to
Pennington Avenue
37 74
§ 315-241. Family day-care homes.
Where authorized elsewhere in this chapter, family day-care homes may be
conducted in a private dwelling unit subject to the following:
A. No more than five children, up to the age of six years, may be cared for
in the dwelling units.
B. A private residence in which three to five children, not counting
children legally related to the caregiver or where there is no payment
for the care, are provided with child-care services for 15 or more hours
per week on a regular basis qualifies if approved by the New Jersey
Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which the
Division contracts for family day care.
C. No changes that would require a building permit shall be made to the
interior or exterior of the dwelling unit for the purposes of this use.
D. The dwelling unit shall have hard-wired smoke detectors.
§ 315-240 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-241
305:1017
§ 315-242. Junkyards and recycling centers.
E. No advertising is permitted on the premises.
A. Screening and fencing.
(1) Opaque fencing, screens or buffers no less than 10 feet high shall
be provided along all property lines. Fencing along any property
line of a junkyard or recycling center that abuts a public right-ofway,
except within industrially zoned areas, or abuts an existing
residential, institutional or public-serving commercial use,
notwithstanding the existing zoning classification affecting such
use, shall be provided in the form of an opaque wall with a finished
or painted side facing outwards, the materials and design of which
shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board at the time of
application for site plan approval.
(2) Fencing facing the public right-of-way shall be set back five feet
from the property line, and landscaping shall be provided for the
area between the property line and the fence.
(3) Gates providing access to junkyards shall be a minimum of eight
feet high, shall be made of opaque materials and shall open such
that the doors do not infringe on the public right-of-way.
(4) Opaque fencing shall not be required with respect to property lines
in industrial areas abutting other industrial uses.
B. Site standards. Horizontal and vertical control points for all stockpile
areas containing processed or unprocessed materials shall be
established and maintained on all sites containing such areas, pursuant
to the following conditions:
(1) Horizontal limit markers shall be set at the corners of all stockpile
areas shown on the approved site plan of the facility. The outer
edge of each stockpile, as delineated by the horizontal limit marker,
shall be no less than 15 feet from any property line abutting a
residential, institutional or public-serving commercial property.
(2) At least two vertical limit markers shall be set at locations in close
proximity to each stockpile area, clearly establishing maximum
vertical limits for each stockpile area. The maximum height of
stockpiles shall be 20 feet above existing grade in facilities located
in areas zoned other than industrial or where the stockpile is within
50 feet of a property line abutting a residential, institutional or
public-serving commercial property. The maximum height of other
stockpiles shall be 35 feet, except with respect to combustible or
flammable materials, where the maximum height shall be 20 feet.
(3) Metal pipe or rods permanently set in place as approved by the
Department of Inspections shall be used to establish horizontal and
vertical control points. Where a stockpile is walled at any point by
§ 315-241 TRENTON CODE § 315-242
305:1018
an interior wall other than the wall marking the property line, the
wall can be used for a horizontal limit marker and/or the base for a
vertical limit marker.
(4) All markers shall be shown on the approved site plan for the facility.
Within 30 days of final site plan approval, a site inspection shall be
held at the facility site in the presence of the owner and/or operator
of the facility and authorized representatives of the City for the
purpose of establishing the precise location of all markers.
(5) Aisles, driveways and uniform passageways shall be provided
between stockpiles to permit access for fire-fighting operations,
including areas where stripped vehicle bodies are stored.
(6) Storage of tires shall take place exclusively in enclosed containers
or structures and shall comply with all other state regulations with
respect to fire and mosquito control provisions.
(7) The Planning Board may require that any crushing operations be
located in enclosed containers or structures or, in the alternative,
shall require the owner or operator to obtain and receive an air
pollution permit from the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
C. Other standards.
(1) The Planning Board may require that certain interior driveways
within junkyards be paved in order to minimize tracking of mud and
debris and in order to facilitate proper drainage of the site.
(2) All processed and unprocessed materials and residue shall be
stored in a manner which prevents runoff, leakage or seepage of
any waste or residue into, on or around the soil on which the
storage or stockpile is located. The design of all storage, stockpile
and disposal areas, and the methods established for prevention of
runoff, leakage and seepage, shall be subject to Planning Board
review and approval at the time of site plan application.
D. Compliance. The provisions of § 315-242 herein shall not be enforceable
against any junkyard or recycling center that shall establish to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that it has been in continuous
operation as a junkyard or recycling center at its present location since
July 20, 1955. All other facilities subject to the provisions of Subsection
A herein shall be in compliance with the provisions thereof no later than
July 1, 1996. For the purposes of this subsection, "compliance" shall
mean submission of a site plan to the Planning Board meeting the
requirements of this chapter, approval of such site plan with such
modifications as the Planning Board may deem appropriate, and
completion of all improvements set forth on the approved site plan.
§ 315-242 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § 315-242
305:1019
Appendix
Chapter A316
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ A316-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Rules of Council, 1962, and is
hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the rules."
§ A316-2. Rules.
The following rules shall govern the Council and its meetings:
RULE I
Governing Rules
Except as may be provided in the Charter, questions of order, the
organization and the conduct of business of the Council shall be governed
by Robert's Rules of Order in all cases to which they are applicable, and in
which they are not inconsistent with these rules.
§ 315-242 TRENTON CODE § A316-2
305:1020
RULE II
Meetings; Council Conference
A. Regular meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first
and third Thursdays of each month at 5:30 p.m., except that only one
regular meeting shall be held during each of the months of July and
August on a date to be fixed by the Council, in the preceding month
of June for the July meeting and in the preceding month of July for
the August meeting; provided, however, that when the day fixed for
any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by
law as a legal or national holiday, or upon a day when more than
three members of the governing body are attending a state or national
conference or convention, such meeting shall be held at the same hour
on the next succeeding day not a holiday. The time and location of any
public meeting shall be subject to change whenever the City Council,
by a majority vote, shall determine that a change in time or place
of a public meeting shall be in the public interest and provided that
adequate public notice of the time and place of such meeting shall be
provided in accordance with state law. Unless otherwise determined
by City Council, regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the
Council chamber on the second floor of City Hall.
B. Special meetings. The Mayor, whenever (s)he deems it in the public
interest, and upon request in writing of a majority of the Council, shall
call a special meeting of the Council. The President of the Council
may also call a special meeting whenever (s)he deems it necessary.
A request by members of Council, Mayor or President of Council for
a special meeting therefor shall state the time and purpose of the
meeting. The Mayor or the President of the Council, as the case may
be, shall deliver the call for a special meeting to the Clerk who shall
forthwith deliver copies thereof to each member of Council at his/
her residence or at such place as (s)he may designate in advance. No
business except what is described in the call shall be considered at the
special meeting. Except in case of emergency, special meetings may
be called upon not less than two days' notice.
C. Adjourned meetings. An adjourned meeting shall be considered a
continuation of the preceding meeting and the business of the Council
shall be resumed where it was left at the last adjournment.
D. Council conference. The Council shall hold conferences at 5:30 p.m.
each Tuesday preceding the regular meeting, or as otherwise provided
by City Council's Annual Notice of Meeting Dates; provided, however,
that when the day fixed for any conference of the Council falls upon
a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, or upon a day
when three or more members of the governing body are attending a
state or national conference or convention, such meeting shall be held
on a day to be scheduled by the Clerk of the Council or cancelled.
[Amended 9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-46]
§ A316-2 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § A316-2
305:1021
RULE II
Meetings; Council Conference
E. Docket review. On the Tuesday proceeding each Council meeting, the
Council President, or the Vice President, or the Council President's
designee if neither shall be available, shall make a review of the docket
with the Business Administrator, the City Clerk and the Law Director
and a representative designated by the Mayor. The Council President
may remove an item from the Council agenda during docket review, for
further study or information, provided that the removal of any items
from the docket must be listed on the next regular scheduled Council
meeting docket. [Added 9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-46]
RULE III
Agenda [Amended 9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-46]
All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, claims, contract
documents or other matters to be submitted to the Council by the
administration, at least 24 business hours prior to each Council meeting,
shall be delivered to the Clerk, whereupon the Clerk shall immediately
prepare a calendar of such matters together with such additional matters
that (s)he may have to present, in conformity with the prescribed order of
business as hereinafter provided and shall furnish a copy to each member
of the Council. When required, (s)he shall furnish the Mayor, the Business
Administrator and the City Attorney with a copy of the same prior to
the Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit. All administration matters shall be presented to
the Council by the Mayor, Business Administrator or a designee of either
of them, provided that nothing herein shall limit the Charter power of the
Council to require reports or to investigate. All ordinances or resolutions
presented by members of Council shall be presented to the Council
President for review, at least 24 hours prior to any agenda review meeting,
before same are placed upon the docket.
RULE IV
The Presiding Officer
A. Election and duties. The Presiding Officer of the Council shall be the
President, who shall be elected at the organization meeting for a term
of four years. [Amended 8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-32]
(1) The Council may also elect a Council Vice President from among
its members for a term concurrent with the Council President.
The Council President shall designate the Council Vice President
to act as the presiding officer whenever the Council President
shall be absent from the municipality due to disability or other
cause and prevented from attending a Council meeting. Only in
that instance, the Council Vice President shall possess all the
rights, powers and duties of the Council President.
§ A316-2 TRENTON CODE § A316-2
305:1022
RULE IV
The Presiding Officer
(2) No dual office holding: Mayor or Council President. Upon election
of the Council President as Mayor, by majority vote of Council, to
fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Council President shall
forfeit his or her position as Council President while retaining his
or her seat on Council.
B. Bingo and raffles. The President of the Council is authorized to
approve or disapprove bingo and raffle applications for and on behalf
of the Council pursuant to state statute.
RULE V
City Attorney
The City Attorney or such member or members of his/her office as (s)he
may designate shall be available to the Council at all regular and special
meetings. He/She, or his/her designee, shall draw ordinances and
resolutions for any member of the Council when and as requested.
RULE VI
Call to Order; President; President Pro Tem [Amended 8-7-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-32]
The President shall take the Chair at the hour appointed for the meeting
and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the absence of the
Council President, the Council Vice President shall call the Council to
order. In the absence of the Council President and Council Vice President,
the Clerk shall call the Council to order. The Clerk shall then determine
whether a quorum is present and in that event call for the election of a
temporary President. Upon the arrival of the Council President or Council
Vice President, the temporary President shall relinquish the Chair upon the
conclusion of the business immediately before Council.
RULE VII
Roll Call
Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the Clerk or his/her
designee shall call the roll of the members in alphabetical order, and the
names of those present shall be entered in the minutes.
§ A316-2 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § A316-2
305:1023
RULE VIII
Quorum
A. A majority of the whole number of members of the Council shall
constitute a quorum. No ordinance, resolution or motion shall be
adopted by the Council without the affirmative vote of the majority
of all members of the Council; provided, however, that whenever a
member of Council shall have disqualified himself for reason of conflict
of interest, a resolution or motion shall be adopted by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the nondisqualified members of the Council.
B. Should no quorum attend within 30 minutes after the hour appointed
for the meeting of the Council, the President, or in his/her absence the
Clerk or his/her designee, may thereupon adjourn the meeting until
the next day, unless by unanimous agreement those members present
select another hour or day. The names of the members present and
their action at such meeting shall be recorded in the minutes by the
Clerk.
RULE IX
Order of Business [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
Promptly at the hour set for each meeting, the members of the Council and
the Clerk shall take their regular stations in the Council chamber, and the
business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition
in the following order:
1. Roll call.
2. Invocation.
3. Pledge of allegiance.
4. Minutes of the previous meeting.
5. Unfinished business.
6. Communications and petitions.
7. Reports.
8. New business (resolutions, ordinances, motions).
9. Hearing of citizens.
10. Adjournment.
§ A316-2 TRENTON CODE § A316-2
305:1024
RULE X
Reading of Minutes
Unless a reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a
majority of the Council, such minutes when signed by the President and
the Clerk may be approved without reading, and the yeas and nays shall
be entered on the minutes. Upon the call of the roll, no member shall
discuss or explain his/her vote; and the silence of any Council member who
is present shall be recorded as an affirmative vote unless he/she states
directly that he/she abstains. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed
by the presiding officer and by the Clerk.
Rule XII
Committees
There shall be no standing committees of the Council, other than the
committee of the whole. The rules of the Council shall govern the meetings
of the committee of the whole so far as applicable. Special committees
for legislative purposes may be appointed by the President pursuant to
resolution. No special committee shall proceed to the consideration of any
matter referred to it unless a majority of the members of the committee
shall be present. All committee meetings shall be held at City Hall. No
special committee shall report on a matter referred to it at the same
meeting at which the reference is made, except by unanimous consent of
the members of the committee.
Rule XIII
Nominations and Appointments
A. Nominations submitted by the Mayor will be considered in
committee of the whole and reported to the Council not later than
the second next ensuing regular meeting. Any member of the Council
may move a nomination. Within two days after confirmation or
rejection of a nomination, the Clerk shall, in writing, notify the Mayor
of that fact.
B. With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any
member of the Council may nominate as many candidates as there
are offices to be filled. The Council will consider such nominations
in committee of the whole, which will report to a regular meeting of
the Council. Where there is a single office to be filled, the sense of
the Council on the appointment shall be taken as to each nominee
in alphabetical order, and the first nominee to receive a majority
shall be deemed appointed. Where there is more than one office
to be filled, such as on a board, commission or authority, the same
procedure shall be followed with respect to each office separately
until the total number of appointments to be made has been
completed. In the discretion of the Chair, a group of nominations
may be considered at once where there is no apparent division in the
Council as to the nominees included in the group.
§ A316-2 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § A316-2
305:1025
Rule XIV
Rules of Debate
A. Question under consideration. When a question is presented and
seconded, it is under consideration, and no motion shall be received
thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone or
to amend, until the question is decided. These motions shall have
preference in the order in which they are mentioned, and the first
two shall be decided without debate.
B. As to the President. The President or such other member of the
Council as may be presiding may move, second and debate from the
Chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules
imposed upon all members, and shall not be deprived of any of the
rights and privileges of a Council member by reason of being the
presiding officer.
C. Getting the floor. Improper references shall be avoided. Every
member desiring to speak for any purpose whatsoever shall address
the presiding officer and, upon recognition, shall confine himself/
herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and
indecorous language. A member may only speak once on the same
subject but may speak to clear up a matter of fact or explain a
material part of his/her speech, except that a member after moving a
question may once again speak on the same subject.
D. Interruption. A member once recognized shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it be to call him/her to order or as herein
otherwise provided. If a member while speaking is called to order,
(s)he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined
by the presiding officer, and if in order, (s)he shall be permitted to
proceed. Any member may appeal to the Council from the decision of
the Chair upon a question of order, when without debate the Chair
shall submit to the Council the question, "Shall the decision of the
Chair be sustained?" and the Council shall decide by a majority vote.
E. Privilege of closing debate. The Council member moving the
adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of
closing the debate.
F. Civic comment. Members of Council who wish to speak during civic
comment shall be limited to a period of 10 minutes' time. [Added
9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-46]
§ A316-2 TRENTON CODE § A316-2
305:1026
Rule XV
Addressing the Council
A. Subject to the provisions of Rule XXI, any person may petition the
presiding officer for leave to address the Council, which permission
shall be granted only after a showing to the satisfaction of the
presiding officer that the subject matter of the address deserves the
time and attention of the Council, by oral communication on any
matter over which the Council has control; provided, however, that
notice is given to the Clerk 24 business hours in advance of the
Council meeting, in order that the same may appear on the calendar
of the Council.
B. Any person may orally petition the Council at any Council meeting
for leave to orally address the Council at that meeting, which leave
shall be granted only after showing to the satisfaction of a majority
of the members of the Council present that the subject matter of the
address deserves the time and attention of the Council.
Rule XVI
Manner of Addressing Council; Time Limit
Each person addressing the Council shall step up to the microphone, shall
give his/her name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records,
and unless further time is granted by the Council shall limit the address to
10 minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not
to any person thereof. No person, other than members of the Council and
the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion,
either directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission
of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a Council member
except through the presiding officer.
Rule XVII
Decorum
A. By Council members. While the Council is in session, the members
must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither
by conversation or otherwise except as herein provided delay or
interrupt the proceedings, the peace of the Council, disturb any
member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Council
or its presiding officer.
B. By persons. Any person making impertinent or slanderous remarks
or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council shall
forthwith be barred from further audience before the Council, by the
presiding officer, unless permission to continue or again address the
Council be granted by the majority vote of the Council.
§ A316-2 VEHICLES, UNATTENDED § A316-2
305:1027
Rule XVIII
Enforcement of Decorum [Amended 2-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-6]
A security officer shall be the sergeant-at-arms of the Council meetings.
He, she or they shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the
presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the
Council meetings.
Rule XIX
Ordinances, Resolutions, Motions and Contract Documents
A. Introduction. Ordinances may be introduced and adopted by title,
except bonding or local improvement ordinances, which shall be
read in full by the Clerk or his/her designee before consideration
by the Council on second and final reading. Every ordinance after
introduction and adoption on first reading shall be published in full,
together with a notice as required by law, and publication shall be
at least 10 days prior to the time fixed for further consideration for
second and final passage. At the time and place so specified in such
notice, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be
heard thereon.
B. Prior approval by administrative heads of departments. All
ordinances, resolutions and contract documents before presentation
to the Council by the Mayor or the Business Administrator shall
have been reduced to writing and shall have been approved as to
form and legality by the City Attorney or his/her designee. Prior
to presentation, all such documents shall have first been referred
to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the
administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution
or contract document would devolve. Any statement of fact or
representation submitted in support of any such document,
resolution or ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, Business
Administrator or a designee of either of them.
C. Introducing for passage or approval. Ordinances, resolutions and
other matters and subjects requiring action by the Council must be
introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council, except that
the Mayor may present under Rule III, ordinances, resolutions and
other mailers or subjects to the Council, and any Council member
may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance,
resolution, matter or subject be adopted in accordance with law;
otherwise they shall not be considered. When a Council member
assumes sponsorship of an ordinance or resolution, (s)he shall
countersign the same in the space provided thereon.
D. All ordinances shall take effect 20 days after final passage and
approval by the Mayor. Two-thirds of the Council may, however,
declare an emergency by written resolution to reduce this twentyday
period, except the period for bond ordinances shall not be
reduced.
§ A316-2 TRENTON CODE § A316-2
305:1028
Rule XIX
Ordinances, Resolutions, Motions and Contract Documents
E. Adoption. Ordinances other than bond and appropriation ordinances
shall require four affirmative votes for adoption. Bond and
appropriation ordinances shall require five affirmative votes for
adoption.
F. Veto by the Mayor. Ordinances vetoed by the Mayor shall require
five affirmative votes to override the veto.
G. Preparation. Ordinances amending any existing ordinances shall
contain in brackets the part repealed, and the new part to be
inserted shall be underscored.
H. Emergency resolutions. Resolutions creating emergency
appropriations and budgetary transfers shall require five affirmative
votes for adoption.
I. Any resolution or ordinance put forth by any Council member which
has been defeated shall not be reintroduced for a period of one
year following the vote on said ordinance or resolution. [Added
9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-46]
Rule XX
Reports and Resolutions to be Filed with City Clerk
All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and entered in
the minutes.
Rule XXI
Adjournment
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.
Rule XXII
Certification of Passage of Ordinances over Mayor's Veto
Whenever an ordinance has been vetoed by the Mayor and is passed by the
Council over such veto in the manner provided by law, the City Clerk shall
append to such ordinances a certification in substantially the following
form:
"I hereby certify that the above ordinance adopted by the Council of the
City of Trenton on the _____________ day of ___________, was vetoed by the
Mayor of the City, and was passed notwithstanding the veto by the Mayor,
on the _______________ day of _________________.
Dated:
City Clerk."
Chapter A317
§ A316-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A316-2
A317:1029
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A317-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations, shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms shall be supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission, FCC Rules and Regulations, 76.5, 47 CFR
420 (March 1972), as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and in no way shall be construed to broaden, narrow, alter
or conflict with the federal or state definitions.
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities Commission, Department of Energy.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this chapter and is known as
"Cable One, Inc."
OFFICE — The Office of Cable Television within the Department of Energy.
§ A317-2. Purpose.
The City hereby grants to the company a nonexclusive franchise to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the City poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City of a cable
television system and cable communications system.
§ A317-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the franchise, herein granted to the company,
was held after proper public notice, pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act, such hearing, having been held as above stated, and such
hearing having been fully open to the public, and the City having received
at such hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to
receive this franchise, the City hereby finds that the company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications and
that the company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate
and feasible.
§ A317-4. Franchise term.
A. Duration of franchise; expiration and renewal.
(1) Term. The consent herein granted in § A317-1 shall expire 15 years
from the effective date of this chapter.
(2) Renewal. The consent herein granted shall be subject to renewal
for a period of 10 years only after review of the performance of the
company and the adequacy of the terms of the consent herein
granted in a full public proceeding.
§ A316-2 TRENTON CODE § A317-4
A317:1030
§ A317-5. Construction requirements.
(3) The company shall be required to petition the Board for a
certificate of approval authorizing continued operation during the
period following expiration of the consent granted herein until such
time that a decision is made by the City Council relative to the
renewal of such contract. Such petition shall be filed at least 60
days prior to the expiration of the consent granted herein.
B. Franchise fee. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the
company, during each year of operations under the consent granted
herein, shall pay to the City 2 1/2% of the gross revenues from all
recurring charges received by the company from subscribers to its
cable television reception service in the City.
C. Franchise territory. The consent granted herein to the company shall
apply to the entirety of the City and any property hereafter annexed
thereto.
A. Construction timetable. The company shall complete construction
within one year of the date upon obtaining a registered statement from
the FCC. The construction shall commence within 90 days alter receipt
of such statement.
B. Conditions of construction.
(1) Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall
disturb any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or
other surfaces in the natural topography, the company shall, at its
sole expense, restore and replace such places or things so
disturbed in as good condition as existed prior to the
commencement of such work.
(2) Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the City
shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or
place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall, at its
own expense, remove, relay and relocate its equipment.
(3) Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of
the City, at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances. Whenever the request for
removal is made by private parties, the cost shall be borne by those
same parties.
(4) Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges upon this franchise, the company shall have the authority
to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain
proper clearance for the company's wires and cables.
§ A317-4 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A317-6
A317:1031
§ A317-6. Service requirements.
A. Local office. During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof,
the company shall maintain a local business office or agent for the
purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all complaints
regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters. Such local business office shall be open during normal
business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, except holidays.
B. Complaint officer. The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as
the complaint officer for the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All
complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with
N.J.S.A.14:17-7.1.
C. Extension of service. The company shall be required to proffer service
to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
franchise territory described herein, in accordance with the proposal
for the provision of services as described in this application. Any
additional extension of the system which is necessary in the future but
not contemplated in the application shall be made in accordance with
the Board's line extension policy now or hereafter promulgated.
D. Emergency uses. The company shall be required to have the capability
to override at the head end the audio portion of the system in order to
permit the broadcasting of emergency messages by the City Council.
E. Interconnection. Except as otherwise provided for in this application
upon which this chapter is based, in the event that the City determines
that it is necessary and feasible for it to contract with the company for
the purposes of providing interconnection services, the company shall
be required to apply to the Board for approval to enter into and
establish the terms and conditions of such contract. All costs for such
application to the Board shall be borne by the City. Any such
interconnection shall be done in accordance with prior FCC
authorization and in accordance with Paragraph 22 of the Clarification
of Rules, FCC 74384 46 FCC 2d 175 (1974), and FCC Rules and
Regulations, 5576 252 (a2) and 5576 252, 41 Fed. Reg. 20665 (June 30,
1976).
F. Facilities for access to the system. In the event that the City determines
that it is necessary and feasible for it to contract with the company for
the purpose of providing other specialized services, then the company
shall be required to apply to the Board and the FCC for approval to
enter into and establish the terms and conditions of such contract.
Except as provided in the application, all costs for such application to
the Board and the FCC shall be borne by the contractee.
G. Two-way services. In the event that the City determines that it is
necessary and feasible for it to contract with the company for the
purpose of providing two-way service, and except to the extent state
regulation is pre-empted by the Federal Communications Commission,
§ A317-6 TRENTON CODE § A317-6
A317:1032
§ A317-7. Rates for CATV reception service.
The City having determined the rates proposed in the application, and
subsequent amendments thereto, for cable television reception service are
reasonable, approves them as presented. In the event there shall be the
passage of any law permitting preferred rates for senior citizens, such
preferred rates shall be made available to the senior citizens of the City.
§ A317-8. Insurance and bond requirements.
§ A317-9. Incorporation of application.
All of the minutes taken in connection with this application, and all of the
correspondence submitted in connection therewith, and all of the written
commitments contained in the written application, except as modified
herein, shall be considered to be binding upon the applicant as the terms
and conditions of this consent, and that application shall be annexed hereto
and made a part hereof by reference, provided that any provisions of
the application in conflict with the provisions of the Cable Television Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and/or FCC Rules and Regulations 5576.1 et seq.
(1973) as amended and as clarified, FCC Clarification of Rules 37 Fed. Reg.
14288 terms of this grant and such provisions in the application which
exceed the FCC Rules and Regulations are considered unenforceable.
§ A317-10. Consistency with future federal and state rules and
orders.
If any state or federal agency or body should modify, change or alter any of
its provisions with respect to cable television generally, such modifications,
the company shall be required to apply to the Board for approval to
enter into and establish the terms and conditions of such contract.
H. Except as provided in the application, all costs for such application shall
be borne by the contractee. The City and the company hereby
acknowledge that state regulation of two-way cable television services
has been pre-empted by the Federal Communications Commission, with
the exception of state regulation of point-to-point intrastate nonvideo
transmission.
A. Performance bond. The company shall post a bond which shall remain
in effect for the life of the franchise, in the amount of $25,000.
B. Liability insurance. The company agrees to maintain and keep in full
force and effect, at its sole expense at all times during the term of this
consent, sufficient liability insurance naming the City as an insured,
and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution
or demand in the minimum amounts of $150,000 per person for any one
claim, and $500,000 as to any accident or occurrence and in the
minimum amount of $100,000 for property damage as to any one
accident or occurrence.
§ A317-6 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A317-10
A317:1033
changes or alterations shall be incorporated into this consent consistent
with the applicable dates specified in the change.
§ A317-11. Citizens Advisory Council.
There is hereby established a Citizens Advisory Council composed of six
members who shall be residents of the City. Members of the Citizens
Advisory Council shall be appointed by the City Council for a term of
two years; a seventh member, the television classroom studio manager of
Trenton High School, shall be ex officio. Except for the ex officio member,
the initial term of three members shall be two years, and the initial term
of such three members shall be one year; thereafter all members shall
be appointed to terms of two years so that three will expire in one year
and three the next. The Citizens Advisory Council shall report annually to
the City Council or as often as it deems appropriate. One member to be
designated by the City Council shall sit on the Board of Directors of the
company and have the same rights as other Board of Director members. The
Citizens Advisory Council shall monitor the operation and service afforded
by the company, and may make such recommendations as it deems
appropriate to the company and the City Council.
§ A317-12. When effective.
The City consent shall become effective as of the date upon which the
City received written notification that the company accepts the terms and
conditions herein.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
03-117 11-6-2003 Parking revenue bond NCM
03-118 11-6-2003 Land lease NCM
03-119 11-6-2003 Land acquisition NCM
03-120 11-6-2003 Land acquisition NCM
03-121 11-6-2003 Land acquisition NCM
§ A317-10 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1034
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
03-122 11-6-2003 Land sale NCM
03-123 11-6-2003 Land sale NCM
03-124 11-6-2003 Land acceptance NCM
03-125 12-4-2003 Land acquisition NCM
03-126 12-4-2003 Easement NCM
03-127 12-4-2003 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
03-66
03-128 12-18-2003 Salaries NCM
03-129 12-18-2003 Sewer bond NCM
03-130 12-18-2003 Parking bond NCM
03-131 12-18-2003 Bond NCM
03-132 12-18-2003 Bond NCM
03-133 12-18-2003 Property sale NCM
03-134 12-18-2003 Property sale NCM
03-135 12-18-2003 Property sale NCM
03-136 12-18-2003 Property sale NCM
03-137 12-18-2003 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
03-18
03-138 12-18-2003 Designation of
developer
NCM
03-139 12-18-2003 Property sale NCM
03-140 12-18-2003 Land acquisition NCM
03-141 12-18-2003 Housing amendment Ch. 132
03-142 12-18-2003 Uniform Fire Code Ch. 97, Art. I
04-1 1-6-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-2 1-6-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-3 1-22-2004 Designation of
developer
NCM
04-4 1-22-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-5 1-22-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-6 2-5-2004 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
04-7 2-5-2004 Property sale NCM
04-8 2-5-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 272
04-9 2-19-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-10 2-19-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-11 2-19-2004 Property sale NCM
04-12 2-19-2004 Land acquisition NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1035
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
04-13 2-19-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-14 2-19-2004 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
04-15 2-19-2004 Designation of
developer
NCM
04-16 3-4-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-17 3-4-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-18 3-18-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-19 3-18-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-20 3-18-2004 Designation of
developer
NCM
04-21 3-18-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-22 3-18-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-23 4-1-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-24 4-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-25 4-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-26 4-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-27 4-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-28 4-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-29 4-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-30 4-1-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-31 4-1-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-32 4-1-2004 Salaries NCM
04-33 4-1-2004 Property sale NCM
04-34 4-1-2004 Hermitage Avenue
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
04-35 4-15-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-36 5-6-2004 Designation of
developer
NCM
04-37 5-6-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-38 5-6-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-39 5-6-2004 Salaries NCM
04-40 5-20-2004 Designation of
developer
NCM
04-41 5-20-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-42 5-20-2004 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1036
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
04-43 5-20-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-44 6-1-2004 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
03-135
04-45 6-1-2004 Street vacation NCM
04-46 6-1-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-47 6-1-2004 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
03-135
04-48 6-1-2004 Easement NCM
04-49 6-1-2004 Property sale NCM
04-50 6-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-51 6-17-2004 Bond NCM
04-52 6-17-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-53 7-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-54 7-1-2004 Property sale
amendment
NCM
04-55 7-1-2004 Property sale
amendment
NCM
04-56 7-1-2004 Property sale NCM
04-57 7-1-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-58 8-5-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 77
04-59 8-5-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-60 8-5-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-61 8-5-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-62 8-5-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-63 8-5-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-64 8-5-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-65 8-5-2004 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
03-135
04-66 8-5-2004 Bond NCM
04-67 8-5-2004 Bond NCM
04-68 8-5-2004 Bond NCM
04-69 9-2-2004 Property sale NCM
04-70 9-2-2004 Property sale NCM
04-71 9-2-2004 Designation of
developer
NCM
04-72 9-2-2004 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
03-134
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1037
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
04-73 9-2-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-74 9-2-2004 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
04-75 9-2-2004 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
04-76 9-2-2004 Lease agreement NCM
04-77 9-2-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-78 9-2-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-79 9-16-2004 Pennington Avenue
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
04-80 9-16-2004 Salaries NCM
04-81 10-7-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-82 10-7-2004 Street vacation NCM
04-83 10-7-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-84 10-21-2004 Alcoholic beverages:
consumption in public
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. II
04-85 10-21-2004 Salaries NCM
04-86 10-21-2004 Abandoned property Ch. 215
04-87 10-21-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-88 10-21-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-89 10-21-2004 Property sale NCM
04-90 10-21-2004 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
04-50
04-91 10-21-2004 Repealer Repealed Ord. No.
03-121
04-92 10-21-2004 Street vacation NCM
04-93 12-21-2004 Easement NCM
04-94 10-21-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-95 10-21-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-96 11-4-2004 Property sale NCM
04-97 11-4-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-98 11-4-2004 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
04-99 11-22-2004 New York Avenue
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1038
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
04-100 12-16-2004 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 10, Art. I
04-101 12-16-2004 Property sale NCM
04-102 12-16-2004 Land acquisition NCM
04-103 12-16-2004 Property sale NCM
05-1 1-4-2005 CAP bank established NCM
05-2 1-6-2005 Rates for OPRA
requests
NCM
05-3 1-6-2005 Street acceptance NCM
05-4 1-6-2005 Street acceptance NCM
05-5 1-6-2005 Street acceptance NCM
05-6 1-6-2005 Street acceptance NCM
05-7 1-6-2005 Street acceptance NCM
05-8 1-6-2005 Fire prevention: fire
and smoke detector
devices amendment;
key boxes amendment
Ch. 97, Arts. III and
IV
05-9 1-6-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
05-10 1-20-2005 Enterprise Avenue
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
05-11 1-20-2005 New York Avenue
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
05-12 2-3-2005 Property sale
rescinded
NCM
05-13 2-3-2005 Property sale NCM
05-14 2-17-2005 Land acquisition NCM
05-15 2-17-2005 Champale
redevelopment area
amendment
NCM
05-16 2-17-2005 Designation of
developer; property
sale
NCM
05-17 2-17-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-18 3-3-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-19 3-3-2005 Land acquisition NCM
05-20 3-17-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1039
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
05-21 3-17-2005 Land acquisition NCM
05-22 3-17-2005 Designation of
developer; property
sale
NCM
05-23 3-17-2005 Land acquisition NCM
05-24 3-17-2005 Land acquisition NCM
05-25 3-17-2005 Land acquisition NCM
05-26 3-17-2005 Land acquisition NCM
05-27 3-17-2005 Designation of
developer; property
conveyance
NCM
05-28 3-17-2005 Designation of
developer
NCM
05-29 4-7-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-30 4-7-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-31 4-7-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-32 4-7-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
05-33 4-21-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-34 4-21-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-35 5-5-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-36 5-5-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-37 5-5-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-38 5-5-2005 Sale of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-05
05-39 5-5-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-40 5-5-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-41 5-19-2005 Salaries NCM
05-42 5-19-2005 Salaries NCM
05-43 5-19-2005 Salaries NCM
05-44 5-19-2005 Salaries NCM
05-45 5-19-2005 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
05-46 5-19-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
05-47 5-19-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-48 5-19-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-49 5-19-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-50 5-19-2005 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1040
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
05-51 5-19-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-52 5-19-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-53 5-19-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-54 5-19-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-55 5-31-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-56 5-31-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-57 5-31-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-58 5-31-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-59 5-31-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-60 5-31-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-61 5-31-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-62 6-16-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-63 7-7-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-64 7-7-2005 Salaries NCM
05-65 7-7-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-66 7-7-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-67 7-7-2005 Sale of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-05
05-68 7-7-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
05-69 7-7-2005 Pawnbrokers and
precious metals and
gems amendment
Chs. 198 and 213
05-70 7-7-2005 Acceptance of
easement
NCM
05-71 7-7-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-72 7-7-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-73 7-7-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-74 7-7-2005 Lease of property NCM
05-75 7-7-2005 Bond NCM
05-76 7-7-2005 Bond NCM
05-77 7-7-2005 Bond NCM
05-78 7-7-2005 Bond NCM
05-79 7-7-2005 Bond NCM
05-80 7-19-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
05-81 7-19-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-82 7-19-2005 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1041
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
05-83 7-19-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-84 7-19-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-85 7-19-2005 Bond NCM
05-86 7-19-2005 Bond NCM
05-87 7-19-2005 Bond NCM
05-88 7-19-2005 Criminal street gang
loitering
Ch. 154, Art. II
05-89 7-19-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-90 7-19-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-91 7-19-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
05-92 8-4-2005 Tax exemption for
Bayville Holdings, LLC
NCM
05-93 8-4-2005 Long-term tax
exemption for Matrix
East Front Street
Associates Urban
Renewal, LLC
NCM
05-94 8-4-2005 Long-term tax
exemption for Patriot
Village Urban Renewal
Associates LP
NCM
05-95 9-8-2005 Lease agreement NCM
05-96 9-8-2005 CAP ordinance NCM
05-97 9-8-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-98 9-22-2005 Bond NCM
05-99 9-22-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-100 9-22-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-101 9-22-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-102 9-22-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-103 10-6-2005 Long-term tax
exemption for Trenton
Zephyr Urban Renewal
Corporation
NCM
05-104 10-6-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
05-105 10-20-2005 Mutual aid agreement:
emergency police
services
Ch. 163, Art. I
05-106 10-20-2005 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1042
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
05-107 10-20-2005 Bond NCM
05-108 11-3-2005 Bond NCM
05-109 11-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
05-110 11-21-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-111 12-15-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-112 12-15-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
05-113 12-15-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-114 12-15-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-115 12-15-2005 Sale of property NCM
05-116 12-15-2005 Land lease NCM
06-1 1-5-2006 Humboldt-Sweets
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
06-2 1-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-3 1-19-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-4 1-19-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
06-5 1-19-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
06-6 1-19-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-7 1-19-2006 Sale of property Rescinded by Ord.
No. 06-68
06-8 1-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 77
06-9 1-19-2006 Cadwalader Estates
redevelopment plan
NCM
06-10 2-2-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-11 2-2-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-12 2-2-2006 Acquisition of property
rescinded
NCM
06-13 2-2-2006 Authorization of
payment for property
acquisition
NCM
06-14 2-2-2006 Contracts Ch. 57
06-15 2-2-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
06-16 2-16-2006 Bond NCM
06-17 2-16-2006 Acquisition of property
rescinded
NCM
06-18 2-16-2006 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1043
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
06-19 2-16-2006 Salaries NCM
06-20 3-2-2006 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
06-21 3-2-2006 Property sale
rescinded
NCM
06-22 3-2-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-23 3-2-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-24 3-16-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-25 3-16-2006 Exchange of property NCM
06-26 3-28-2006 Long-term tax
exemption for Project
Freedom at Trent
Center
NCM
06-27 4-6-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-28 4-6-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-29 4-6-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-30 4-6-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-31 4-6-2006 Slaughterhouses
amendment
Ch. 237
06-32 4-20-2006 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
06-33 4-20-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-34 4-20-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-35 4-20-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-36 4-20-2006 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
06-37 4-20-2006 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
06-38 4-20-2006 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
06-39 4-20-2006 Lamberton Street
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
06-40 5-4-2006 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1044
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
06-41 5-4-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-42 5-18-2006 Champale
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
06-43 6-8-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-44 6-8-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-45 6-8-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-46 6-22-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
06-47 6-22-2006 East State Street
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
06-48 6-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
06-49 6-22-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-50 6-22-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-51 6-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
06-52 6-22-2006 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
06-53 6-22-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-54 6-22-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-55 6-22-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-56 6-22-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-57 8-17-2006 Salaries NCM
06-58 8-17-2006 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
06-59 8-17-2006 Bond NCM
06-60 8-17-2006 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
06-61 8-17-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-62 8-17-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-63 8-17-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-64 9-7-2006 Stormwater
management
Ch. 254
06-65 9-7-2006 Animals: feeding of
wildlife
Ch. 21, Art. IV
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1045
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
06-66 9-7-2006 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
06-67 9-7-2006 Lease agreement
amendment
NCM
06-68 9-7-2006 Property sale
rescinded
NCM
06-69 9-7-2006 Appropriation and CAP
bank
NCM
06-70 9-7-2006 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 309
06-71 9-7-2006 Tax on parking of
motor vehicles
Ch. 268, Art. V
06-72 9-21-2006 Bond NCM
06-73 9-21-2006 Long-term tax
exemption for
Performa
Entertainment District
Project
NCM
06-74 9-21-2006 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
06-75 9-21-2006 Trenton Station
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
06-76 9-21-2006 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
06-77 10-5-2006 Lease agreement NCM
06-78 10-19-2006 Salaries NCM
06-79 10-19-2006 Salaries NCM
06-80 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-81 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-82 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-83 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-84 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-85 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-86 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-87 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 08-20 1/2
06-88 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1046
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
06-89 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-90 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-91 10-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-92 11-2-2006 Roebling Gateway
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
06-93 11-2-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-94 11-2-2006 Easement rights
acceptance
NCM
06-95 11-2-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-96 11-2-2006 Acquisition of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-01
06-97 12-7-2006 Lease agreement Repealed by Ord.
No. 08-07
06-98 12-7-2006 Exchange of property NCM
06-99 12-7-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
06-100 12-7-2006 Appropriation and CAP
bank
NCM
06-101 12-21-2006 Bond NCM
06-102 12-21-2006 Bond NCM
06-103 12-21-2006 Bond NCM
06-104 12-21-2006 Salaries NCM
06-105 12-21-2006 Salaries NCM
06-106 12-21-2006 Salaries NCM
06-107 12-21-2006 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 309
06-108 12-21-2006 Lease agreement
amendment
NCM
06-109 12-21-2006 Salaries NCM
06-110 11-7-2006 Public contracts:
political contributions
and award of contracts
in excess of $17,500
amendment
Ch. 57, Art. I
07-01 1-4-2007 Street vacation NCM
07-02 1-4-2007 Street vacation NCM
07-03 1-4-2007 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1047
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
07-04 1-4-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
07-05 1-4-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
07-06 1-4-2007 Acquisition of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-14
07-07 1-4-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-08 1-4-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07-09 1-4-2007 Designation of
developer
NCM
07-10 1-4-2007 Designation of
developer
NCM
07-11 1-4-2007 Long-term tax
exemption for Trenton
Concord Urban
Renewal
Condominiums, LLC
NCM
07-12 1-4-2007 Long-term tax
exemption for Trenton
Concord Urban
Renewal Retail, LLC
NCM
07-13 1-4-2007 Long-term tax
exemption for Trenton
Concord Urban
Renewal Hotel, LLC
NCM
07-14 1-4-2007 Long-term tax
exemption for Trenton
Concord Urban
Renewal Garage, LLC
NCM
07-15 1-18-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07-16 1-18-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
07-17 1-18-2007 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
07-18 2-1-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
07-19 2-1-2007 Conservation
easement
NCM
07-20 2-15-2007 Bond amendment NCM
07-21 3-1-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
07-22 3-1-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07-23 3-1-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07-24 3-1-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07-25 3-1-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1048
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
07-26 3-15-2007 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
07-27 4-5-2007 City Hall
Redevelopment Area
Plan
NCM
07-28 4-19-2007 Bond NCM
07-29 4-19-2007 Street vacation NCM
07-30 4-19-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-31 4-19-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-32 4-19-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-33 4-19-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-34 4-19-2007 Salaries NCM
07-35 4-19-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-36 5-3-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07-37 5-3-2007 Ewing, Carroll,
Southard Streets
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
07-38 5-3-2007 Street acceptance NCM
07-39 5-17-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-40 5-17-2007 Salaries NCM
07-41 5-17-2007 Peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers amendment
Ch. 206, Art. I
07-42 5-17-2007 Sale of property
rescinded
NCM
07-43 5-17-2007 Sale of property
rescinded
NCM
07-44 6-7-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-45 6-7-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-47 6-21-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-48 6-21-2007 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
07-49 7-19-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-50 7-19-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
07-51 8-16-2007 Redevelopment area
plan amendment
NCM
07-52 8-16-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-53 8-16-2007 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1049
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
07-54 8-16-2007 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
amendment
NCM
07-55 8-16-2007 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
07-56 8-16-2007 Sublease agreement NCM
07-57 8-16-2007 Salaries NCM
07-58 8-16-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-59 8-16-2007 Accepting bids and
authorizing execution
of deeds
NCM
07-60 8-16-2007 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
07-61 9-6-2007 Easement NCM
07-62 9-6-2007 Redevelopment area
plan amendment
NCM
07-63 9-6-2007 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
07-64 9-6-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-65 9-20-2007 Long-term tax
exemption
NCM
07-66 9-20-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-67 9-20-2007 Payment in lieu of
taxes
NCM
07-68 9-20-2007 Land acquisition NCM
07-69 9-20-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
07-70 10-18-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-71 10-18-2007 Easement NCM
07-72 11-1-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 42
07-73 11-1-2007 Salaries NCM
07-74 11-20-2007 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
07-75 11-20-2007 Bond NCM
07-76 11-20-2007 Bond NCM
07-77 12-6-2007 Exchange of property NCM
07-78 12-6-2007 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
07-79 12-6-2007 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1050
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
07-80 12-20-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-81 12-20-2007 Sale of portion of
water utility system
NCM
07-82 12-20-2007 Slaughterhouses
amendment
Ch. 237
08-01 1-3-2008 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
amendment
NCM
08-02 1-17-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
08-03 1-17-2008 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
08-04 1-17-2008 Financial agreement
with Aleda Urban
Renewal Associates
Limited Partnership
NCM
08-05 1-29-2008 Designation of
developer for
Humboldt Sweets
Redevelopment Area
NCM
08-06 2-21-2008 New York Avenue
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
08-07 2-21-2008 Lease agreement (Ord.
No. 06-97) repealer
NCM
08-08 2-21-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08-09 2-21-2008 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
08-10 3-20-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-11 3-20-2008 Payment in lieu of
taxes
NCM
08-12 3-20-2008 Disposition agreement
and exchange of
properties
NCM
08-13 4-3-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
08-14 4-3-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 77
08-15 4-3-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
08-16 4-3-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08-17 4-3-2008 Salaries NCM
08-18 4-3-2008 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1051
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
08-19 4-17-2008 Acquisition of property
amendment
NCM
08-20 4-17-2008 Designation of
developer for Mercer
Jackson 1 A
Redevelopment Area
NCM
08-20 1/2 4-17-2008 Acquisition of property
(Ord. No. 06-87)
repealer
NCM
08-21 5-8-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-22 5-8-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08-23 5-8-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-24 5-8-2008 Trenton Station
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
08-25 5-22-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-26 5-22-2008 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
amendment
NCM
08-27 5-22-2008 City Center South
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
08-28 5-22-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-29 5-22-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-30 5-22-2008 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
amendment
NCM
08-31 5-22-2008 Disposition agreement
and sale of properties
NCM
08-32 6-5-2008 AFSCME Local 2286
contract
NCM
08-33 6-5-2008 Lamberton Street
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
08-34 6-5-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-35 6-19-2008 Designation of
developer and sale of
property amendment
NCM
08-36 6-19-2008 Acceptance of bids for
City-owned properties
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1052
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
08-37 6-19-2008 Designation of
developer for
Humboldt Sweets
Redevelopment Area
amendment
NCM
08-38 7-10-2008 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
08-39 8-7-2008 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
08-40 8-7-2008 Salaries NCM
08-41 9-4-2008 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
08-42 9-4-2008 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
08-43 9-4-2008 Bond NCM
08-44 9-4-2008 Bond NCM
08-45 9-4-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08-46 9-4-2008 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 309
08-47 9-4-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
08-48 9-18-2008 Uniform Fire Code
amendment
Ch. 97, Art. I
08-49 9-18-2008 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
08-50 10-9-2008 Littering amendment Ch. 150
08-51 10-23-2008 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
08-52 10-23-2008 Street vacation NCM
08-53 10-23-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
08-54 10-23-2008 Street name change
for portion of Second
Street
NCM
08-55 11-6-2008 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
NCM
08-56 11-6-2008 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
08-57 11-6-2008 Acquisition of property
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1053
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
08-58 11-6-2008 Retirement: Defined
Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 223, Art. I
08-59 11-6-2008 Exchange of properties NCM
08-60 11-6-2008 Designation of
developer and sale of
properties
NCM
08-61 11-6-2008 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 309
08-62 11-6-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-63 11-25-2008 Lease agreement NCM
08-64 11-25-2008 Acquisition of property
amendment
NCM
08-65 11-25-2008 Acquisition of
properties amendment
NCM
08-66 12-18-2008 Termination of leases NCM
08-67 12-18-2008 Easement NCM
09-01 1-8-2009 Acceptance of bids for
City-owned property
NCM
09-02 2-3-2009 Sale of portion of
water utility system
NCM
09-03 2-5-2009 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 42
09-04 2-19-2009 Long-term tax
exemption
NCM
09-05 2-19-2009 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 10, Art. I
09-06 2-19-2009 Designation of
developer and sale of
properties
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-34
09-07 3-5-2009 Contract with Trenton
Fire Officers'
Association (FMBA)
NCM
09-08 3-5-2009 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
09-09 3-5-2009 Parking meters: onstreet
parking meters
amendment; Trenton
Parking Utility
facilities amendment
Ch. 188, Arts. I and
II
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1054
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
09-10 3-19-2009 Fire prevention:
Uniform Fire Code
amendment
Ch. 97, Art. I
09-11 4-2-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-12 4-16-2009 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
09-13 4-16-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-14 4-16-2009 Dedication of lands NCM
09-15 5-7-2009 Enterprise Avenue
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
09-16 5-21-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-17 5-21-2009 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
09-18 5-21-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-19 5-21-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-20 6-4-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
09-21 6-4-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-22 6-4-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-23 6-4-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-24 6-4-2009 North Clinton Avenue
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
09-25 7-9-2009 Release of restrictions
on property
NCM
09-26 7-9-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-27 7-9-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
09-28 7-9-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
09-29 7-9-2009 Street acceptance NCM
09-30 7-9-2009 Contract with
AFSCME Local No.
2281
NCM
09-30 1/2 7-9-2009 Salaries NCM
09-31 7-9-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-32 7-9-2009 Towing and storage Ch. 283
09-33 7-9-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-34 7-9-2009 Bond amendment NCM
09-35 8-6-2009 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 309
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1055
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
09-36 8-6-2009 Street acceptance NCM
09-37 8-6-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-38 8-6-2009 Dedication of lands NCM
09-39 9-3-2009 Lamberton Street
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
09-40 9-3-2009 Lease agreement NCM
09-41 9-3-2009 Collective bargaining
agreement with
AFSCME Local No.
2286
NCM
09-42 9-3-2009 Street vacation NCM
09-43 9-3-2009 Zoning and land
development
amendment
Ch. 315
09-44 9-17-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-45 9-17-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-46 9-17-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-47 9-17-2009 Creation of position of
Assistant to Council
member
NCM
09-48 10-1-2009 Salaries NCM
09-49 10-1-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-50 10-22-2009 Central East
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
09-51 10-22-2009 Trenton Station
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
09-52 10-22-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-53 11-24-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-54 11-24-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-55 11-24-2009 Authorizing additional
name of Manny Rivera
Way for Academy
Street
NCM
09-56 11-24-2009 Land acquisition NCM
09-57 11-24-2009 Land acquisition
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1056
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
09-59 12-17-2009 Sale of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-14
09-60 12-17-2009 Easement NCM
09-61 12-17-2009 Easement modification
agreement
NCM
09-62 Failed
09-63 12-17-2009 Land dedication NCM
10-01 1-7-2010 Land acquisition
repealer
NCM
10-02 1-7-2010 Designation of
developer and sale of
property
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-35
10-03 1-7-2010 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
10-04 1-7-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-05 1-21-2010 Sale of property
repealer
NCM
10-06 1-21-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-07 1-21-2010 Regulating use of Cityowned
passenger
motor vehicles by City
personnel
NCM
10-08 2-18-2010 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
10-09 2-18-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
10-10 2-18-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
10-11 2-18-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-12 6-17-2010 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
10-13 3-25-2010 Land acquisition NCM
10-14 3-25-2010 Land acquisition
repealer
NCM
10-15 3-25-2010 Bond NCM
10-16 3-25-2010 Bond NCM
10-17 4-22-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
10-18 4-22-2010 Lease agreement NCM
10-19 4-22-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
10-20 5-6-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-21 5-20-2010 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1057
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
10-22 5-20-2010 Lease agreement NCM
10-23 5-20-2010 Land acquisition NCM
10-24 5-20-2010 Noise amendment Ch. 167
10-25 5-20-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-26 5-20-2010 Peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers amendment
Ch. 206, Art. I
10-27 6-3-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-28 6-3-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
10-29 6-3-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-30 6-3-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-31 6-3-2010 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
amendment
NCM
10-32 6-3-2010 Zoning and land
development
amendment
Ch. 315
10-33 6-17-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
10-34 6-17-2010 Bond NCM
10-35 6-17-2010 Bond NCM
10-36 6-17-2010 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
10-37 9-2-2010 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
10-38 9-2-2010 Street acceptance NCM
10-39 9-2-2010 Lease agreement NCM
10-40 Held
10-41 9-16-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-42 10-5-2010 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
10-43 10-5-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
10-44 10-5-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-45 10-21-2010 Animals: licensing of
dogs
Ch. 21
10-46 10-21-2010 Nuisances amendment Ch. 171
10-47 10-21-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 77
10-48 10-21-2010 Retail Food
Establishment Code
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1058
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
10-49 Held
10-50 10-21-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-51 10-21-2010 Pennington Avenue
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
10-52 10-21-2010 Tax exemption for L &
F Urban Renewal
Properties
NCM
10-53 10-21-2010 Rescission of sale of
property authorized by
Ord. No. 07-59
NCM
10-54 10-21-2010 Rescission of sale of
property authorized by
Ord. No. 08-36
NCM
10-55 10-21-2010 Rescission of sale of
property authorized by
Ord. No. 09-01
NCM
11-01 2-1-2011 Sale of property
amendment
NCM
11-02 Tabled
11-03 2-1-2011 Sale of property NCM
11-04 Tabled
11-05 2-17-2011 Conservation
easement
NCM
11-06 5-19-2011 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
11-07 3-17-2011 Vacating public rights
of portion of Cottage
Alley
NCM
11-08 4-7-2011 Lease agreement NCM
11-09 4-7-2011 Lease agreement NCM
11-10 4-7-2011 Lease agreement NCM
11-11 4-7-2011 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 10, Art. I
11-12 4-7-2011 Peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers amendment
Ch. 206, Art. I
11-13 4-7-2011 Sanitary easement and
street dedication
NCM
11-14 4-7-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
11-15 Tabled
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1059
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
11-16 4-21-2011 Long-term tax
exemption
NCM
11-17 4-21-2011 Appropriation NCM
11-18 Not adopted
11-19 Salaries amendment Defeated
11-20 5-19-2011 Bond amendment NCM
11-21 Tabled
11-22 Tabled
11-23 5-19-2011 Conveyance of
property
NCM
11-24 5-19-2011 Long-term tax
exemption
NCM
11-25 5-19-2011 Long-term tax
exemption
NCM
11-26 6-2-2011 Long-term tax
exemption
NCM
11-27 6-2-2011 Long-term tax
exemption
NCM
11-28 5-19-2011 Lease agreement NCM
11-29 6-16-2011 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
11-30 6-2-2011 Lease of property NCM
11-31 7-19-2011 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
11-32 Lease of property Not adopted
11-33 7-19-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
11-34 7-19-2011 Lease agreement NCM
11-35 7-19-2011 Lease agreement NCM
11-36 Administration
amendment
Not adopted
11-37 7-19-2011 Retirement: Defined
Contribution
Retirement Program
amendment
Ch. 223, Art. I
11-38 10-6-2011 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
11-39 Designating developer
and authorizing sale of
City-owned property
Withdrawn
11-40 Administration
amendment
Vetoed by Mayor
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1060
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
11-41 Salaries Not adopted
11-42 Administration
amendment
Not adopted
11-43 Exceed municipal
budget; establish cap
bank
Not adopted
11-44 Rules of procedure
amendment
Not adopted
11-45 10-6-2011 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 272
11-46 11-3-2011 Pawnbrokers
amendment
Ch. 197
11-47 11-3-2011 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
11-48 11-3-2011 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 10, Art. I
11-49 11-22-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
11-50 11-22-2011 Licensing amendment Ch. 146
11-51 Bond Not adopted
12-01 1-19-2012 Sale of property NCM
12-02 Not adopted
12-03 Creation of Director of
Data Processing
position
Not adopted
12-04 2-16-2012 Bond NCM
12-05 2-16-2012 Sale of property NCM
12-06 4-3-2012 Licensing amendment Ch. 146
12-07 3-1-2012 Lease of property NCM
12-08 Salaries Not adopted
12-09 4-19-2012 Sale of property NCM
12-10 4-19-2012 Tax exemption for
Block -3 Urban
Renewal
NCM
12-11 4-19-2012 Lease agreement NCM
12-12 Tabled
12-13 4-19-2012 Lease agreement NCM
12-14 4-19-2012 Lease agreement NCM
12-15 Tabled
12-16 4-19-2012 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1061
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
12-17 6-7-2012 City-owned property:
leasing or granting
rights of use and
occupancy privileges
Ch. 54, Art. I
12-18 5-17-2012 Lease agreement NCM
12-19 5-17-2012 Lease agreement NCM
12-20 5-17-2012 Bond NCM
12-21 5-17-2012 Bond NCM
12-22 7-26-2012 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment;
consumption in public
amendment
Ch. 10, Arts. I and
II
12-23 7-26-2012 Street realignment,
vacation and
acceptance
NCM
12-24 7-26-2012 Salaries NCM
12-25 8-16-2012 Ethics Board Ch. 70
12-26 8-16-2012 Bond NCM
12-27 Bond Not adopted
12-28 8-16-2012 Sale of property NCM
12-29 9-25-2012 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
13-01 1-17-2013 Refunding bond NCM
13-02 1-17-2013 Refunding bond NCM
13-03 1-17-2013 Refunding bond NCM
13-04 1-17-2013 Refunding bond NCM
13-05 Salaries Vetoed by Mayor
13-06 2-7-2013 Sale of property NCM
13-07 2-21-2013 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
13-08 3-7-2013 Lease agreement NCM
13-09 3-7-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-10 3-7-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-11 3-7-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-12 4-16-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1062
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
13-13 4-16-2013 Lease agreement NCM
13-14 4-16-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-15 4-16-2013 Sale of property NCM
13-16 4-16-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-17 4-16-2013 Street dedication NCM
13-18 6-18-2013 Bond NCM
13-19 6-18-2013 Bond NCM
13-20 6-18-2013 Bond NCM
13-21 6-18-2013 Appropriation NCM
13-22 6-18-2013 Appropriation NCM
13-23 5-23-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-24 Bond Not introduced
13-25 6-18-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-26 Peddling, soliciting
and itinerant vendors:
tagging
Not introduced
13-27 City-owned property
amendment
Withdrawn
13-28 Rules of procedure
amendment
Withdrawn
13-29 7-25-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-30 Loitering amendment Withdrawn
13-31 8-15-2013 Lease agreement NCM
13-32 3-20-2014 Appropriation NCM
13-33 9-5-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-34 9-5-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-35 3-20-2014 Bond amendment NCM
13-36 9-5-2013 Roebling Gateway
Redevelopment Area
Plan amendment
NCM
13-37 9-24-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1063
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
13-38 9-24-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-39 9-24-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-40 Street name change
for a portion of Walnut
Avenue
Withdrawn
13-41 10-17-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-42 10-17-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-43 10-17-2013 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 42
13-44 10-17-2013 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
13-45 Housing standards
amendment
Not adopted
13-46 10-17-2013 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
13-47 10-17-2013 Commercial structures
amendment; housing
standards amendment
Chs. 56; 132
13-48 Food handling
amendment
Not adopted
13-49 Animals amendment Not adopted
13-50 11-7-2013 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 257
13-51 11-7-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 77
13-52 11-7-2013 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
13-53 11-26-2013 Signs: promotion of
safe passage for public
use of commercial
establishments
Ch. 233, Art. III
13-54 11-26-2013 Police Chaplains Ch. 211
13-55 11-26-2013 Fees amendment Pending review
13-56 12-19-2013 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
13-57 12-19-2013 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1064
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
13-58 12-13-2013 Tax exemption
pursuant to New
Jersey Economic
Opportunity Act of
2013
Ch. 268, Art. VI
13-59 Bond Tabled
13-60 12-19-2013 Tax abatement and
financial agreement
with South Village
Urban Renewal
Investors, LLC
NCM
13-61 12-19-2013 Rescission of sale of
property
NCM
13-62 12-19-2013 Acceptance of bids for
City-owned property
NCM
13-63 12-19-2013 Bond NCM
13-64 1-2-2014 Lease agreement NCM
14-01 Taxicabs and
limousines
amendment; traffic
amendment
Not adopted
14-02 2-20-2014 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
14-03 2-20-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-04 3-6-2014 Rescission of sale of
certain City-owned
property
NCM
14-05 3-6-2014 Rescission of sale of
certain City-owned
property
NCM
14-06 3-6-2014 Rescission of sale of
certain City-owned
property
NCM
14-07 3-6-2014 Lease agreement NCM
14-08 3-20-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-09 4-3-2014 Parking surcharge Ch. 185
14-10 4-17-2014 Salaries NCM
14-11 4-17-2014 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1065
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
14-12 Administration
amendment
Not adopted
14-13 4-17-2014 Traffic amendment;
taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 14; Ch. 272
14-14 4-17-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
repealer
NCM
14-15 4-17-2014 Tax abatement and
financial agreement
NCM
14-16 4-17-2014 Tax abatement and
financial agreement
NCM
14-17 5-15-2014 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
14-18 5-15-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-19 Bond amendment Not adopted
14-20 Bond Not adopted
14-21 Bond Not adopted
14-22 Bond Not adopted
14-23 Appropriation Not adopted
14-24 6-24-2014 Shared service
agreement
NCM
14-25 6-19-2014 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
14-26 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
Not adopted
14-27 6-19-2014 Tax abatement and
financial agreement
NCM
14-28 6-19-2014 Salaries NCM
14-29 Bond Not adopted
14-30 8-7-2014 Multiparty agreement NCM
14-31 8-7-2014 Rescission of sale of
certain City-owned
property
NCM
14-32 8-7-2014 Rules of procedure
amendment
Ch. A316
14-33 10-2-2014 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1066
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
14-34 9-4-2014 Designation of
developer and sale of
properties repealer
NCM
14-35 9-4-2014 Designation of
developer and sale of
property repealer
NCM
14-36 9-4-2014 Disposition agreement
and sale of property
NCM
14-37 9-4-2014 Appropriation NCM
14-38 9-4-2014 Bond NCM
14-39 9-4-2014 Bond NCM
14-40 9-4-2014 Bond NCM
14-41 9-4-2014 Bond NCM
14-42 9-4-2014 Administration
amendment;
Employment
Commission
Ch. 2; Ch. 69
14-43 9-4-2014 Public contracts:
employment of
residents by
developers and
contractors
Ch. 57, Art. II
14-44 9-4-2014 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 193
14-45 Passed at
referendum
11-4-2014
Sick leave for private
employees
Ch. 230
14-46 9-18-2014 Lease for use of vacant
City-owned property
NCM
14-47 9-18-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-48 9-18-2014 Fees for marriage and
civil union ceremonies
Ch. 77
14-49 10-2-2014 Rescission of sale of
certain City-owned
property
NCM
14-50 10-2-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-08
14-51 10-2-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-52 10-2-2014 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1067
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
14-53 10-16-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-54 11-6-2014 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
14-55 11-25-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-56 11-25-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-57 12-18-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-58 12-18-2014 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
14-59 1-6-2015 Reacquisition of
certain real property
NCM
14-60 1-6-2015 Refunding bond NCM
15-01 2-19-2015 Bond amendment NCM
15-02 4-2-2015 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
15-03 5-7-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-04 5-7-2015 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
15-05 5-7-2015 Lease extension of
certain City-owned
property
NCM
15-06 5-21-2015 Bond NCM
15-07 Housing standards
amendment
Not adopted
15-08 5-21-2015 Ordinance No. 14-50
repealer
NCM
15-09 5-21-2015 Acquisition of certain
real property
NCM
15-10 5-21-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-11 5-21-2015 Abandoned property:
creditor responsibility
for residential
property in foreclosure
Ch. 215, Art. II
15-12 Bond Withdrawn
15-12 6-30-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-13 6-30-2015 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1068
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
15-14 7-16-2015 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
15-15 9-3-2015 Authorization for sale
of certain City-owned
property; and
disposition and
developer agreement
NCM
15-16 7-16-2015 Homesteading
program
NCM
15-17 7-16-2015 Smoking in parks,
recreation facilities
and other public
property
Ch. 54, Art. II
15-18 8-20-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-19 8-20-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-20 8-20-2015 Acquisition of certain
real property
NCM
15-21 8-20-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-22 8-20-2015 Animals: humane
treatment
Ch. 21, Art. V
15-23 9-3-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-24 9-3-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-25 9-3-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-26 9-3-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-27 9-3-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-28 9-3-2015 Accepting bids and
authorizing public sale
of City-owned property
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-20; Ord. No.
16-27; Ord. No.
16-29; Ord. No.
16-30
15-29 9-17-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-30 9-17-215 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-16
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1069
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
15-31 10-15-2015 Lease of certain vacant
City-owned property
NCM
15-32 10-15-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-33 10-15-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-34 10-15-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-35 11-5-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-36 11-24-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-41
15-37 11-24-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-38 11-24-2015 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-39 12-17-2015 Street vacation NCM
15-40 12-17-2015 Easement NCM
15-41 Bond Not adopted
15-42 Bond Not adopted
15-43 Bond Not adopted
15-44 12-17-2015 Street vacation NCM
15-45 12-17-2015 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
15-46 12-17-2015 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
15-47 1-7-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
15-48 1-7-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-01 2-18-2016 Bond amendment NCM
16-02 3-3-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-03 3-17-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
16-04 3-17-2016 Acquisition of certain
privately owned
property
NCM
16-05 3-17-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1070
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
16-06 3-17-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-07 3-17-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-08 3-17-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-09 3-17-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-61
16-10 3-17-2016 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 132
16-11 3-17-2016 Downtown Business
Improvement Zone
Ch. 252, Art. II
16-12 4-7-2016 Alcoholic beverages Ch. 10
16-13 4-21-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-14 4-21-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-15 4-21-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-16 4-21-2016 Ordinance No. 15-30
repealer
NCM
16-17 4-21-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-18 5-5-2016 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
16-19 5-5-2016 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-20 5-5-2016 Ordinance No. 15-28,
authorizing sale of
property to Vadim
Paley and Alex Onik,
repealer
NCM
16-21 5-5-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
repealer
NCM
16-22 Bond Not adopted
16-23 5-19-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-24 5-19-2016 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-25 5-19-2016 Refunding bond NCM
16-26 Bond Not adopted
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1071
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
16-27 6-2-2016 Ordinance No. 15-28,
authorizing sale of 226
Rusling Street,
repealer
NCM
16-28 6-2-2016 Ordinance No. 05-67
repealer
NCM
16-29 6-2-2016 Ordinance No. 15-28,
authorizing sale of 823
Carteret Avenue,
repealer
NCM
16-30 6-2-2016 Ordinance No. 15-28,
authorizing sale of 336
Tyler Street, repealer
NCM
16-31 Administration
amendment
Not adopted
16-32 6-16-2016 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
16-33 6-16-2016 Flood control Ch. 109
16-34 8-18-2016 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
16-35 7-21-2016 Bond NCM
16-36 Bond Not adopted
16-37 6-16-2016 Bond NCM
16-38 6-16-2016 Bond NCM
16-39 7-21-2016 Lease of certain
property repealer
NCM
16-40 7-21-2016 Authorization to
execute agreement
with State of New
Jersey
NCM
16-41 7-21-2016 Ordinance No. 15-36
repealer
NCM
16-42 7-21-2016 Powers and duties of
Urban Renewal
Supervisor
Ch. 132
16-43 7-21-2016 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
16-44 Bond Not adopted
16-45 8-18-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-46 9-15-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1072
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
16-47 9-15-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-48 9-15-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-49 9-15-2016 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
16-50 10-20-2016 Salaries NCM
16-51 Salaries Not adopted
16-52 9-15-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-53 9-15-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-54 9-15-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-55 9-15-2016 Acquisition by gift of
certain real property
NCM
16-56 9-15-2016 Stormwater
management:
retrofitting of storm
drain inlets
Ch. 254, Art. II
16-57 9-15-2016 Stormwater
management: outdoor
application of fertilizer
Ch. 254, Art. III
16-58 9-15-2016 Stormwater
management: covering
of dumpsters and other
refuse containers
Ch. 254, Art. IV
16-59 10-6-2016 Authorization for
establishment of
sterile syringe access
program
NCM
16-60 10-6-2016 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-61 10-6-2016 Ordinance No. 16-09
repealer
NCM
16-62 10-6-2016 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-63 10-20-2016 Reauthorization of
developer designation;
agreement with Vista
Center Development,
LLC, amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1073
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
16-64 10-20-2016 Littering amendment Ch. 150
16-65 10-20-2016 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
16-66 12-15-2016 Traffic amendment;
taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 14; Ch. 272
16-67 Salaries NCM
16-68 Rescinding sale of
certain property
NCM
16-69 Rescinding sale of
certain property
NCM
16-70 1-5-2017 Creation of Recreation
Division Director
position
NCM
16-71 1-5-2017 Creation of Supervisor
of Billing and
Collecting position
NCM
16-72 1-5-2017 Creation of Senior
Employee Benefits
Clerk position
NCM
16-73 Tobacco and nicotine
delivery products
Not adopted
16-74 1-5-2017 Lease agreement
amendment
NCM
16-75 1-5-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-01 1-19-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-02 1-19-2017 Creation of Payroll
Supervisor position
NCM
17-03 2-2-2017 Creation of Chief of
Administrative
Services position
NCM
17-04 2-16-2017 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
17-05 2-16-2017 Tobacco and nicotinedelivery
products
Ch. 280
17-06 Bond Not adopted
17-07 3-16-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-08 4-6-2017 Seasonal positions and
salaries
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1074
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
17-09 4-6-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-10 4-6-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-11 4-6-2017 Tax abatement and
financial agreement
for certain property
NCM
17-12 4-6-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-13 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-14 4-6-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-15 4-6-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-16 4-6-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-17 4-6-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-18 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-19 Bond amendment NCM
17-20 5-4-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-21 5-4-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-22 Authorizing release of
restricted affordable
housing units from
applicable affordability
controls
NCM
17-23 5-4-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-24 6-1-2017 Repeal of Ordinance
No. 06-34
NCM
17-25 6-1-2017 Repeal of Ordinance
No. 05-38
NCM
17-26 6-1-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-27 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1075
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
17-28 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-29 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-30 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-31 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-32 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-33 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-34 6-1-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-35 6-1-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-36 6-1-2017 Authorizing release of
restricted affordable
housing units from
applicable affordability
controls
NCM
17-37 6-15-217 Bond NCM
17-38 6-15-2017 Appropriation NCM
17-39 6-15-2017 Bond NCM
17-40 7-6-2017 Acquisition of certain
real property
NCM
17-41 7-6-2017 Acquisition of certain
real property
NCM
17-42 8-3-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-43 8-3-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-44 8-3-2017 Street name change NCM
17-45 8-3-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-46 8-3-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-47 8-3-2017 Acquisition of certain
real property
NCM
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1076
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
17-48 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing; regulation of
establishments
amendment
Withdrawn
17-49 9-7-2017 Acquisition of certain
real property
NCM
17-50 Bond NCM
17-51 9-7-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-52 9-7-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-53 9-7-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-54 9-7-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-55 9-7-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
17-56 Appointment of Tax
Collector
NCM
17-57 9-7-2017 Salaries NCM
17-58 9-7-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-59 Appropriation NCM
17-60 Bond NCM
17-61 9-21-2017 Bond NCM
17-62 10-5-2017 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
17-63 9-21-2017 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
17-64 Bond NCM
17-65 10-5-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
17-66 11-2-2017 Bond NCM
17-67 10-5-2017 Creation of Health
Officer position
NCM
17-68 10-5-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1077
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
17-69 10-5-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
17-70 11-2-2017 Zoning and land
development
amendment
Ch. 315
17-71 11-2-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
17-72 11-2-2017 Bond NCM
17-73 11-21-2017 Licensing amendment Ch. 146
17-74 11-21-2017 Zoning and land
development
amendment
Ch. 315
17-75 11-21-2017 Alcoholic beverages:
minors amendment;
consumption in public
Ch. 10, Art. II; Ch.
10, Art. V
17-76 11-21-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
17-77 11-21-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
17-78 11-21-2017 Sale of certain Cityowned
property
amendment
NCM
17-79 11-21-2017 Traffic amendment Ch. 14
17-80 Tax abatement and
financial agreement
for certain property
NCM
17-81 12-21-2017 Lease of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
17-82 12-21-2017 Zoning and land
development
amendment
Ch. 315
18-01 Not adopted
18-02 2-15-2018 Creating Recreation
Division Director
Position
NCM
18-03 2-15-2018 Salaries NCM
18-04 2-15-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-05 Not adopted
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1078
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
18-06 3-1-2018 Agreement NCM
18-07 3-15-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-08 3-15-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-09 3-15-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
18-10 3-15-2018 Disposition Agreement NCM
18-11 3-15-2018 Establishing
Entertainment
Districts
NCM
18-12 3-15-2018 Best Price Insurance
Contracting
NCM
18-13 3-15-2018 Bond Ordinance NCM
18-14 Not adopted
18-15 4-5-2018 Appropriation NCM
18-16 4-5-2018 Zoning and Land
Development
Amendment
Ch. 315
18-17 4-19-2018 Designation of
Redeveloper
NCM
18-18 4-19-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-19 4-19-2018 Appropriation NCM
18-20 5-3-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-21 5-3-2018 Stormwater
Management: Illicit
Connections
Ch. 254, Art. V
18-22 5-3-2018 Lease NCM
18-23 5-3-2018 Stormwater
Management: Spilling,
Dumping or Disposal
of Materials Other
Than Stormwater
Ch. 254, Art. VI
18-24 Not adopted
18-25 5-17-2018 Lease NCM
18-26 Number not used
18-27 6-21-2018 Bond NCM
18-28 6-7-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-29 6-7-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-30 6-21-2018 Bond NCM
18-31 6-21-2018 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1079
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
18-32 6-21-2018 Appropration NCM
18-33 6-21-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 14
18-34 6-21-2018 Lease NCM
18-35 6-21-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-36 6-21-2018 Master Plan
Implementation
Procedures
NCM
18-37 6-21-2018 Pilot Agreement
Amendment
NCM
18-38 6-21-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
18-39 6-21-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-40 Not adopted
18-41 6-21-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 14
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-42 Rules of Procedure
Amendment
Not adopted 24
18-43 Rules of Procedure
Amendment
Not adopted 24
18-44 9-20-2018 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 10 24
18-45 10-4-2018 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 24
18-46 9-20-2018 Rules of Procedure
Amendment
Ch. A316 24
18-47 Salaries NCM 24
18-48 10-18-2018 Licensing
Amendment;
Nuisances
Amendment; Signs:
Off-Site Signage of
State-Licensed
Medical Marijuana
Businesses
Ch. 146; Ch.
171; Ch. 233,
Art. IV
24
18-49 10-18-2018 Repeal of Sale of
Property
NCM 24
18-50 Administration
Amendment
Not adopted 24
18-51 Salaries NCM 24
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1080
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-52 11-1-2018 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 24
18-53 11-1-2018 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-54 11-1-2018 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-55 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-56 11-1-2018 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-57 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-58 11-1-2018 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-59 Imitation and Toy
Firearms
Tabled 24
18-60 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-61 12-6-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 14 24
18-62 Yard Waste Not adopted 24
18-63 12-6-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 14 24
18-64 12-6-2018 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-65 12-6-2018 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-66 12-4-2018 Bond NCM 24
18-67 12-20-2018 Cancellation of Tax
Lien as Part of
Property
Acquisition
NCM 24
18-68 12-20-2018 Sale of Property NCM 24
18-69 12-20-2018 Lease NCM 24
18-70 12-20-2018 Acquisition of Land NCM 24
18-71 Sale of Property Tabled 24
18-72 12-20-2018 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 24
18-73 Bond NCM 24
18-74 1-3-2019 Chief Engineer,
Environmental
Engineer and Water
Sample Collector
Positions Created
and Salaries
Established
NCM 24
18-75 Administration
Amendment
Tabled 24
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1081
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-76 1-3-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 14 24
18-77 Bond NCM 24
18-78 Supervisor of Motor
Pool
Tabled 24
18-79 1-3-2019 Salaries NCM 24
19-1 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-2 1-17-2019 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-3 1-17-2019 Housing Standards
Amendment
Ch. 132 24
19-4 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-5 2-7-2019 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 10 24
19-6 2-7-2019 Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 146 24
19-7 2-7-2019 Revoking
Authorization of
Agreement and
Sale of Property
NCM 24
19-8 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-9 Revoking
Authorization of
Agreement and
Sale of Property
NCM 24
19-10 2-7-2019 Yard Waste Ch. 312 24
19-11 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-12 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-13 Animals
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-14 Deputy Director of
Human Services
Not adopted 24
19-15 2-21-2019 Sale of Property;
Redevelopment
Agreement
NCM 24
19-16 2-21-2019 Bond NCM 24
19-17 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-18 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-19 Sale of Property NCM 24
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1082
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
19-20 Animals
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-21 Housing Standards
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-22 6-6-2019 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 10 24
19-23 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-24 Geographic
Information
Systems Specialist
Not adopted 24
19-25 4-18-2019 Ethics, Board of
Amendment
Ch. 70 24
19-26 Sale of Property;
Redevelopment
Agreement
NCM 24
19-27 4-18-2019 Sale of Property NCM 24
19-28 5-16-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 24
19-29 Youth Council Not adopted 24
19-30 Youth in
Governance
Program
Not adopted 24
19-31 Parks and
Recreation Areas
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-32 Rules of Procedure
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-33 Bureau of Fire
Prevention
Not adopted 24
19-34 Rules of Procedure
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-35 Fire Safety
Manager for High-
Rise Buildings
Not adopted 24
19-36 5-16-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 24
19-37 6-6-2019 Salaries NCM 24
19-38 6-20-2019 Appropriation NCM 24
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1083
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
19-39 Pay-to-Play
Requirements for
Redevelopment
Agreements
Tabled 24
19-40 Gang Loitering
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-41 8-1-2019 Salaries NCM 24
19-42 8-1-2019 Salaries NCM 24
19-43 Administration
Amendment
Not adopted 24
19-44 Bond NCM 24
19-45 Bond NCM 24
19-46 Bond NCM 24
19-47 9-5-2019 Special
Assessment; Bond
Amendment;
Shared Services
Agreement
NCM 24
19-48 9-5-2019 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 24
19-49 Pay-to-Play
Requirements for
Redevelopment
Agreements
Not adopted 24
19-50 9-5-2019 Honorary Street
Naming on
Roebling Avenue
NCM 24
19-51 9-5-2019 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 24
19-52 9-5-2019 Street Vacation NCM 24
19-53 9-19-2019 Appropriation NCM 24
19-54 9-19-2019 Street Vacation NCM 24
19-55 9-19-2019 Nonadoption of
State Senate Bill
2631 Regarding
Residence of Water
System Employees
NCM 24
19-56 Salaries NCM 24
§ DL-1 TRENTON CODE § DL-1
DT:1084
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
19-57 9-19-2019 Emergency Water
Conservation
NCM 24
19-58 9-19-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 24
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1085

ZONING
315 Attachment 1
City of Trenton
Appendix A, Area and Bulk Schedules
Residential Districts
Zone Use
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum Yards1
(feet) Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum
Building Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building Height
(stories/feet)
Maximum
Lot Coverage
Minimum Net
Habitable Floor Area
Front (square feet) 2 Rear Side
RA Detached 1-family dwelling units 6,000 Average or 30 35 One: 6
Both: 16
50 25 2.5/35 45% 1,500
RB-1 Detached 1-family dwelling units 4,000 Average or 25 35 One: 6
Both: 14
40 20 2.5/35 45% 1,200
RB-2 Detached 1-family dwelling units 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: 14
40 — 3/35 45% 1,200
RB-2 Semidetached 1-family dwelling units 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: n/a
25 per unit — 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
RB Detached 1-family dwelling units 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: 14
40 — 3/35 45% 1,200
RB Semidetached 1-family dwelling units 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: n/a
25 per unit — 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
RB Row house dwelling units 1,500 per unit Average or 20 35 —3
15 per unit — 3/35 50% 900 per unit
NOTES:
1 See § 315-232, Yard exceptions.
2 When there is only one existing structure on a block, the front yard setback for a new structure shall be as specified in the table.
3 There shall be no more than eight units in any one row house structure. A minimum side yard setback of six feet is required for each end unit in a row house structure.
315 Attachment 1:1 04 - 01 - 2011
TRENTON CODE
City of Trenton
Zoning Schedules
Business/Mixed Use Districts
Zone Use
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum Yards1
(feet) Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(stories/feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Net Habitable Floor Area
Front (square feet) 2 Rear Side
MU Detached 1-family dwelling units 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 45% 1,200
MU Semidetached 1-family dwelling units 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: —
25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
MU Two-family dwelling structures 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
MU Row house dwelling units 1,500 per unit Average or 20 35 —4
15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
MU Multifamily dwelling structures 2,000 per unit (first 2 units)
500 per unit (additional units)
Average or 20 35 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 60% 650 per unit
MU Offices 5,000 Average or 20 35 One: 10
Both: 20
50 3/35 60% —
MU Mixed-use structures 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 10
Both: 20
40 3/35 60% Residential: 650 per unit
Business: 400 per business use
BA Business uses 2,000 Average or 0 203 One: 05
Both: 05
20 —5
60% 800 per business use
BA Detached 1-family dwelling units 4,000 Average or 0 203 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 45% 1,000 per unit
BA Semidetached 1-family dwelling units 2,500 per unit Average or 0 203 One: 6
Both: —
25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
BA Two-family dwelling structures 2,500 per unit Average or 0 203 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
BA Row house dwelling structures 1,500 per unit Average or 0 203 —4
15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
BA Multifamily dwelling structures 2,000 per unit (first 2 units)
500 per unit (additional units)
Average or 0 203 One: 0
Both: 0
20 —6
60% 500 per unit
BA Mixed-use structures 4,000 Average or 0 203 One: 05
Both: 05
40 —6
60% Residential: 500 per unit
Business: 800 per business use
DD Business uses 2,000 0
7
203 One: 05
Both: 05
20 14/210 — 800 per business use
DD Detached 1-family dwelling units 4,000 0
7
20 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 45% 1,000 per unit
04 - 01 - 2011 315 Attachment 1:2
ZONING
Zone Use
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum Yards
(feet)1 Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(stories/feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Net Habitable Floor Area
Front (square feet) 2 Rear Side
DD Semidetached 1-family dwelling units 2,500 per unit 0
7
20 One: 6
Both: —
25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
DD Two-family dwelling structures 2,500 per unit 0
7
20 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
DD Row house dwelling structures 1,500 per unit 0
7
20 —4
15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
DD Multifamily dwelling structures 2,000 per unit (first 2 units)
500 per unit (additional units)
0
7
20 One: 0
Both: 0
20 —6
60% Residential: 500 per unit
Business: 800 per business use
DD Mixed-use structures with residential
uses above business uses
2,000 0
7
203 One: 05
Both: 05
20 14/210 — 500
BB Business uses 2,000 Average or 202, 8 20 One: 05
Both: 05
20 4/50 60% 800 per business use
BB Detached 1-family dwelling units 4,000 Average or 202, 8 20 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 45% 1,000 per unit
BB Semidetached 1-family dwelling units 2,500 per unit Average or 202, 8 20 One: 6
Both: —
25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
BB Two-family dwelling structures 2,500 per unit Average or 202, 8 20 One: 6
Both: 14
40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
BB Row house dwelling structures 1,500 per unit Average or 202, 8 20 —4
15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
BB Multifamily dwelling structures 2,000 per unit (first 2 units)
500 per unit (additional units)
Average or 202, 8 20 One: 0
Both: 0
20 4/50 60% 500 per unit
BB Mixed-use structures 4,000 Average or 202, 8 20 One: 05
Both: 05
40 4/50 60% Residential: 500 per unit
Business: 800 per business use
NOTES:
1 See § 315-232, Yard exceptions.
2 When there is only one existing structure on a block, the front yard setback for a new structure shall be as specified in the table.
3 No rear yard setback shall be required on a corner lot that is less than 50 feet from a side street line.
4 There shall be no more than eight units in any one row house structure. A minimum side yard setback of six feet is required for each end unit in a row house structure.
5 When a building designed wholly or partially for the conduct of business or other nondwelling purposes adjoins a lot in a residence district at the side, a six-foot setback shall be provided on the residential side of the business lot.
6 Refer to the Capital City Renaissance Plan for height limitations. The Planning Board may further restrict building height by taking into consideration the average height of buildings in the same block as the proposed building site, and
where the proposed site is a corner, the height of buildings on the other corners of the same intersection. In historic districts the number of stories of any proposed new building must be consistent with adjacent historic buildings.
7 No front yard setback shall be required, except when the Downtown District frontage extends part way into a block, the remainder of which is in a residence district, the same front yard shall be required for the business frontage as the
adjoining residential frontage.
8
If the property abuts a residence district, the front yard setback shall be the same as for the abutting residence district. If abutted by more than one residence district, the front yard requirements of the least restrictive residential district
shall apply.
315 Attachment 1:3 04 - 01 - 2011
TRENTON CODE
City of Trenton
Zoning Schedules
Industrial Districts
Zone Use
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum Yards
(feet)1
Minimum FAR Maximum FAR
Maximum Building
Height
Front (stories/feet) 2 Rear3, 4 Side4
IA All permitted uses 10,000 Average or 20 10 One: 0
Both: 0
0.4 1.5 3/50
IB All permitted uses 25,000 Average or 20 10 One: 0
Both: 0
0.2 0.5 3/50
NOTES:
1 See § 315-232, Yard exceptions.
2 When there is only one existing structure on a block, the front yard setback for a new structure shall be as specified in the table.
3 No rear yard setback shall be required on a corner lot that is less than 50 feet from a side street line.
4 When a property adjoins a residence or business district at the rear or side, the same rear and side yard setback shall be required as for the most restrictive adjoining residence or business district.
04 - 01 - 2011 315 Attachment 1:4

ZONING
315 Attachment 1
City of Trenton
Appendix A, Area and Bulk Schedules

Residential Districts
Zone 
Minimum Lot Size
Front Yard 
Side Yard
Rear Yard 
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Building Width
Maximum Building Height
Maximum Lot Coverage
Minimum Net Habitable Floor Area

RA 6,000 Average or 30 35 One: 6 Both: 16 50 25 2.5/35 45% 1,500
RB-1  4,000 Average or 25 35 One: 6 Both: 14 40 20 2.5/35 45% 1,200
RB-2 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: 14 40 — 3/35 45% 1,200
RB-2 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: n/a 25 per unit — 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
RB-3 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: 14 40 — 3/35 45% 1,200
RB-4 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: n/a 25 per unit — 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
RB-5 1,500 per unit Average or 20 35 —3 15 per unit — 3/35 50% 900 per unit
MU-1 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 45% 1,200
MU-2 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: — 25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
MU-3 2,500 per unit Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
MU-4 Row house dwelling units 1,500 per unit Average or 20 35 —4 15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
MU-5 500 per unit  Average or 20 35 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 60% 650 per unit
MU-6 5,000 Average or 20 35 One: 10 Both: 20 50 3/35 60% —
MU-7 4,000 Average or 20 35 One: 10 Both: 20 40 3/35 60% Residential: 650 per unit Business: 400 per business use
BA-1 2,000 Average or 0 203 One: 05 Both: 05 20 —5 60% 800 per business use
BA-2 4,000 Average or 0 203 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 45% 1,000 per unit
BA-3 2,500 per unit Average or 0 203 One: 6 Both: — 25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
BA-4 2,500 per unit Average or 0 203 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
BA-5 1,500 per unit Average or 0 203 —4 15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
BA-6 500 per unit  Average or 0 203 One: 0 Both: 0 20 —6 60% 500 per unit
BA-7 4,000 Average or 0 203 One: 05 Both: 05 40 —6 60% Residential: 500 per unit Business: 800 per business use
DD-1 2,000 0 203 One: 05 Both: 05 20 14/210 — 800 per business use
DD-2 dwelling units 4,000 0 20 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 45% 1,000 per unit
DD-3 2,500 per unit 0 20 One: 6 Both: — 25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
DD-4 2,500 per unit 0 20 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
DD-5 1,500 per unit 0 20 —4 15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
DD-6 500 per unit (additional units) 0  20 One: 0 Both: 0 20 —6 60% Residential: 500 per unit Business: 800 per business use
DD-7 2,000 0 203 One: 05 Both: 05 20 14/210 — 500 
BB-1 2,000 Average or 202, 8 20 One: 05 Both: 05 20 4/50 60% 800 per business use
BB-2 4,000 Average or 202, 8 20 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 45% 1,000 per unit
BB-3 2,500 per unit Average or 202, 8 20 One: 6 Both: — 25 3/35 50% 1,000 per unit
BB-4 2,500 per unit Average or 202, 8 20 One: 6 Both: 14 40 3/35 50% 650 per unit
BB-5 1,500 per unit Average or 202, 8 20 —4 15 per unit 3/35 60% 900 per unit
BB-6 500 per unit (additional units) Average or 202, 8 20 One: 0 Both: 0 20 4/50 60% 500 per unit
BB-7 4,000 Average or 202, 8 20 One: 05 Both: 05 40 4/50 60% Residential: 500 per unit Business: 800 per business use
NOTES:
1 See § 315-232, Yard exceptions.
2 When there is only one existing structure on a block, the front yard setback for a new structure shall be as specified in the table.
3 No rear yard setback shall be required on a corner lot that is less than 50 feet from a side street line.
4 There shall be no more than eight units in any one row house structure. A minimum side yard setback of six feet is required for each end unit in a row house structure.
5 When a building designed wholly or partially for the conduct of business or other nondwelling purposes adjoins a lot in a residence district at the side, a six-foot setback shall be provided on the residential side of the business lot.
6 Refer to the Capital City Renaissance Plan for height limitations. The Planning Board may further restrict building height by taking into consideration the average height of buildings in the same block as the proposed building site, and
where the proposed site is a corner, the height of buildings on the other corners of the same intersection. In historic districts the number of stories of any proposed new building must be consistent with adjacent historic buildings.
7 No front yard setback shall be required, except when the Downtown District frontage extends part way into a block, the remainder of which is in a residence district, the same front yard shall be required for the business frontage as the
adjoining residential frontage.
8
If the property abuts a residence district, the front yard setback shall be the same as for the abutting residence district. If abutted by more than one residence district, the front yard requirements of the least restrictive residential district
shall apply.
315 Attachment 1:3 04 - 01 - 2011
TRENTON CODE
City of Trenton
Zoning Schedules
Industrial Districts
Zone Use
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum Yards
(feet)1
Minimum FAR Maximum FAR
Maximum Building
Height
Front (stories/feet) 2 Rear3, 4 Side4
IA All permitted uses 10,000 Average or 20 10 One: 0
Both: 0
0.4 1.5 3/50
IB All permitted uses 25,000 Average or 20 10 One: 0
Both: 0
0.2 0.5 3/50
NOTES:
1 See § 315-232, Yard exceptions.
2 When there is only one existing structure on a block, the front yard setback for a new structure shall be as specified in the table.
3 No rear yard setback shall be required on a corner lot that is less than 50 feet from a side street line.
4 When a property adjoins a residence or business district at the rear or side, the same rear and side yard setback shall be required as for the most restrictive adjoining residence or business district.
04 - 01 - 2011 315 Attachment 1:4