Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Board of Health — See
Ch. 550, Art. I.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Township Committee
[Adopted 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Be it ordained and enacted by the Township Committee of the Township of
Union, County of Union, State of New Jersey, as follows:
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Union of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee of
the Township of Union, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 523, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Union," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Union by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Union" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Union, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by the Township Committee. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Union to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-5 UNION CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and
not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of
this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. This ordinance
specifically repeals the 1986 Code of the Township of Union, adopted
10-28-1986 by Ordinance No. 3879, as amended.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 6-22-2004.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. Penalties. In addition to the changes mentioned in Subsections A and B,
the following sections were amended or added to provide for a
maximum penalty of imprisonment in the county jail or in any other
place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for any
term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof: §§ 5-26, 160-22, 160-27, 164-3, 164-36, 164-46, 168-25B,
168-29, 168-32A, 168-41, 173-4, 198-3, 203-21, 207-4, 216-12, 221-8A,
228-8, 233-7, 266-14F, 273-2, 273-8, 277-3, 298-11, 302-7, 313-4A,
317-8, 345-4, 350-2, 354-7, 358-13, 362-4, 369-6B, 369-9, 373-8,
373-13, 373-16, 390-26, 390-28, 397-6, 406-8, 406-27, 415-10, 421-15,
428-23, 428-29, 434-8, 434-16B, 434-44, 434-50A, 439-10, 443-11A,
450-11, 450-15D, 456-7, 462-39, 462-52, 477-53A, 483-4, 490-37,
494-10, 499-14, 516-5, 516-15, 523-9.
D. Nomenclature. The following titles are hereby changed, as indicated,
throughout the Code:
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the articles and sections which were amended,
added or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation,
footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the
following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842." Schedule A,
which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-13 UNION CODE § 1-14
1:6
(1) "Municipal Engineer" is hereby amended to read "Township
Engineer," and "Assistant Municipal Engineer" is hereby amended
to read "Assistant Township Engineer."
(2) "Building Inspector" and "Construction Official" are hereby
amended to read "Construction Code Official."
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 93.
Personnel benefits — See Ch. 102.
Cooperative purchasing — See Ch. 117.
§ 1-14 UNION CODE § 1-14
5:8
ARTICLE I
Creation; Composition
§ 5-1. Creation.
There is hereby created and established within the organizational structure
of the Township of Union in the County of Union a Department of
Administration.
§ 5-2. Composition.2
The Department of Administration shall be comprised of the following
divisions: the Division of Purchasing, the Division of Accounts, the Division
of Human Resources, the Division of Technical Services and the Division of
Senior Citizens Activities.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-1 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-2
5:9

ARTICLE II
Township Administrator
§ 5-3. Position created.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq., there is hereby created the position
of Township Administrator.
§ 5-4. Appointment; compensation.
The Township Administrator shall be appointed or contracted for by the
majority vote of the Township Committee and shall hold office at the
pleasure of the governing body of the Township. The compensation of the
Township Administrator shall be fixed from time to time by the Township
Committee.
§ 5-5. Removal from office.
The Township Administrator may be removed from office in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138.
§ 5-6. Engagement in organized political campaigns.
The Township Administrator shall not engage in any organized political
campaigns within the Township of Union.
§ 5-7. Basis for appointment.
The Township Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities and qualifications.
§ 5-8. Supervision by Township Committee; duties and
responsibilities.
The Township Administrator shall, under the supervision and control of
the Township Committee, perform such duties as may be requested from
time to time other than those required by law to be exercised by the
governing body itself or by another officer or body and to the extent not
prohibited by law. Such duties and responsibilities shall include but not
be limited to the coordination of operations, activities and administration
of all departments, divisions, offices, boards and agencies of the Township
government and exchanging and disseminating information and generally
advising and consulting with the Township Committee without infringing
upon the lawful powers and duties of other officers, boards and
departments. In addition, the Administrator shall have the following specific
duties and responsibilities:
A. To serve as chief administrative officer of the Township.
B. To attend all meetings of the Township Committee as required, with the
right to participate in all discussions but without the right to vote.
§ 5-3 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-8
5:11
C. To advise the governing body on policy decisions.
D. To execute all laws of the State of New Jersey and execute ordinances
and resolutions of the Township, subject to the direction of the
Township Committee.
E. As the appointing authority, to appoint and remove employees for
whose selection and removal no other method is provided by law.
F. To negotiate contracts, subject to the approval of the Committee.
G. To make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
Township improvements as determined by the Township Committee.
H. To recommend to the Township Committee the adoption of such
measures as he, the Administrator, may deem necessary or expedient.
I. To represent the Township in its relations with the federal government,
state, county and other municipalities and assess the Township's
interest in contracts, franchises and other business transactions.
J. To make reports to the Township Committee as required.
K. To investigate the affairs of any officer or department at the initiation of
the Township Committee and to report to the Committee on the work of
all departments.
L. To receive and reply to all inquiries and complaints concerning
Township business and to provide information and assistance in respect
thereto and, in addition, to review, suggest a method for handling and
follow up on all requests for information.
M. To establish and maintain effective personnel practices and maintain
records of all employees.
N. To carry out all policies established by the Township Committee.
O. In consultation with the Municipal Auditor and department heads, to
prepare the annual operating and capital budgets and submit them to
the Township Committee at a date and in accordance with procedures
established by the Committee and state law.
P. To supervise the disbursement of all Township funds and approve all
vouchers and bills before submitting the same to the Township
Committee for final approval.
Q. To maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and costs of municipal services.
R. To delegate to any department head such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
S. To implement and enforce the policy of the Township Committee with
respect to the compiling and release of public information.
§ 5-8 UNION CODE § 5-8
5:12
§ 5-9. Designation of substitute.
The Township Administrator may designate a qualified municipal employee
of the Township to perform his duties during his temporary absence or
disability. In the event of his failure to make such designation, the Township
Committee, by resolution, may appoint such a substitute Administrator for
the aforesaid purposes.
T. To keep the Township Committee informed as to federal aid projects
and state aid projects and any other aid programs for which the
Township may qualify.
U. To perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance,
resolution or direction of the Township Committee.
V. To control the hiring and firing of all employees below the rank of a
department head, all such action to be within the scope of the New
Jersey Department of Personnel regulations and all other local, state or
federal regulations.
W. To have the authority to assign, reassign or combine functions and
personnel in any department in order to effectuate an orderly and
efficient operation.
X. To receive, review and disseminate all correspondence addressed to the
Township of Union and any of its officials, unless it is clearly marked
personal and confidential.
Y. In conjunction with the Auditor, where deemed necessary, to control
and approve all transfers of funds within or from department budgets
and, further, from time to time to require all departments heads to
justify purchases and expenditures, subject to quotations or bids
previously obtained.
§ 5-8 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-9
5:13

ARTICLE III
Assistant Township Administrator
§ 5-10. Position created.
Pursuant to New Jersey Department of Personnel rules, the position of
Assistant Township Administrator is hereby created.
§ 5-11. Duties and responsibilities.
Under the direction and control of the Township Administrator, the
Assistant Administrator shall perform the duties required under the
applicable job specification promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Personnel. In addition, the Assistant Township Administrator shall perform
any related functions assigned by the Township Administrator.
§ 5-10 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-11
5:15

ARTICLE IV
Division of Purchasing
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 5-12. Creation.
There is hereby created and establish within the Department of
Administration a Division of Purchasing.
§ 5-13. Word usage; definitions.
§ 5-14. Direction and control.
The Division of Purchasing shall operate under the direction and control
of the Township Administrator. Daily operations shall be coordinated and
supervised by the Purchasing Agent.
§ 5-15. Organization and management.
Subject to budgetary appropriations, the Township Administrator shall
exercise all necessary judgment and discretion with regard to the
organization and management of said Division.
A. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory.
B. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein:
COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the Using Agency
Committee.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES — Includes all telephone, gas, water,
electric light and power service, repair or maintenance of equipment,
machinery and other Township-owned personal property. The term shall
not include professional and other contractual services which are by
their nature unique and not subject to competition.
SUPPLIES — Includes all supplies, materials and equipment.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township
of Union in the County of Union.
TOWNSHIP PURCHASING AGENT — The Purchasing Agent of the
Township of Union in the County of Union.
USING AGENCY — Any department, agency, commission, bureau or
other unit in the Township government using supplies or procuring
contractual services as provided for in this chapter.
§ 5-12 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-16
5:17
§ 5-16. Duties and responsibilities of Purchasing Agent.
The Township Purchasing Agent shall be in charge of and have general
supervision of the Division of Purchasing. The Purchasing Agent shall
perform all duties required of a department head by law and shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by this chapter.
A. The Purchasing Agent shall:
(1) Be appointed by the Township Committee for a term of four years.
(2) Have had, prior to his appointment, at least three years' experience
in municipal government in an executive capacity.
(3) Be bonded in an amount of at least $5,000 or, in the alternative, be
included under the blanket municipal bond.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to
purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services needed by
any using agency of the Township in accordance with purchasing
procedures as prescribed by this chapter and such rules and
regulations as the Purchasing Agent shall adopt for the internal
management and operation of the Purchasing Division.
C. The authority of the Purchasing Agent shall not include construction of
buildings, street or park improvements and other related projects.
D. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any Township officer
or employee to order, to purchase or to make any contract within the
purview of this chapter, other than through the Purchasing Division,
and any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions
hereof shall not be approved by the Township Purchasing Agent, and
the Township shall not be bound thereby.
E. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred herein, the
Purchasing Agent shall:
(1) Act to procure for the Township the highest quality in supplies and
contractual services at the least expense to the Township.
(2) Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain full and open
competition insofar as possible on all purchases and sales.
(3) Establish and amend, when necessary, all rules and regulations
authorized by or promulgated under this article and any other
necessary to its operation.
(4) Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions and new products and secure for the
Township the benefit of research done in the field of purchasing by
other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies,
trade and business organizations.
§ 5-16 UNION CODE § 5-16
5:18
§ 5-17. Using agencies.
All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the
department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the
Purchasing Agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements
in supplies and the contractual services in such manner, at such time,
and for such future periods as the Purchasing Agent shall prescribe. The
Purchasing Agent shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall
have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality or estimated cost;
but revision as to quality shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications established pursuant to this article.
§ 5-18. Voidable contracts.
§ 5-19. Competitive bids.
All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services and all
sales of obsolete equipment shall, except as specifically provided herein, be
based, wherever possible, on competitive bids.
§ 5-20. Formal bids; advertising.
(5) Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably
necessary to the operation of this chapter and of the Division of
Purchasing.
(6) Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors' catalog file. Said catalog
shall be filed according to materials and shall contain descriptions
of vendors' commodities.
(7) Explore the possibilities of buying in bulk in order to take full
advantage of discounts.
(8) Act to procure for the Township all federal tax exemptions to which
it is entitled.
(9) Prepare and adopt a standard purchasing nomenclature for using
agencies and suppliers.
(10) Prepare and secure, with the cooperation of the various Township
departments and agencies, standard and written specifications for
supplies used by the various branches of the Township government.
A. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in
which any officer or employee of the Township is financially interested,
directly or indirectly, shall be void.
B. The Purchasing Agent and every officer and employee of the Township
is expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any
person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or
contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or anything of
value whatsoever.
§ 5-16 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-20
5:19
§ 5-21. Open market purchases.
§ 5-22. Emergency purchases.
A. All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided
herein, when the estimated aggregate value thereof shall exceed
$2,500 shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals as required by
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
B. Authorization to publicly advertise for formal bids shall be initiated by
approval of the Township Committee.
C. Formal bids shall be received by the Township Purchasing Committee,
unless otherwise ordered. The Purchasing Committee shall consist of
the Municipal Administrator, the Purchasing Agent and the Township
Treasurer.
D. The Purchasing Agent and using department shall review bids and
submit recommendations as to the award to the Township Committee.
E. The Township Committee shall award or reject bids under this section.
A. All purchases of supplies and contractual services of less than the
estimated aggregate value of $2,500 may be made in the open market
without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed by § 5-20 for the award of formal contracts.
B. All requisitions shall be approved by a department head.
C. All open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at
least three competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder.
D. The Purchasing Agent shall solicit bids in the manner provided by law,
including but not limited to:
(1) Direct mail request to prospective vendors.
(2) Telephone.
(3) Public notice.
E. The Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of all open orders and all
competitive bids submitted in connection therewith.
A. Emergency purchases shall be made as follows by:
(1) The Purchasing Agent. In case of an apparent emergency which
requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services,
the Purchasing Agent shall secure, by open market procedure as
herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or
contractual services, the amount of the expenditure not to exceed
$200.
§ 5-20 UNION CODE § 5-22
5:20
§ 5-23. Inspection of deliveries.
§ 5-24. Inventory procedure.
(2) The department head. In case of actual emergency and with the
consent of the Purchasing Agent, the head of any using agency may
purchase directly any supplies whose immediate procurement is
essential to prevent delays in the work of the using agency which
may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of citizens.
B. The head of such using agency shall send to the Purchasing Agent a
requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together with a full report
of the circumstances of the emergency.
C. The Purchasing Agent shall prescribe, by rules and regulations, the
procedure under which emergency purchases by heads of using
agencies may be made.
A. The head of the using agency shall inspect or supervise the inspection
of all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their
conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries
which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with
the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the Purchasing
Agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any
outside laboratory. The costs of such tests shall be charged to the using
agency.
A. All using agencies shall submit to the Purchasing Agent, at such times
and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all
supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete,
worn out or scrapped.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall submit to all departments, prior to the sale
of surplus materials as described below, a list of items no longer
required to determine if they can use any of the equipment, parts and
supplies listed.
C. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock
to other using agencies.
D. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which
have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for or
trade in the same on new supplies.
E. Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder
in accordance with the statute in such case made and provided. A
record of each sale shall be made and placed on file.
§ 5-22 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-25
5:21
§ 5-25. Cooperative purchasing.3
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans, as provided for in the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, when the best interests of the Township
could be served thereby.
§ 5-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating this article or any
of the provisions thereof shall be punished by one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section.
3. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 117, Purchasing, Cooperative.
§ 5-25 UNION CODE § 5-26
5:22
ARTICLE V
Division of Accounts
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 5-27. Creation.
There is hereby created and established within the Department of
Administration a Division of Accounts.
§ 5-28. Supervision and control.
The Division of Accounts shall be under the supervision and control of the
Supervisor of Accounts, who shall be considered the head of this Division
and who shall be certified as Supervisor of Accounts by Civil Service.
Included but not limited thereto, the eligibility requirements for the position
of Supervisor of Accounts shall have a thorough knowledge of the principles
of auditing and accounting and their application to specific cases; of the
procedures used in keeping and auditing the accounts of final transactions;
of accounting methods and techniques; of the procedures used in
preventing errors; of the interpretation of varied financial data; and of the
principles of personnel administration.
§ 5-29. Organization and management.
Subject to budgetary appropriations, the Township Administrator shall
exercise all necessary judgment and discretion with regard to the
organization and management of said Division.
§ 5-30. Supervisor of Accounts; duties and responsibilities.
The Supervisor of Accounts, as division head, shall provide for the proper
and efficient conduct of the following functions of the Division of Accounts:
A. Supervise the activities of assigned personnel, establish division
procedures and methods of operations.
B. Check bank statements and maintain a running analysis of accounts.
C. Prepare budget requests, review budget practices and carry on
research in order to make the budget a more meaningful document;
assist in the preparation of the budget and prepare budget
amendments, supervise and/or compile needed financial and other data
for inclusion in budget.
D. Calculate payroll deductions and prepare and verify payrolls and
maintain needed records and files.
E. Make audits of financial records and accounts to determine their
accuracy and completeness; develop trial balances and other
bookkeeping data; prepare and/or audit balance sheets and other
financial statements and reports.
§ 5-27 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-30
5:23
F. Provide technical guidance in reviewing, analyzing, evaluating and
reporting on program accomplishments in financial terms; compare
performance with operating plans and standards as reflected in
financial data.
G. Report on and interpret the results as requested with the objectives of
promoting economy and efficiency in the execution of programs;
develop, coordinate and execute financial policies, procedures and
plans.
H. Develop, coordinate and maintain an integrated system of financial staff
services through synthesis of data and informative flow to provide the
necessary financial control.
I. Supervise clerical and accounting staff and assign their duties and
responsibilities.
J. Prepare, audit and edit reports of costs and other financial summaries
and statements.
K. Review disbursements and controls to assure adherence to contractual
obligations; supervise and maintain essential accounting records and
files.
L. Determine the amount of money involved in proposed salary changes
and relate the salary changes to wage increases by industry.
M. Review all requisitions for appropriateness of expenditures and do
follow-up work on all questions, vouchers and requisitions.
N. Compile difficult and other statements and reports using basic data;
assist in the preparation of annual financial statements, which may be
required by law.
O. Prepare resolutions to transfer moneys from one account to another.
P. Work with data processing equipment to revise or establish new
operational procedures.
Q. Cooperate and assist the Township Auditor in the operation and
auditing of accounts.
R. Make difficult inspections of varied transactions and records to ensure
that concerned regulations and accounting procedures are observed.
S. Maintain or supervise the maintenance of essential accounting records
and files.
T. Assist the Municipal Treasurer in supervising and performing the work
involved in the preparation of varied financial reports and statements.
U. Assist the Municipal Treasurer in the negotiation of loans and the sale
of bonds.
§ 5-30 UNION CODE § 5-30
5:24
V. Advise the Municipal Treasurer of moneys available for investing and
maintain records of the Treasurer's investments.
W. Provide cash flow projection to the Municipal Treasurer for investment
program.
X. Conduct all investigations, survey and reports directed by the Township
Committee or Municipal Administrator.
§ 5-30 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-30
5:25

ARTICLE VI
Division of Human Resources
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 5-31. Creation.
There is hereby created and established within the Department of
Administration a Division of Human Resources.
§ 5-32. Supervision and control.
The Division of Human Resources shall operate under the direction and
control of the Township Administrator. Daily operations shall be coordinated
and supervised by the Chief of Administrative Services.
§ 5-33. Organization and management.
Subject to budgetary appropriations, the Township Administrator shall
exercise all necessary judgment and discretion with regard to the
organization and management of said Division.
§ 5-34. Chief of Administrative Services; duties and responsibilities.
The Chief of Administrative Services shall administer and control the
following functions thereto:
A. Supervises work pertaining to the operation of personnel and
supportive units of the jurisdiction and develops suitable work
programs and working procedures.
B. Gives assignments and instructions to individuals and the heads of
several units within the administrative and support unit.
C. Acts as liaison with the NJ Department of Personnel and any other
public agency which directly affects the jurisdiction's operation.
D. Serves as advisor to higher levels of management in the handling of
personnel matters and employee relations problems.
E. Oversees the employee performance evaluation program.
F. Supervises the preparation of resolutions and/or other documents
relating to creation of new positions, work to be performed,
qualifications required, and other personnel matters.
G. Maintains a job classification and salary plan.
H. Compiles, evaluates and approves personnel action material for
submission to state.
I. Recommends personnel actions such as hiring, firing, promoting or
disciplining.
§ 5-31 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-34
5:27
J. Interprets applicable laws, policies, rules and regulations for
subordinates.
K. Answers questions about application of regulations or policies.
L. Consults with staff members for identification of staffing or operational
needs.
M. Settles conflicts or problems in a supervisory capacity.
N. Informs individuals of procedures necessary for completion of forms or
applications and explains agency programs and services.
§ 5-34 UNION CODE § 5-34
5:28
ARTICLE VII
Division of Technical Services
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 5-35. Creation.
There is hereby created and established within the Department of
Administration a Division of Technical Services.
§ 5-36. Supervision and control.
The Division of Technical Services shall operate under the direction and
control of the Township Administrator. Daily operations shall be coordinated
and supervised by the contracting agency.
§ 5-37. Organization and management.
Subject to budgetary appropriations, the Township Administrator shall
exercise all necessary judgment and discretion with regard to the
organization and management of said Division.
§ 5-38. Contracting agency; duties and responsibilities.
(Reserved)
§ 5-35 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-38
5:29

ARTICLE VIII
Division of Senior Citizens Activities
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 5-39. Creation.
There is hereby created and established within the Department of
Administration a Division of Senior Citizens Activities.
§ 5-40. Direction and control.
The Division of Senior Citizens Activities shall operate under the direction
and control of the Township Administrator. Daily operations shall be
coordinated and supervised by the Supervisor of Senior Citizens Activities.
§ 5-41. Organization and management.
Subject to budgetary appropriations, the Township Administrator shall
exercise all necessary judgment and discretion with regard to the
organization and management of said Division.4
§ 5-42. Supervisor of Senior Citizens Activities; duties and
responsibilities.
The Supervisor of Senior Citizens Activities, as division head, shall provide
for the proper and efficient conduct of the following functions of the Division
of Senior Citizen Activities:
A. Plans and supervises programs with existing social agencies that will
enrich the lives of the elderly.
B. Teaches methods of alleviating problems by setting up social,
recreational and educational activities to assist elderly residents in
utilizing their spare time in creative involvement.
C. Initiates, organizes and supervises the administration of clubs,
meetings, lectures, group excursions and other group endeavors.
D. Stimulates community awareness of older citizens and the need to
include them in the ongoing life of the community.
E. Works to prevent the social isolation of older adults and helps them
remain active and contributing members of society.
F. Compiles, correlates and reviews information regarding federal, state
and private foundation funds that are available to meet the needs of the
elderly.
4. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 8, Art. VII, Division of Economic Development, added 7-11-1995
by Ord. No. 4408, as amended 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 4554, which article previously
followed this section, was repealed 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4578. See now Ch. 34, Art. II,
Department of Economic Development.
§ 5-39 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-42
5:31
G. Applies for funding of programs and ensures compliance with program
objectives.
§ 5-42 UNION CODE § 5-42
5:32
Chapter 12
BOARDS, COMMITTEES, AGENCIES AND COMMISSIONS
§ 5-42 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 5-42
5:33

ARTICLE I
Absenteeism
[Adopted 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 5283]
§ 12-1. Attendance policy.
Absenteeism of more than 50% of all regularly scheduled meetings within
a six-month period shall be disapproved. It shall be incumbent upon each
Chairperson to advise his/her membership of this attendance policy and to
advise the Township Administrator, who shall report same to the Township
Committee, when an individual appointee's attendance is below 50% of all
regularly scheduled meetings within said six-month period. Upon direction
of the Township Committee, the Township Clerk will inform members with
excessive absenteeism that their appointment is terminated, unless another
procedure by law governs the appointees' removal.
§ 12-1 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 12-1
5:35

ARTICLE II
Human Relations Commission
[Adopted 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 5357]
§ 12-2. Findings; Commission created; membership; term;
compensation.
§ 12-3. Objectives; duties.
A. It is hereby found that prejudice and discrimination against any
individual or group because of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, age, sex, affectional or sexual orientation, marital status,
liability for service in the Armed Forces of the United States or
nationality is inimical to democracy, the cornerstone of our American
tradition, and menaces peace and public welfare. To eliminate such
prejudice and discrimination in Union, a Commission should be
established through which the citizens of Union may be kept informed
of developments in human relations and from which the elected and
appointed officials and the departments of this Township may obtain
advice and assistance in adopting those measures to keep peace and
good order and harmony among the citizens of Union and to promote
and ensure equality of treatment and of opportunity to all, regardless of
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status,
affectional or sexual orientation, liability for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States, nationality or sex or as otherwise identified
by state law.
B. There is hereby created and established an advisory commission to be
known as the "Human Relations Commission" (hereinafter the
"Commission"), consisting of 11 members and one alternate to be
appointed for a term of three years by the Township Committee, except
as set forth below. One member of the Commission shall be a student
from Union High School and one member shall be a student from Kean
University. The two student members shall be considered nonvoting
interns and shall serve for a term of one year. The Township Committee
shall also appoint a Committeeman, a member of the Board of
Education, and a member of the Police and Fire Department, who shall
serve ex officio without vote and shall serve for a term of one year.
C. The Commission shall concern itself with alleged incidents of prejudice
and discrimination as they occur and affect individuals in Union. The
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except
that the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall receive compensation as
determined by the Township Committee. No person who is a Township
employee holding a managerial or policy-making position shall serve as
a voting member of the Commission. All members of the Commission
shall be appointed in accordance with the Township Committee's
operating practices and procedures for appointments to advisory
boards and commissions, including the submission of written volunteer
forms provided by the Township Clerk.
§ 12-2 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 12-3
5:37
A. The objectives of the Commission shall be to work cooperatively with
other persons to eliminate discrimination and the result of past
discrimination, to recommend ways and means of initiating and
improving Township government programs designed to eliminate
discrimination or to remove the effects of past discrimination, to
develop programs for coordination of community efforts to address
problems involving tensions in the community and to make
recommendations to the Township Council for the development of
policies, procedures and programs that will aid in the prevention and
elimination of all types of discrimination in Union.
B. In performing this function, the Commission shall strive to increase the
effectiveness of these programs, to increase the fairness with which
these programs are operated and to increase interdepartmental
harmony in the operation of these programs.
C. To achieve these objectives, the Commission shall:
(1) Develop mutual understanding and respect among all racial,
religious, cultural and ethnic groups in Union and work to prevent
discriminatory practices against such groups.
(2) Aid in seeing that no person is deprived of equal services in this
Township by reason of discrimination on account of race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, affectional or
sexual orientation, liability for service in the Armed Forces of the
United States, nationality or sex or as otherwise identified by state
law.
(3) Encourage, receive, investigate and evaluate complaints from any
person of discrimination which allegedly violates law and such
other complaints as it deems fall within the scope of its services
and make public procedures which a person may use to complain of
discrimination.
(4) Receive and investigate complaints of intergroup tensions and
practices of discrimination and acts of prejudice against any person
or group due to consideration of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, age, marital status, affectional or sexual orientation,
liability for service in the Armed Forces of the United States,
nationality or sex or as otherwise identified by state law.
(5) Confer with the Township Counsel on such complaints as appear to
require legal process after initial investigation and/or failure to
achieve conciliation.
(6) Investigate upon request or initiate investigation of alleged
incidents of prejudice and discrimination and make
recommendations for corrective action and coordinate community
efforts toward their resolution.
§ 12-3 UNION CODE § 12-3
5:38
§ 12-4. Annual budget; office space.
The Human Relations Commission may be granted an annual budget as is
reasonable and proper to enable it to carry out its responsibilities and shall
have the use of adequate space and facilities for the conduct of its business.
§ 12-5. Complaints; information to be confidential.
(7) Formulate, develop and disseminate programs of community
information, education materials and reports which will assist in
the elimination of prejudice, intolerance, intergroup tensions and
discrimination or which promote goodwill and result in better
human relations.
(8) Assist community groups and various fraternal, service and
benevolent organizations in the promotion of education campaigns
devoted to the elimination of group prejudices, racial or
neighborhood tensions, intolerance and discrimination.
(9) Cooperate with and render assistance to the Affirmative Action
Officer and other branches of Township government in the area of
human relations.
(10) Cooperate with and render assistance to county, state, federal and
other governmental or private agencies in the area of human
relations.
(11) File with the Township Committee an annual report of the
Commission's activities. In addition, as it deems necessary, prepare
and publish an annual report and such other factual reports and
recommendations concerning problems relating to discrimination,
racial tensions and other human relations concerns the
Commission deems necessary. Copies of all such reports and
recommendations shall be filed with the Township Council and
Clerk.
A. Any individual in Union claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory
practice prohibited by this chapter or the State Law Against
Discrimination, N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq., may submit to the Civil Rights
Commission a complaint, written or oral, identifying himself or herself
and stating his or her belief that a discriminatory practice has been
committed in Union. The Commission may endeavor to eliminate the
alleged discriminatory practice by conference, conciliation and
persuasion. However, the Commission shall refer all Township
employees to the Affirmative Action Officer to initially counsel and
investigate all complaints of discrimination. The counseling and
investigation process by the Township Affirmative Action Officer shall
be conducted in accordance with the law.
§ 12-3 ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 12-5
5:39
§ 12-6. Cooperation of departments.
The obtaining of factual information by the Commission in the performance
of its duties under this chapter is hereby declared to be necessary to its
functions. All other departments of the Township shall cooperate with the
Commission, upon its request, relative to the gathering of information;
provided, however, that the opinion of the Township legal counsel shall be
obtained in such matters as appear to involve questions of confidentiality or
liability on the part of the Township and/or the Commission.
B. The Commission shall not make public, without the written consent of
complainant and respondent, information concerning the efforts to
eliminate a discriminatory practice.
§ 12-5 UNION CODE § 12-6
5:40
Chapter 17
CLAIMS APPROVAL AND PAYMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5. Cooperative purchasing — See Ch. 117.
§ 17-1. Submission of detailed statement.
Any person claiming payment from the Township of Union in the County
of Union shall first submit a detailed statement of the items or demand
necessitating such claim to the responsible executive agency, specifying
particularly how the bill or demand is made up, and a certification of
the party claiming payment that it is correct. No bill, claim or demand
shall be considered for payment unless the voucher has attached to it, or
includes, a certification of a department head, or other municipal official
responsible for certain functions, or of his duly designated representative,
having personal knowledge of the facts that the goods have been received
by or the services rendered to the Township of Union in the County of
Union, and that those services or goods are consistent with any existing
contract or purchase order. The Township Treasurer shall have the duty to
audit, warrant and make recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 17-2. Processing certified bills for payment.5 [Amended 4-10-1979
by Ord. No. 3366]
A. The bill or claim duly certified shall be presented to the Township
Treasurer for inclusion on the claims list, which said claims list may be
submitted to any regular or special meeting of the governing body. It
shall be the duty of the Township Treasurer to examine all bills or
claims submitted for payment in order to ascertain if proper
administrative procedures have been followed. All vouchers should
reflect the approval of the Township Treasurer and also the approval of
the Purchasing Agent, where a purchase order was required to be
issued. All claims or bills to be considered by the governing body shall
be listed systematically without preference, and said list shall be made
available to every member of said governing body prior to formal action
by that body. The claims on the claims list shall be reviewed by the
Municipal Administrator, and such list shall reflect his approval before
submission for the consideration of the governing body.
B. In the event that any voucher claimant is a person that is in a position
that would authorize him to certify or approve any voucher, then and in
that event authority is hereby given for not including said voucher on
the claims list, in which event said voucher shall be presented to the
Township Committee in due course at any regular or special meeting of
5. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 5, Art. IV, Division of Purchasing.
§ 12-6 CLAIMS APPROVAL AND PAYMENT § 17-2
17:41
§ 17-3. Approval or rejection.
Claims on the claims list shall be considered by the governing body, which
shall approve such list, except that said governing body may reject any
claim presented to it stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved
claim shall be referred back to the Township Treasurer with such
instructions as the governing body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 17-4. Recording claims in official minutes.
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes or through an appropriate claims register, indicating that
the governing body has by formal action approved the same with the
appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records
pertaining to approved and disapproved bills or claims shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 17-5. Payment procedures. [Amended 4-10-1979 by Ord. No.
3366]
After the Clerk has certified that the claims list or individual vouchers,
as above authorized, have been approved by at least a majority of the
members of the Township Committee, she shall turn the same over to the
Township Treasurer, who shall forthwith prepare the necessary checks for
the payment thereof, which said checks shall be signed by the Chairman of
the Township Committee, the Township Clerk and thereafter signed by the
Township Treasurer. After preparing checks for the payment of claims, he
shall record them in proper books of account and thereafter mail the checks
to the claimants.
Chapter 22
COMMITTEE MEETINGS
the governing body for approval by at least a majority of the members
of said Township Committee.
§ 17-2 UNION CODE § 17-5
22:42
ARTICLE I
Rules of Decorum
[Adopted 3-27-1990 by Ord. No. 4081 (Ch. 22, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 22-1. Rules applicable to Township Committee members.6
Members of the Township Committee shall observe order and decorum
during Township Committee meetings. A member of the Township
Committee shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt
the proceedings of the Committee nor disturb any member while speaking
nor refuse to obey the orders of the Chairman. Township Committee
members shall inform the Chairman before leaving their seats during a
Committee meeting.
§ 22-2. Township staff.
Members of the Township staff shall observe the same rules of order and
decorum applicable to the Township Committee in § 22-1 above.
§ 22-3. Defamatory and threatening language prohibited.
Any person(s) making personal, defamatory or profane remarks or who
willfully utters loud, threatening or abusive language or engages in any
disorderly conduct which disturbs or disrupts the orderly conduct of any
meeting shall be called to order by the Chairman. If such conduct continues,
the Chairman of the Township Committee, at his discretion, may order such
person removed from that meeting by the Sergeant at Arms.
§ 22-4. Length of presentation; governmental issues.7
Persons addressing the Township Committee shall be allowed a maximum of
five minutes for their presentations and may comment on any governmental
issue that a member of the public feels may be of concern to the residents
of the community.
§ 22-5. Disorderly conduct.
No person in the audience shall engage in disorderly conduct such as
handclapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using profane language, shouting
or other similar demonstrations which may disturb the peace and order of
the Township Committee meeting.
§ 22-6. Repeated disturbance; removal from meeting.
All persons shall, at the request of the Chairman, be silent. If, after receiving
a warning from the Chairman, a person persists in disturbing the meeting,
the Chairman may order that person to leave the meeting. If he does not
6. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq., the Open Public Meetings Act.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 22-1 COMMITTEE MEETINGS § 22-6
22:43
remove himself, the Chairman may order the Sergeant at Arms to remove
him.
§ 22-7. Sergeant at Arms.
The Chief of Police, or such member of the Department of Police as the
Chairman may designate, shall be Sergeant at Arms at the Township
Committee meetings. The Sergeant at Arms shall carry out all orders given
by the Chairman for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at
the Township Committee meeting. On the instruction of the Chairman, the
Sergeant at Arms shall remove from the meeting any person who disturbs
the proceedings of the Committee.
§ 22-8. Resisting removal.
Any person who resists removal by the Sergeant at Arms shall be charged
with violating N.J.S.A. 2C:33-8, Disrupting meetings and processions.
§ 22-9. Recording, taping or photography. [Amended 4-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 4999]
The Township Committee will permit the videotaping of Township
Committee meetings provided the following guidelines are complied with:
§ 22-10. Rules of conduct.
Township Committee meetings shall be conducted pursuant to Robert's
Rules of Order.
A. All videotaping is to be conducted from designated locations.
(1) The last two rows in the northwest corner of the main meeting
room shall be designated as the location for the recording of said
public meetings. The last two rows shall be clearly marked, alerting
any member of the public who wishes to videotape a meeting that
such videotaping must be conducted from this designated location.
(2) The southeast corner of the conference room shall be designated as
the location for the recording of said public meetings. Such rows
shall be clearly marked, alerting any member who wishes to
videotape a meeting shall do so from this designated location.
B. All video cameras must be privately owned and have self-contained
recording devices with built-in lighting and power sources.
C. A person shall not operate more than one video camera at a time.
D. Unrestricted videotaping will be permitted prior to the start of the
approval of minutes at the Township Committee Regular Meeting.
§ 22-6 UNION CODE § 22-10
22:44
ARTICLE II
Open Public Conference Meetings
[Adopted 3-25-1975 by Ord. No. 2968A (Ch. 23 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 22-11. Conference meetings to be open to public.
All conference meetings of the Township Committee shall be open to the
public and press.
§ 22-12. Executive session.
In its discretion, the Township Committee may determine that a matter to
be discussed is so sensitive that the public interest would best be served by
discussing such a matter in executive session, including but not limited to
contract negotiations, legal strategy, placement of Township personnel and
matters of similar import.
§ 22-13. Participation by public. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
At any open conference meeting, the public and press will be permitted to
comment on any governmental issue that a member of the public feels may
be of concern to the residents of the community.
§ 22-14. Reports and other communications.
All reports, communications, proposed ordinances, proposed resolutions,
contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the Township
Committee shall be delivered to the Township Clerk at a reasonable time in
advance of a conference meeting.
§ 22-11 COMMITTEE MEETINGS § 22-14
22:45
Chapter 24
CONTRACTS
§ 22-14 UNION CODE § 22-14
22:46
ARTICLE I
Contractor Qualification and Performance Standards
[Adopted 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 5358]
§ 24-1. Contractor responsibility certification.
For properties or projects that exceed a minimum acreage of 25 acres, as a
condition of performing work on a public construction contract or a publicly
subsidized construction project, a developer, owner, general contractor,
construction manager, or other lead or prime contractor seeking award of
contract shall submit a contractor responsibility certification at the time it
submits its bid for a contract.
§ 24-2. Compliance required.
All contractors and subcontractors that perform significant work on any
public facility or public works project, including construction, alteration,
renovation, repair, service or maintenance work, or those receiving financial
assistance from public subsidies, shall meet the requirements of this article.
For purposes of this article, the term "significant work" shall be defined as
any work or activity covered under the New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act,
N.J.S.A 34:11-56.25 et seq.
§ 24-3. Certification.
In the contractor responsibility certification, general contractors and
subcontractors shall certify the following facts regarding their past
A. Financial assistance from public subsidies is defined as something of
economic value provided by the Township or other public entity to a
private entity, including, but not limited to loans, loan guarantees,
grants, tax exemptions, tax abatements, and tax incentive financing,
approved, funded, authorized, administered or provided by the local
government in connection with work on private-sector construction
projects for economic development and/or job growth. A project is
subsidized by the public if:
(1) A party to the contract received or will receive a qualifying tax
preference, abatement, or other incentive;
(2) A party to the contract received or will receive a public loan;
(3) The work takes place on land that a party to the contract leases
from the state or a county, municipality, or political subdivision;
(4) The work takes place on land that a party to the contract purchased
from the state or a county, municipality, or political subdivision for
less than fair market value, as determined at the time of the sale;
or
(5) The work takes place in an area designated by the government
entity as an area in need of redevelopment.
§ 24-1 COMMITTEE MEETINGS § 24-3
22:47
performance and work history and its current qualifications and
performance capabilities:
§ 24-4. Hiring of residents.
In addition, the Township recognizes the importance of their construction
projects to the state and local economy. Therefore, as a matter of policy, the
A. The firms have all valid, effective licenses, registrations or certifications
required by federal, state, county, or local law, including but not limited
to, licenses, registrations, certificates required to: (1) do business in the
designated locale; and (2) perform the contract work it seems to
perform. These shall include, not be limited to, licenses, registrations or
certificates for any type of trade work or specialty work, which the firm
proposes to self-perform.
B. The firms meet the bonding requirements for the contract, as required
by applicable law or contract specifications and any insurance
requirements, as required by applicable law or contract specification,
including general liability insurance, worker's compensation insurance
and unemployment insurance requirements.
C. The firms have not been debarred by any federal, state or local
government agency or authority in the past three years.
D. The firms have not defaulted on any project in the past three years.
E. The firms have not had any type of business, contracting or trade
license, registration, or other certification suspended or revoked in the
past three years.
F. The firms have not been cited and found guilty for a willful violation of
federal or state safety laws in the past three years.
G. The firm and/or its owners have not been convicted of any crime
relating to the contracting business by a final decision of a court or
government agency in the past three years.
H. The firms will pay all craft employees that it employs on the project the
current wage rates and benefits under applicable federal or state
prevailing wage laws.
I. The firms participate in an apprenticeship program that is currently
registered with the USDOL, the NJDOL or any state having equal to or
higher requirements as either the USDOL or NJDOL apprenticeship
programs, for each craft or trade in which it apprentices. The firm shall
provide proof of meeting this qualification standard by submitting
appropriate documentation as an attachment to this certification. The
firm shall continue to participate in applicable apprenticeship programs
for the full duration of the contract work. The apprenticeship program
in which the firm participated shall have graduated at least one enrollee
in each of the past three years.
§ 24-3 UNION CODE § 24-4
22:48
Township will request the successful contractor to make good faith effort to
hire residents from the communities impacted by the construction project.
§ 24-5. Proof of participation.
All contractors and subcontractors that perform significant work on any
public facility or public works project receiving financial assistance shall be
required to affirmatively provide evidence of and confirm compliance with
proof of participation in an apprenticeship program currently registered
and approved by the United States Department of Labor (USDOL), the New
Jersey Department of Labor (NJDOL) or any state having equal to or higher
requirements as either the USDOL or NJDOL apprenticeship programs.
Additionally, apprenticeship programs shall meet the criteria set forth in
§ 24-3I of this article.
§ 24-6. Construction safety and health course.
As a condition of performing work on public works contracts over the public
works threshold or receiving financial assistance, the general contractor
shall provide certification that he and each subcontractor working on the
project shall have at least one employee who has successfully completed
the OSHA ten-hour construction safety and health course. As a condition
of performing work on public works contracts of $500,000 or more total
cost of project, the general contractor shall provide certification that each
subcontractor working on the project shall have at least one employee who
has successfully completed OSHA thirty-hour construction safety and health
course.
§ 24-7. Inquiries.
The Township may conduct any additional inquiries to verify that the
prospective awardee and its subcontractors have the technical
qualifications and performance capabilities necessary to successfully
perform the contract and that the firms have sufficient record of legal
compliance and business integrity to justify the award of a public contract.
In conducting such inquiries, the Township of Union may seek relevant
information from the firm, its prior clients or customers, its subcontractor
or any other relevant source.
§ 24-8. Exemptions for redevelopers. [Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No.
5424]
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the article, a redeveloper
executing a redevelopment agreement with the Township in connection with
a redevelopment project shall not be required to comply with the Act, by
its terms, where the Township Committee determines that strict compliance
with the article is not consistent with the goal of promoting redevelopment
within a redevelopment area by private enterprise, and the work on a
redevelopment project within a redevelopment area can be completed by
or on behalf of such redeveloper in a competent, professional and safe
§ 24-4 COMMITTEE MEETINGS § 24-8
22:49
manner without requiring strict compliance with the article. In that event,
the Township Committee shall have the right and authority, by passage of
a resolution, to approve a redevelopment agreement which relieves such
a redeveloper and urban renewal entity from compliance with the article,
including the article provisions respecting prevailing wage requirements
and any other specific requirements, with respect to the work performed in
connection with the redevelopment project.
§ 24-8 UNION CODE § 24-8
22:50
Chapter 28
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Law — See Ch. 82.
Prosecutor — See Ch. 93, Art. II.
Public Defender — See Ch. 93, Art. IV.
§ 28-1. Establishment. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
A Municipal Court for the Township of Union in the County of Union is
established as of January 1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
293 of the Laws of 1993 (N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.), as amended and
supplemented.
§ 28-2. Title.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of Township
of Union in the County of Union."
§ 28-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the court.
§ 28-4. Judges; appointment; term. [Amended 6-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 4028; 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. 5081; 1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 5553]
There shall be three Municipal Judges of said Municipal Court, one of whom
shall be named Municipal Judge (supervising), who shall be appointed
by the Township Committee of the Township of Union in the County of
Union and who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his
appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified; provided,
however, that the recorder who shall be in office upon adoption of this
section shall be a Municipal Judge and shall continue to be Municipal Judge
for a term equal to the balance of the term for which he was originally
appointed. With the written consent of the Superior Court of New Jersey
Assignment Judge of Union County, a temporary judge of the Municipal
Court may be appointed by the Township Committee to meet a special need
of limited duration for a term not to exceed one year.
§ 28-5. Compensation and benefits of Municipal Judge. [Amended
10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879; 12-23-1991 by Ord. No. 4174]
A. The salary and compensation of the Municipal Judge shall be provided
by ordinance of the Township of Union. The sum shall be paid in equal
installments as other salaries in the Township are paid.8
§ 24-8 COMMITTEE MEETINGS § 28-5
22:51
§ 28-6. Authority conferred. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
Said Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge thereof shall have, possess
and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by
the provisions of Chapter 293 of the Laws of 1993 (N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.),
as amended and supplemented, or by any other law.9
§ 28-7. Location of Court. [Amended 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 4028]
The Municipal Court shall be held at police headquarters in the Township of
Union in the County of Union, or in the District Courtroom, located at 981
Caldwell Avenue, Union, New Jersey, as the Judges may determine and in
such other locations as may be announced by them, as the business of the
Court may require, subject to the rules applicable to Municipal Courts.
Chapter 34
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special improvement districts — See Ch. 471.
B. The Municipal Judge shall not receive sick, vacation or personal leave.
C. The Municipal Judge shall be entitled to the medical benefits package
plan. Effective January 1, 1992, any municipal judge shall pay via
payroll deduction 25% of the medical package increase, if any, for the
current year, not to exceed $100.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Salaries and Compensation
9. Editor's Note: Former § 26-7, Clerk, as amended, which previously followed this section,
was repealed 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 4028.
§ 28-5 UNION CODE § 28-7
34:52
ARTICLE I
Economic Development Committee
[Adopted 8-9-1977 by Ord. No. 3220A (Ch. 30 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 34-1. Committee established; composition. [Amended 3-9-1993 by
Ord. No. 4233; 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 4242; 12-28-1995 by Ord. No.
4421]
There is hereby established an Economic Development Committee, which
shall consist of 13 members, classified and appointed as follows:
§ 34-2. Service without compensation; terms; vacancies. [Amended
3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 4233; 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 424210]
§ 34-3. Advisory capacity of Committee.
The Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Township
Committee on all matters concerning industrial, business and commercial
development within the limits of the Township of Union, not in conflict with
the rights and duties of the Union Township Planning Board. The Committee
shall have full and complete charge of all expenditures of funds allocated
to said Committee by the budget of said Township, and said Township
shall not be liable for any amount greater than that appropriated for said
Committee by the Township Committee. The Committee may solicit funds
from interested citizens or other municipalities.
A. Class I: one member of the Township Committee to be appointed by the
Mayor with the concurrence of the Township Committee.
B. Class II: the Municipal Administrator.
C. Class III: the Director of Economic Development.
D. Class IV: five other members of the public at large appointed by the
Mayor with the concurrence of the Township Committee.
E. Class V: five alternate members of the public at large appointed by the
Mayor with the concurrence of the Township Committee.
A. All members of the Committee shall serve without compensation. The
terms of the members comprising Class I and Class II shall correspond
to their respective terms of office. The Class III member shall serve for
three years. Class IV and V members shall serve for periods of one year.
B. Appointments to fill a vacancy of a Class III member shall be for the
unexpired term only.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 34-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT § 34-4
34:53
§ 34-4. Chairman; other offices.
The Committee shall elect a Chairman and create and fill such other offices
as it shall deem necessary and shall create and fill such committees and
positions not limited to its membership as it shall deem necessary.
§ 34-5. Bylaws and rules; recommendations and reports.
A. The Committee shall have the power to adopt bylaws and rules and
regulations subject to the approval thereof by the Township Committee.
B. The Committee shall have the power to make recommendations to the
Township Committee and shall periodically render reports of its
activities to said Township Committee.
§ 34-4 UNION CODE § 34-5
34:54
ARTICLE II
Department of Economic Development
[Adopted 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4578 (Ch. 31 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 34-6. Creation.
There is hereby created a Department of Economic Development.
§ 34-7. Position of Director of Economic Development created.
Pursuant to New Jersey Department of Personnel rules, the position of
Director of Economic Development is hereby created.
§ 34-8. Control of Department.
The Department of Economic Development shall be under the control of
the Township Administrator and subject to such rules and regulations that
may, from time to time, be adopted by the Township Committee by either
ordinance or resolution.
§ 34-9. Organization and management.
Subject to budgetary appropriations and direction of the Township
Administrator, the Director of Economic Development shall coordinate and
supervise daily operations.
§ 34-10. Duties and responsibilities of Director of Economic
Development.
The Director of Economic Development shall administer and control the
following functions thereto:
A. Make recommendations to the Township Committee for economic
development policy.
B. Coordinate all Township economic development plans and activities.
C. Provide liaison with the Township of Union Chamber of Commerce,
Union County Economic Development Authority, Union County
Chamber of Commerce and the Township's special improvement
district.
D. Maintain an inventory of industrial and commercial properties.
E. Identify suitable sites for development for available industrial and office
sites.
F. Develop programs to market the Township's assets and advantages.
G. Encourage the establishment of new industries and businesses in the
Township.
H. Provide assistance in financial packaging for county, state and federal.
§ 34-6 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT § 34-10
34:55
I. Development of programs and strategies to inform the citizenry of
community development programs and projects that will benefit them.
J. Coordinate activities to develop community support for Township
programs.
K. Coordinate with the Township Planning and Zoning Board and provide
assistance upon request in all matters under their jurisdiction.
L. Conduct studies and collect statistical and other data as needed.
M. Handle special projects at the request of the Township Committee.11
11.Editor's Note: Former § 31-6, Personnel assigned, which previously followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 34-10 UNION CODE § 34-10
34:56
Chapter 39
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 39-1. Intent and purpose; establishment of Office of Civil Defense
and Disaster Control.12
§ 39-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER CONTROL — The emergency services of
local government in helping to carry out the basic governmental functions
of maintaining the public peace, health and safety during an emergency.
This shall include plans and preparations for protection from and relief,
recovery and rehabilitation from the effects of any emergency.
DECLARATION OF A STATE OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY — The
determination by the Director or his authorized Deputy, upon consultation
with the Mayor or acting Chief Executive, that a disaster has occurred or
is imminent requiring activation of all or part of the Township civil defense
and disaster control (CD-DC) organization, from which determination a
proclamation of a state of local disaster emergency shall issue.
DIRECTOR — The coordinator of the Township Civil Defense and Disaster
Control Office, appointed by the Mayor.
DISASTER — Any unusual set of circumstances which endangers the health,
safety or resources of the residents of the Township and which is or may
become too large in scope or unusual in type to be handled in its entirety by
regular municipal operating services.
EMERGENCY — Includes "disaster" and "war emergency" as defined
herein, and shall exist upon proclamation by the Mayor.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an Office of Civil
Defense and Disaster Control in order to provide for the local
government and the community to coordinate their activities during
emergency operations.
B. The Office of Civil Defense and Disaster Control will be the coordinating
agency for all activity in connection with civil defense, disaster control
and civil preparedness. It will be the instrument for providing planning
guidance on civil defense and disaster control, and emergency
operations for the departments and agencies of the local government.
C. This chapter will not relieve any Township department of its
responsibilities or authority given to it by state statute or by local
ordinance, nor is it meant to adversely affect the work of any volunteer
agency organized for relief in emergencies.
12.Editor's Note: Former Section 1, which immediately preceded this section and which
provided for a short title, was deleted 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879.
§ 34-10 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 39-2
39:57
LOCAL CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER CONTROL FORCES — The
employees, equipment and facilities of all Township departments, boards
and commissions; and, in addition, all volunteer personnel, equipment and
facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies.
LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster, or the imminence
thereof, which overtaxes the municipality's ability to cope, requiring mutual
assistance from other municipal or county sources, but is not so severe as
to require action by the government under the New Jersey CD-DC Act.
REGULATIONS — Includes plans, programs and other emergency
procedures for civil defense and emergencies, promulgated in accordance
with this chapter.
VOLUNTEER — Any person duly appointed by the Director and assigned
to participate in civil defense and disaster control activity serving without
remuneration.
WAR EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster occurring anywhere within the
Township as the result of enemy attack or the imminent danger thereof.
§ 39-3. Organization and appointments.
§ 39-4. Emergency powers and duties.
A. The Township Committee is hereby authorized to create an
organization for civil defense and disaster control, utilizing to the
fullest extent the existing agencies within the Township.
B. The organization shall consist of the following:
(1) The Office of Civil Defense and Disaster Control under the direction
of the Mayor. The Director shall be the executive head of the Office.
There shall also be such deputies and assistants, appointed by the
Mayor, as are deemed necessary.
(2) The employees, equipment and facilities of all Township
departments, boards and commissions who will participate in civil
defense and disaster control activity.
(3) Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to, and accepted
by, the Township.
A. The Mayor.
(1) During any emergency, the Township Committee may authorize the
Mayor to promulgate such regulations as he deems necessary to
protect life and property and preserve critical resources.
Regulations promulgated in accordance with this authority will be
given widespread circulation. These regulations will have the force
of ordinance when duly filed with the Township Clerk, and
violations will be subject to the penalties provided in § 39-8 of this
chapter. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
§ 39-2 UNION CODE § 39-4
39:58
(a) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of
vehicles in order to facilitate the work of civil defense and
disaster control forces and volunteers, or to facilitate the
movement of persons from critical areas within or without the
Township.
(b) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas
deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.
(c) Such other regulations, necessary to preserve public peace,
health and safety.
(2) At the direction of the County Civil Defense and Disaster Control
Coordinator, the Mayor may order civil defense and disaster
control forces to the aid of other communities when required in
accordance with the statutes of the state; and may request
noncontiguous municipalities to send aid to the Township, in case
of an emergency when conditions in the Township are beyond the
resource capabilities of the local civil defense and disaster control
forces.
(3) During any emergency, the Mayor may obtain vital supplies,
equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the
protection of health, life and property of the people and bind the
Township for the fair value thereof.
(4) The Mayor may, during any emergency, require emergency services
of any Township officer or employee. All duly authorized persons
rendering emergency services shall be entitled to such privileges
and immunities as may be provided by state law for regular
Township employees and other registered and identified civil
defense and disaster workers.
(5) The Mayor will cause to be prepared the Plan hereinafter referred
to and will exercise his ordinary powers and any special powers
conferred upon him by the ordinances of the Township of Union and
by any statute of the state.
B. The Director.
(1) The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence
of the Township Committee and shall serve for a term of three
years, except that the term of the first person appointed as Director
pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall expire on December 31,
1976.
(2) The Director shall be a person well versed and trained in planning
operations involving the activities of many different agencies which
will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the
event of an emergency. The Director shall be responsible to the
Mayor and the Township Committee in regard to all phases of the
civil defense and disaster control activity. Under the supervision of
§ 39-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 39-4
39:59
§ 39-5. Civil Defense Council.
The Civil Defense Council, as heretofore established by law, is continued.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the Chairman of the
Council serving as the Township Disaster Control Director. The Council shall
have the powers, functions and duties prescribed by general law, executive
order, ordinance or resolution.
§ 39-6. Emergency operations plan (the "Plan").
the Mayor and Township Committee, he shall be responsible for
the planning, coordination and operation of the civil defense and
disaster control activity in the Township. Under the supervision of
the Mayor and Township Committee, he shall maintain liaison with
state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby
political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective operation
of the Plan. His duties, subject to the supervision of the Township
Committee, shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer
personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities
of the Township for civil defense and disaster control purposes.
(b) Development of an emergency operating center facility and
coordination of plans for the immediate use of all of the
facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the
Township for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage
to persons and property, and protecting and restoring to
usefulness governmental services and public utilities
necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
(c) Negotiating agreements with owners or persons in control of
buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or
other property for civil defense and disaster control purposes
and designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
(d) Through public informational programs, educating the civilian
population as to actions necessary and required for the
protection of their persons and property in an emergency.
(e) Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient
operation of the civil defense and disaster control forces and to
familiarize residents with civil defense and disaster control
regulations, procedures and operations.
(f) Coordinating any activity of all other public and private
agencies engaged in any civil defense and disaster control
activity.
(g) Assuming such authority and conducting such other activity as
the Mayor and Township Committee may direct to promote and
execute the Plan.
§ 39-4 UNION CODE § 39-6
39:60
§ 39-7. Liability.
A. A comprehensive emergency operations plan (the "Plan") shall be
adopted and maintained by resolution of Township Committee. The Plan
shall be prepared by the Director and submitted for approval by the
Township Committee and will outline duties and responsibilities under
this chapter and all other applicable regulatory requirements. In
preparation of the Plan, the Director will consult with all municipal
department heads whose departments will be assigned duties and
responsibilities under the Plan, and said department heads will assist
the Director in preparation of the Plan. In the preparation of the Plan,
as it pertains to Township organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and
agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When the Plan is
approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies
to perform the functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain their
portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The Plan
shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of
law whenever an emergency exists.
B. The Director shall prescribe, in the Plan, those positions within the
organization referred to in § 39-3 for which lines of succession are
necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and
keep on file with the Director a current list of three persons as
successors to his position. The list will be in order of succession and
will, as nearly as possible, designate persons best capable of carrying
out all assigned duties and functions.
C. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not
available within the Township government, the Township Committee
may authorize the Director to seek assistance from persons outside of
government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature,
shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such
duties prior to, during and after the occurrence of a disaster. Such
services from persons outside of government may be accepted by the
Township on a volunteer basis.
A. This chapter is an exercise by the Township of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, welfare, health and
safety. During an emergency, neither the Township nor agents and
representatives of said Township, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents
thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to
comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons or property as the result of said activity.
B. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants the Township the right to
inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real
estate or premises, for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
§ 39-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 39-7
39:61
§ 39-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 39-9. Suspension of conflicting regulations.
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing
ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
Chapter 43
EMPLOYMENT OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 93. Personnel benefits — See Ch. 102.
§ 43-1. Time period for employment or appointment of former
Township Committee members.
No member of the Township Committee shall be employed or appointed
to serve as a full-time official, officer, employee or other personnel of
the Township of Union for a period of two years following the expiration,
termination or resignation from the office of Township Committeeman.
Chapter 47
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 113.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 207.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Soil removal — See Ch. 456.
emergency, shall not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any
persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission, or for loss of or damage to the property
of such persons.
§ 39-7 UNION CODE § 47-1
43:62
§ 47-1. Department established.
There is hereby created and established for the Township of Union, in the
County of Union, a Department of Engineering.
§ 47-2. Functions and responsibilities.
A. Under the supervision of the head of the Engineering Department and
such deputies and supervisors as may be delegated, the Department of
Engineering shall provide for the proper and efficient conduct of all
engineering functions of the Township government and shall provide
assistance and services, as may be required and needed, to all
Township departments.
B. Said Department shall be charged with the responsibility of the
operation of, but not limited thereby, the following services:
(1) Provide all staff engineering required by the Township.
(2) Prepare, maintain and preserve maps, charts and records of roads,
utilities, public buildings, structures and all public facilities owned
or operated by the Township.
(3) Prepare, review and approve specifications for public works
contracts and certify satisfactory completion of work to authorize
progress permits pursuant to the contract.
(4) Make such recommendations as may be required in connection
with the applications made to the Union Township Planning
Board.13
(5) Maintain the tax atlas and tax maps for the Tax Assessor's office in
a current status and promptly record all changes of ownership.
(6) Conduct all investigations and make all surveys necessary for the
preparation of preliminary designs, plans and specifications and
making estimates of cost for all road, bridge, culvert and storm
drain facility construction, reconstruction, major repair,
replacement and improvements, including designs and
specifications of material used.
(7) On approval of preliminary plans by all parties involved, prepare
final plans, specifications and proposals for advertising to receive
bids therefor.
(8) On receipt of bids therefor, prepare reports for awards of contracts
or rejection of bids.
(9) Supervise project construction as per plans, specifications and
contracts, including the use of proper materials.
13.Editor's Note: The Planning Board was created and established 1-22-1975, in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. See Ch. 170, Land
Development.
§ 47-1 ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT § 47-2
47:63
§ 47-3. Township Engineer.
(10) Comply with all state and/or federal requirements and perform all
liaison work where state and/or federal funds are involved and
obtain state and/or federal approvals where required.
(11) Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications,
operating records and files pertaining to all Township roads,
bridges, sewers and storm drain facilities owned or operated by the
Township.
(12) Provide surveyors and developers with records of Township road
line and grade information.
(13) Prepare estimates for capital expenditure programs.
A. The Department of Engineering shall be under the supervision and
control of the Township Engineer, who shall be appointed in accordance
with the statute in such case made and provided. Said Township
Engineer shall be lawfully licensed under the laws of the State of New
Jersey to practice professional engineering and land surveying and
shall likewise possess a valid planner's license issued by the New Jersey
State Board of Professional Planners. The Township Engineer shall be a
degreed civil engineer with a professional engineer's license and shall
be certified as a municipal engineer.14
B. Included but not limited, eligibility requirements of the Township
Engineer shall be a comprehensive knowledge of principles, practices,
methods and techniques required for planning, designing, directing and
operating complex and diversified public projects; extensive knowledge
of management science, administrative methods, procedures and
techniques; a broad knowledge of municipal functions, emphasizing
planning, zoning, land subdivision and development, public utilities,
pertinent statutes, local ordinances and regulations; a broad knowledge
of civil engineering theory and practice, especially pertaining to public
works and improvements; a thorough knowledge of land surveying
techniques and practices; the ability to initiate and develop technical
studies and surveys and to prepare reports; the ability to direct,
coordinate and supervise work of subordinates engaged in a variety of
technical activities; the ability to interpret policy decisions and to
advise appropriate local authorities in a clear, concise and direct
manner on any matter concerning public works and improvements; and
the ability to establish and maintain effective work relationships with
associates, subordinates and the general public.15
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
15.Editor's Note: Former § 35-4, Salary of Engineer, amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879,
and former § 35-5, Appointments, which previously followed this section, were repealed
2-25-1997 by Ord. No. 4491.
§ 47-2 UNION CODE § 47-3
47:64
§ 47-4. Assistant Township Engineer. [Amended 2-25-1997 by Ord.
No. 4491]
§ 47-5. Principal Engineering Aide.
C. The term of the Township Engineer shall commence January 1 of each
year and terminate December 31 of each year. [Added 2-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 4859]
A. There is hereby created the position of Assistant Township Engineer,
who, under the direction of the Township Engineer, shall perform
technical work related to planning, design, construction and
maintenance of all municipal facilities, as well as other related work
assigned by the Township Engineer.
B. Said Assistant Township Engineer shall hold a degree in civil
engineering, issued upon graduation from a recognized college or
university and/or a valid professional engineer's license and/or a valid
land surveyor's license.
C. Said Assistant Township Engineer shall have a working knowledge of
principles, practices, methods and techniques required for planning,
designing, directing and operating diversified public projects;
knowledge of administrative methods, procedures and techniques; a
broad knowledge of municipal functions, emphasizing planning, zoning,
land subdivision and development of public utilities, of pertinent
statutes, local ordinances and regulations; a broad knowledge of civil
engineering theory and practice, especially pertaining to public works
and improvements; a thorough knowledge of land surveying techniques
and practices; the ability to develop technical studies and surveys and
to prepare reports; the ability to direct, coordinate and supervise work
of subordinates engaged in a variety of technical activities; the ability to
interpret policy decisions; and the ability to establish and maintain
effective work relationships with associates, subordinates and the
general public.
A. There is hereby created the position of Principal Engineering Aide in
the Department of Engineering, who, under the supervision of the head
of the Engineering Department and such deputies and supervisors as
may be delegated, has the responsibility to oversee the general
operation of the Department of Engineering and Operations.
B. Said Principal Engineering Aide shall have knowledge of principles,
practices, methods and techniques required for directing and
supervising the general work performed by a Municipal Engineering
Department; a knowledge of field and office techniques; a knowledge of
municipal functions, ordinances and regulations; an ability to prepare
reports and interpret policy decisions; an ability to establish and
maintain effective work relationships with associates, subordinates and
the general public.
§ 47-3 ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT § 47-6
47:65
§ 47-6. Senior Draftsman.
Chapter 51
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 51-1. Commission created.
There is hereby created for the Township of Union, in the County of Union,
an Environmental Commission, as the same is authorized pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 51-2. Composition; service without compensation; Chairman;
terms.
A. There is hereby created the position of Senior Draftsman within the
Department of Engineering of the Township of Union, in the County of
Union.
B. Said Draftsman shall perform the following duties, i.e., routine drafting
work involved in the preparation of drawings, maps, charts, graphs,
sketches and plans; prepare clear, accurate and complete working
plans and detailed drawings according to specified dimensions; make
final sketches of proposed drawings, drawing of charts for
representation of statistical data and drawing finished designs;
maintain established relevant records and files and such other related
work as may be directed. Said Draftsman shall be under the supervision
and control of the Township Engineer, or such deputies and supervisors
to whom he may be directed to report.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Chairman of the Township Committee, with the advice and consent of
the members thereof, one of whom shall be a member of the Planning
Board, and all of whom shall be residents of the Township of Union, with
the exception of the Township Engineer, who shall be a member of the
Commission. [Amended 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 4682]
B. Said members shall serve without compensation, except as hereinafter
provided. The Chairman of the Township Committee shall designate one
of the members to serve as Chairman and Presiding Officer of the
Commission. The terms of office of the Commission first appointed
pursuant to this chapter shall be for one, two or three years, as the
same may be designated by the Chairman of the Township Committee in
making said appointments, and the successors thereof shall be
appointed for terms of three years and until the appointment and
qualification of their successors. The first members of the Commission
shall be appointed for the following terms:
(1) Two members for a term expiring December 31, 1975.
(2) Two members for a term expiring December 31, 1976.
§ 47-6 UNION CODE § 51-2
51:66
§ 51-3. Vacancies.
A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as is an
original appointment.
§ 51-4. Removal for cause.
The Chairman of the Township Committee, or the Township Committee, may
remove any member of the Commission for cause on written charges served
upon the member and after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be
entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
§ 51-5. Powers and responsibilities.
The Commission shall have the power to conduct research into the use and
possible use of the open land areas of the municipality and may coordinate
the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes and may
advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purposes. It
shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including
open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain
information on the proper use of such areas, and may from time to time
recommend to the Planning Board of the municipality16 plans and programs
for inclusion in a Municipal Master Plan and the development and use of
such areas.
§ 51-6. Records of meetings and activities.
Said Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and make
an annual report to the governing body of said Township. Said Commission
is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its operations.
Chapter 64
FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSIONS
(3) Three members for a term expiring December 31, 1977.
16.Editor's Note: The Planning Board was created 1-22-1975 in accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. See Ch. 170, Land Development.
§ 51-2 FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSIONS § 51-6
64:67

ARTICLE I
Morses Creek Flood Control Commission
[Adopted 9-27-1983 by Ord. No. 3665 (Ch. A326, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 64-1. Participation.
The Township of Union in the County of Union agrees to participate in
the creation and operation of the Morses Creek Flood Control Commission
pursuant to Chapter 316, P.L. 1971,17 as follows:
A. The municipalities and county invited to participate in the Commission
are:
(1) City of Linden.
(2) Borough of Roselle.
(3) Borough of Roselle Park.
(4) Borough of Kenilworth.
(5) Township of Cranford.
(6) Township of Union.
(7) County of Union.
B. The Morses Creek Flood Control Commission shall be established in
accordance with Chapter 316, P.L. 1971 of the State of New Jersey.
C. The Morses Creek Flood Control Commission shall:
(1) Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area.
(2) Make such data and studies available to the participating member,
the Army Corps of Engineers, local and County Planning Boards
and officials concerned with subdivisions and development of
properties within the floodway and drainage area.
(3) Keep itself informed as to the availability of state and federal funds
and grants and the procedures for applying therefor and shall make
such information available to participating members.
(4) Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, brook cleaning and the like.
(5) Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and lowlying
areas by the county or participating municipalities.
(6) Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
§ 64-1 FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSIONS § 64-1
64:69
(7) Encourage its participating members, and others, to adopt
appropriate ordinances and regulations relating to flood control.
(8) Encourage its participating members to support other programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding.
(9) Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by members, subject to the
limitations in this ordinance and subject to limitations as set forth
in Chapter 316, P.L. 1971.18
D. Quorum. Any number of members of the Commission shall have the
right to meet at regularly scheduled meetings. Any action taken
involving the expenditure of funds, other than clerical and mailing,
connected with the usual business of the Commission shall be adopted
only at a meeting at which there is at least one county representative
and at least one representative from each municipality.
E. Each member municipality and county reserves the right, pursuant to
Section 2 of said Chapter 316, P.L. 1971 [N.J.S.A. 40:14-17(d)], to
withdraw from the Commission; provided, however, that at least 90
days' notice of such intention is given to the Commission and provided,
further, that such withdrawal, after the adoption of the Commission
budget for a given year, shall not abrogate the responsibility of the
municipality or county to meet its responsibility and obligation under
the budget for such year.
F. Appropriations.
(1) The general administrative and other expenses of the Commission,
affecting the Commission as a whole, shall be apportioned among
the members as follows:
(a) One-fourth thereof to be borne by Union County.
(b) Three-fourths thereof to be apportioned among the
participating municipalities according to a formula taking into
account the total area within the drainage basin, as a result of
which the Union Township participation therein will amount to
3.13%.
(c) In the event that other municipalities with areas in the Morses
Creek Drainage Basin decide to join the Commission, the
formula used to obtain the foregoing percentage shall be
reapplied to determine the apportionment among the
remaining and participating municipalities.
(2) Whenever a specific project is undertaken involving less than the
interests of all of the participating members or a special benefit to
less than all of the participating members, the apportionment of the
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
§ 64-1 UNION CODE § 64-1
64:70
§ 64-2. Municipal representation.
costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the participating members
specially benefited thereby in advance of authorization of such
project.
(3) The apportionments set forth herein may be changed by the
agreement amount of the participating municipalities and county;
provided, however, that there shall be no increase in the
percentage to be contributed by any participant in the expenses set
forth in Subsection F(1) above, without the consent of the
governing body of such participating member.
(4) Budget. The tentative annual budget for the Commission shall be
adopted by the Commission no later than January 15 of each year,
and such adoption shall be by a vote of at least one county
representative (regardless of the total number of counties
represented thereby) and at least one representative from each
municipality (regardless of the total number of municipalities
represented thereby). A copy of such tentative budget shall be sent
to the governing body of each of the participating counties and
municipalities within one week of the adoption thereof. Such notice
shall include notification of the date fixed by the Commission for
final adoption of such budget, which shall be at least three weeks
after the date of tentative adoption by the Commission.
A. The Chairman of the Township Committee shall appoint, subject to the
approval of said Committee, two representatives to the Commission.
Either or both representatives may be a member of said Township
Committee or any other elective or appointed official of said Township.
B. Each representative shall serve a term of five years or until his
successor has been appointed and qualified, except that any appointed
representative who holds other elective or appointive public office shall
serve as such representative for the term of his elected or appointed
office and only so long as he shall hold such elected or public office,
notwithstanding his term of appointment as such representative.
Appointments to vacancies shall be fulfilled for the balance of the term
only.
C. Alternate members.
(1) In addition to such representatives mentioned in § 64-2A hereof,
the Chairman of the Township Committee shall also appoint,
subject to approval of Committee, two alternate representatives to
the Commission who shall serve for the terms of one year each, or
until the appointment and qualification of their successors. Such
alternates shall have the right to attend all meetings of the
Commission and take part in all discussions. The alternates shall be
designated as First Alternate and Second Alternate and in such
§ 64-1 FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSIONS § 64-2
64:71
order may represent the Township Committee and vote in the event
of the absence or disability of one or both of the representatives.
(2) No alternate representative shall automatically succeed to a
representative position upon a vacancy occurring in a regular
position.
§ 64-2 UNION CODE § 64-2
64:72
ARTICLE II
Elizabeth River Flood Control Commission
[Adopted 2-25-1975 by Ord. No. 2952 (Ch. A326, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 64-3. Participation.
The Township Committee of the Township of Union in the County of Union
agrees to participate in the creation of and operations of the Elizabeth River
Flood Control Commission, pursuant to Chapter 316, P.L. 1971,19 as follows:
A. The municipalities and county participating in said Commission are:
City of Elizabeth, Township of Union, Township of Hillside, Town of
Irvington and County of Union. Membership in said Commission is also
open to Essex County and all other municipalities with area in the
Elizabeth River Basin.
B. The Elizabeth River Flood Control Commission shall be established in
accordance with Chapter 316, P.L. 1971 of the State of New Jersey.20
C. The Elizabeth River Flood Control Commission shall:
(1) Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area.
(2) Make such data and studies available to the participating members,
to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, local and County Planning
Boards and officials and agencies concerned with subdivisions and
development of properties within the floodway and drainage areas.
(3) Keep itself informed as to the availability of state and federal funds
and grants, and the procedures for applying therefore, and shall
make such information available to participating members.
(4) Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, stream maintenance and the like.
(5) Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and
floodplain, by appropriate County Park Commissions, counties or
participating municipalities.
(6) Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention.
(7) Encourage its participating members, and others, to adopt
appropriate ordinances and regulations relating to stormwater
control and land use in floodplains.
(8) Encourage its participating members to support regional programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding.
19.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
§ 64-3 FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSIONS § 64-3
64:73
(9) Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by the members, subject to the
limitations in this ordinance and subject to the limitations as set
forth in said Chapter 316, P.L. 1971.21
D. Appropriations.
(1) The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission,
affecting the Commission as a whole, shall be apportioned among
the members as follows:
(a) One-fourth thereof to be borne by Union County. In the event
that Essex County decides to join the Commission, the 1/4
amount shall be apportioned among the two counties on the
basis of the total area of each county within the Elizabeth River
Basin.
(b) Three-fourths thereof shall be apportioned among the member
municipalities, according to a formula taking into account total
area within the drainage basin and resulting in the following:
Municipality
Expenses
(percent)
Elizabeth 30%
Union 36%
Hillside 16%
Irvington 18%
(c) In the event that other municipalities with areas in the
Elizabeth River Drainage Basin decide to join, the formula used
to obtain the foregoing percentages shall be reapplied to
determine the apportionment among the remaining and
participating municipalities.
(2) Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken, involving less than
the interests of all of the participating members or of special
benefit to less than all of the participating members, the
apportionment of the costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the
participating members specially benefited thereby in advance of
authorization of such project.
(3) The apportionments set forth herein may be changed by agreement
among the participating municipalities and counties; provided,
however, that there shall be no increase in the percentage to be
contributed by any participant in the expenses set forth in
Subsection D(1) above, without the consent of the governing body
of such participating member.
21.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
§ 64-3 UNION CODE § 64-3
64:74
§ 64-4. Municipal representatives.
Representatives.
E. Budget. The tentative annual budget for the Commission shall be
adopted by the Commission no later than February 15 of each year, and
such adoption shall be by a vote of at least one representative from each
county, regardless of the total number of counties represented thereby,
and at least one representative from each municipality, regardless of
the total number of municipalities represented thereby. A copy of such
tentative budget shall be sent to the governing body of each of the
participating counties and municipalities within one week of the
adoption thereof. Such notice shall include notification of the date fixed
by the Commission for final adoption of such budget, which shall be at
least three weeks after the date of tentative adoption by the
Commission.
F. Quorum. Any number of members of the Commission shall have the
right to meet at regularly scheduled meetings. Any action taken
involving the expenditure of funds, other than clerical and mailing
connected with the usual business of the Commission, shall be adopted
only at a meeting at which there is at least one representative from
each county and municipality.
G. Withdrawal. Each member municipality and county reserves the right,
pursuant to Section 2d of said Chapter 316, Laws of 1971,22 to
withdraw from the Commission; provided, however, that at least 90
days' notice of such intention is given to the Commission and provided,
further, that such withdrawal after the adoption of the Commission
budget for a given year shall not abrogate the responsibility of the
municipality or county to meet its obligations under the budget for such
year.
A. The Township Committee shall appoint two representatives to the
aforesaid Commission. One of said representatives shall be a
professional with a background related to the area of storm drainage
and flood control. The other of said representatives shall be either a
member of the Township Committee or one of the officials of the
municipality.
B. Each regular representative shall serve for a term of five years or until
his successor has been appointed and has qualified, except that any
appointed representative who holds another elected or appointed
public office shall serve as such representative only so long as he shall
hold such other elected or appointed public office, notwithstanding his
term of appointment as such representative. Appointments to vacancies
caused by the death, resignation or other inability to serve of a
representative shall be filled for the balance of the term only. No
22.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:14-17d.
§ 64-3 FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSIONS § 64-4
64:75
alternate representative shall automatically succeed to a regular
representative position upon a vacancy occurring in a regular position.
C. In addition to the aforesaid two representatives, the Township
Committee may appoint two alternate representatives to the
Commission who shall serve for a term of one year each, or until the
appointment and qualification of their successors. Such alternates shall
have the right to attend all meetings of the Commission and take part in
all discussions. The alternates shall be designated as First Alternate
and Second Alternate and, in such order, may represent the
municipality and vote in the event of the absence or disability of one or
both of the regular representatives.
§ 64-4 UNION CODE § 64-4
64:76
Chapter 70
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health legislation — See Part III of
this Code.
Adoption of Code by Board of Health — See
Ch. 550.
§ 70-1. Board established.
There shall be established and there is hereby created an appointive Board
of Health in and for the Township of Union, in the County of Union, pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-10.
§ 70-2. Composition. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 3766]
Said Board of Health shall consist of seven members, appointed by the
Township Committee of the Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 70-3. Terms of office. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 3766]
The term of office for said members for said Board of Health shall be
for three years, provided that the terms of not more than three members
thereof shall expire in any one year.
§ 70-4. Rules and regulations.
Said Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its government
and, from its members, shall elect a President thereof.
§ 70-5. Appointments.
Said Board of Health shall appoint such officers and employees as may now
be provided for by ordinance and such other officers and employees as may
from time to time be necessary.
§ 70-6. Contracting debts restricted; annual appropriations.
Said Board of Health shall not contract any debt or debts of any kind beyond
the amount of the appropriation allocated for said Board in the annual
budget adopted by the Township Committee.
§ 70-7. Existing rules and regulations.
All existing rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by the present Board
of Health of the Township of Union, in the County of Union, shall remain in
full force and effect, unless amended or repealed by the Board of Health,
created by this chapter.
§ 64-4 FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSIONS § 70-8
64:77
§ 70-8. Recording, taping or photography. [Added 2-8-2017]
The Board of Health will permit the videotaping, audio recording and/or
still photography ("recording") of Board of Health meetings, provided the
following guidelines are complied with:
Chapter 82
LAW, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 28.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 93.
Personnel benefits — See Ch. 102.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 130.
A. All recording is to be conducted from designated locations. The Board
Clerk shall designate an area for recording within the Bonnell Room,
Town Hall, 1976 Morris Avenue, Union, NJ based upon the availability
of space as to prevent disruption of the business of the Board of Health
or other citizens' right of access. The area designated by the Board
Clerk shall be clearly marked alerting any member of the public who
wishes to record a meeting that such videotaping must be conducted
from this designated location.
B. All video cameras or other recording devices must be privately owned
and have self-contained recording devices with built-in lighting and
power sources.
C. A person shall not operate more than one video camera at a time.
D. Unrestricted recording, subject to the limitations herein will be
permitted prior to the start of the approval of minutes at the Board of
Health Regular Meeting.
E. The Board Clerk reserves the right to have any recording device
inspected prior to use by any person making application to record a
meeting.
F. Any person intending to record under the provisions herein shall
provide written notice to the Board Clerk no later than 10 days prior to
the regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Health.
G. The Board Clerk, for good cause, may deny any such application.
Should such application be denied, the reasons for the denial shall be
stated in writing and provided to the applicant no more than five days
prior to the regular meeting of the Board of Health. Any applicant so
denied may appeal the Board Clerk's decision to the President of the
Board of Health, in writing, no less than three days prior to the regular
meeting of the Board of Health.
§ 70-8 UNION CODE § 82-1
82:78
§ 82-1. Establishment and organization.
§ 82-2. Duties of Township Attorney.
The Township Attorney, in addition to such other functions, powers and
duties as may be otherwise delegated to him by ordinances and resolutions
of the Township Committee, shall:
A. There is hereby created and established in the government of the
Township of Union a Department of Law, which shall be comprised of a
Township Attorney, Assistant Township Attorney and such clerical
assistants as the governing body may determine to be necessary.
[Amended 1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3951; 12-27-1994 by Ord. No.
4367]
B. The head of the Department shall be the Township Attorney. The
Township Attorney and Assistant Township Attorney shall have been
duly admitted to the practice of law in the State of New Jersey for at
least five years. The Township Attorney and Assistant Township
Attorney may also engage in the private practice of law. [Amended
1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3951; 12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 4367]
C. The Township Attorney and Assistant Township Attorney shall be
appointed by the Township Committee for terms of one year, shall serve
until their successor or successors have been appointed and qualified
and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by ordinance
of the Township of Union. [Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4352;
12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 4367]
D. 23The term of the Township Attorney shall commence January 1 of each
year and terminate December 31 of each year. [Added 9-13-1994 by
Ord. No. 4352]
A. Be the chief legal advisor of the municipal government and the attorney
of record in all civil proceedings wherein the Township of Union or any
department or officer thereof shall be a party by virtue of their official
relationship.
B. Advise the Township Committee and officials of the Township of Union
on any and all legal matters relating to municipal government upon
their request.
C. Attend all meetings of the Township Committee.
D. Prepare and supervise the preparation of and approve all ordinances,
contracts, deeds and other legal documents required by the Township
Committee.
23.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, dealing with the term and compensation of the
Assistant Township Attorney, was repealed 1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3951.
§ 82-1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 82-2
82:79
§ 82-3. Compensation and benefits of Township Attorney and
Assistant Township Attorney. [Amended 1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3951;
12-23-1991 by Ord. No. 4173; 12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 4367]
§ 82-4. Special counsel.
E. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions and judgments affecting any
interest of the Township as he may, in his discretion, determine to be
necessary or desirable, or as directed by the Township Committee.
F. Advise and prosecute disciplinary actions by the Municipal
Administrator and department heads against Township employees.
G. Subject to the approval of the Township Committee, have power to
enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in
which the Township is involved.
H. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the Township's interest and report thereon from time to time
as the Township Committee may require.
I. Have such other functions, powers and duties as may be provided by
ordinance or resolution.24
A. The salary and compensation of the Township Attorney and Assistant
Township Attorney shall be provided by ordinance of the Township of
Union. The sum shall be paid in equal installments as other salaries in
the Township are paid.
B. The Township Attorney and Assistant Township Attorney shall not
receive sick, vacation or personal leave.
C. The Township Attorney and Assistant Township Attorney shall be
entitled to the medical benefits package plan. Effective January 1, 1992,
the Township Attorney and Assistant Township Attorney shall pay via
payroll deduction 25% of the medical package increase, if any, for the
current year, not to exceed $100.
A. The Township Attorney shall have the authority, with the approval of the
Township Committee, to engage such additional or special counsel to
aid in the performance of the functions of the Department and in the
preparation, trial or appeal of such cases in which the Township may be
a party or be interested as he may deem necessary.
B. If the Township Attorney should be disqualified with respect to any
matter, the governing body may appoint special counsel to represent
the Township for and with respect to such matters. [Amended
1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3951]
24.Editor's Note: Former § 51-3, Duties of Assistant Township Attorney, which previously
followed this section, was repealed 1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3951.
§ 82-2 UNION CODE § 82-5
82:80
§ 82-5. Transfer of records and duties upon termination. [Amended
1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3951]
Upon termination of his service with the Township, the Township Attorney
shall forthwith surrender to his successor all Township property, excluding
privileged communications and work products, together with a written
consent to substitution of his successor in all legal actions and proceedings
then pending to which the Township is a party.
Chapter 86
MAYOR'S ALLIANCE AGAINST DRUG ABUSE
§ 86-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the Mayor's Alliance Against
Drug Abuse, whose mission is to provide consultation, programs, training,
and resources to the community with the goal of preventing and reducing
the use and abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs.
§ 86-2. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Township of Union a permanent
committee to be known and designated as the "Mayor's Alliance Against
Drug Abuse" (hereinafter referred to as "Alliance"). The Alliance must
publish an agenda for each Alliance meeting, adopt bylaws, keep minutes
of all Alliance meetings, permit public comment at meetings, and have
a quorum of Alliance members for action to be taken by the Alliance; a
quorum is 50% of the official Alliance membership plus one.
§ 86-3. Membership.
A. Membership to the Alliance shall consist of 15 members, which shall
formally meet on a monthly, semi-monthly or quarterly basis. Members
shall be selected by the Township Committee and shall serve for a
period of one year, commencing at the Township Committee's annual
reorganization meeting and ending on December 31 of that calendar
year.
B. Membership to the Alliance shall include the following:
(1) The Mayor of the Township Committee.
(2) A member of the Township Committee.
(3) A representative or an employee of the Board of Health.
(4) A representative of the Township Police Department.
(5) Eleven residents or members of the community, including but not
limited to clergy, members of the Board of Education or staff, and
others.
§ 82-5 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 86-4
82:81
§ 86-4. Responsibilities and powers.
The responsibilities and powers of the Alliance shall be as follows:
Chapter 93
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Employment of Committee members — See
Ch. 43.
Personnel benefits — See Ch. 102.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 124.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 130.
A. To create a network of community leaders, private citizens, and
representatives from public and private human services agencies who
are dedicated to a comprehensive and coordinated effort to promote
and support drug and alcohol prevention and education programs and
related activities with an emphasis on all ages along the developmental
life processes.
B. To conduct an assessment of their community to determine the needs of
the community in relation to alcoholism and drug abuse issues.
C. To identify existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism and
drug abuse.
D. To coordinate projects within the municipality to avoid fragmentation
and duplication.
E. To develop programs to be implemented at the municipal level or
participate in regionally developed programs that accomplish the
purpose of the Alliance effort and the purpose of the Municipal Alliance
Committee.
F. To assist the municipality in acquiring funds for Alliance programs.
G. To cooperate with the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse, the County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse and the Alliance Steering Subcommittee to provide municipal
data, reports or other information which may be required for the
County Annual Municipal Alliance Plan or needed to assist the Alliance
effort.
§ 86-4 UNION CODE § 86-4
82:82
ARTICLE I
Township Personnel Enumerated
[Adopted 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3876 (Ch. 55, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 93-1. Officials, officers and employees. [Amended 5-24-1988 by
Ord. No. 3972; 1-24-1989 by Ord. No. 4007; 6-13-1989 by Ord. No.
4026; 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 4028; 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 4030;
4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 4084; 10-23-1991 by Ord. No. 4174;
7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 4404; 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 4406;
12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 4484; 2-25-1997 by Ord. No. 4491;
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842; 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 5020;
12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5076; 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5192]
The following includes an enumeration of officials, officers, positions and
other municipal personnel in the Township of Union:
A. Officials and officers. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 5409]
Assistant Municipal Administrator
Assistant Superintendent of Public Works
Assistant Township Attorney
Chief of Administrative Services
Construction Officer/Secretary of the Board of Adjustment
Director of Economic/Industrial Development
Director of Human Resources
Director of Recreation
Municipal Administrator
Municipal Court Administrator
Municipal Court Judge
Municipal Court Judge, Presiding
Municipal Prosecutor
Municipal Public Defender
Police Director
Purchasing Agent
Superintendent of Public Works
Superintendent of Recreation
Supervisor of Accounts/Chief Financial Officer
Supervisor of Senior Citizens Activities
Tax Assessor
Tax Collector
Township Attorney
§ 93-1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-1
82:83
Township Clerk
Township Committee Chair
Township Committee member
B. Township positions and employees. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 5409]
Account Clerk
Administrative Clerk
Administrative Secretary
Affirmative Action Officer
Agency Aide
Assessing Clerk Typist
Assistant Municipal Clerk
Assistant Municipal Recycling Coordinator
Assistant Personnel Officer
Assistant Supervising Laborer
Assistant Supervising Maintenance Repairer
Assistant Supervisor Building and Grounds
Assistant Supervisor Roads
Assistant Supervisor Senior Citizens Activities
Assistant Supervisor Sewers
Attorney, Board of Adjustment
Audio Visual Specialist
Board of Adjustment Attorney
Board of Adjustment Chair
Board of Adjustment Clerk
Board of Adjustment member
Board of Adjustment member alternate
Budget Examiner
Building Inspector
Building Maintenance Worker
Building Services Worker
Building Subcode Official
Buyer
Carpenter
Cashier Typist
Chief Sanitation Inspector
§ 93-1 UNION CODE § 93-1
82:84
Clerk - Meeting
Clerk Typist
Clerk Typist (bilingual)
Clerk Typist (seasonal, part-time)
Computer Operator
Construction Inspector
Coordinator of Federal/State Aid
Court Attendant
Crime Prevention Aide
Data Entry Machine Operator
Deputy Municipal Court Administrator
Deputy Tax Assessor
Electrical Subcode Official
Engineering Aide
Engineering Aide Part-Time
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator - Sewer
Equipment Operator - Streets
Executive Assistant
Fire Protection Subcode Official
General Supervisor Public Works
Horticulturist
Housing Inspector
Hydrant Repairer
Identification Clerk
Identification Officer
Laborer (35 hours)
Laborer (40 hours)
Laborer (seasonal)
Maintenance Repairer
Mechanic
Mechanic Diesel
Mechanics Helper
Media Technician
Motor Vehicle Operator Elderly/Handicapped
Municipal Court Administrator
Municipal Recycling Coordinator
§ 93-1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-1
82:85
Office Services Manager
Paralegal Specialist
Parking Enforcement Officer
Payroll Supervisor
Planning Board Attorney
Planning Board Clerk
Playground Leader (day)
Playground Leader (evening)
Plumbing Inspector (Part Time)
Plumbing Subcode Official (Part Time)
Police Aid
Principal Accounts Clerk
Principal Assessing Clerk
Principal Cashier Typist
Principal Clerk Typist
Principal Data Entry Machine Operator
Property Clerk
Public Information Assistant
Public Information Officer
Public Safety Telecommunicator
Public Safety Telecom. Trainee
Public Works Inspector
Records Manager
Recreation Leader
Rent Leveling Board Attorney
Research Assistant Criminal Info.
Sanitation Driver
Sanitation Inspector
School Traffic Guard
Secretary Rent Leveling Board
Senior Account Clerk Typist
Senior Assessing Clerk
Senior Building Maintenance Worker
Senior Building Services Worker
Senior Cashier Typist
Senior Citizens Program Aide
Senior Clerk Typist
§ 93-1 UNION CODE § 93-1
82:86
Senior Construction Inspector
Senior Crime Prevention Aide
Senior Data Entry Machine Operator
Senior Engineering Aide
Senior Hydrant Repairer
Senior Maintenance Repairer
Senior Maintenance Repairer/Low -Pressure License
Senior Mechanic
Senior Public Works Inspector
Senior Sanitation Inspector
Sewer Utility Administration
Sidewalk Inspector
Sports Official
Supervising Building Service Worker
Supervising Maintenance Repairer/Low-Pressure
Supervising Mechanic (35 hours)
Supervising Mechanic (40 hours)
Supervising Public Safety Telecommunicator
Supervisor Parks
Supervisor Recreation Maintenance
Supervisor Roads
Supervisor Sewers
Supervisor Trees
Traffic Maintenance Worker
Tree Climber
Tree Trimmer
Truck Driver
C. Police Department personnel.
Captain
Captain/Detective
Chief
Deputy Chief
Detective
Lieutenant
Lieutenant/Detective
Parking Enforcement Officer
§ 93-1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-1
82:87
§ 93-2. Officials, officers and employees prohibited from holding
elected political office. [Added 12-26-1989 by Ord. No. 4064;
amended 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 4084; 4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 4187]
None of the hereinafter named officials, officers and employees of the
Township of Union in the County of Union, while holding any such office or
position, shall be a candidate for election to a Township of Union political
office or hold any elected political office within the Township of Union or
any office or position within the Township of Union with any political party:
Police Director
Police Officer
Police Property Clerk
Sergeant
Sergeant-Detective
D. Fire Department personnel.
Battalion Chief
Captain
Chief
Deputy Chief
Firefighter
Lieutenant
Mechanic
A. Officials and officers. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Municipal Administrator
Assistant Municipal Administrator
Chief of Administrative Services
Municipal Court Administrator
Township Clerk
Tax Collector
Chief Financial Officer
Superintendent of Public Works
Tax Assessor
Superintendent of Recreation
Supervisor of Senior Citizens Activities
Director of Public Safety
Construction Code Official
Health Officer
§ 93-1 UNION CODE § 93-2
82:88
B. Public Safety Department personnel.
§ 93-2 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-2
82:89

ARTICLE II
Prosecutor
[Adopted 12-11-1973 by Ord. No. 2835 (Ch. 69 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 93-3. Office created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Prosecutor. The appointment
to said office shall be made by the Township Committee.
§ 93-4. Qualifications of appointee.
The person to be appointed to said office shall have been duly admitted to
the practice of law in the State of New Jersey and must be a member in good
standing at the bar of the State of New Jersey at the time of his appointment
and during the term of his office.
§ 93-5. Term of office. [Amended 1-27-1981 by Ord. No. 3501]
The term of office of said Municipal Prosecutor shall be one year.
§ 93-6. Function and duties.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall:
§ 93-7. Compensation and benefits. [Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord.
No. 4901]
A. Conduct prosecutions for crimes and offenses cognizable by the
Municipal Court of the Township of Union, except such crimes and
offenses as it may be the duty of the County Prosecutor of the County of
Union or the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey to prosecute,
including violations of ordinances of said Township and complaints of
any municipal department. Said Municipal Prosecutor shall also take all
appeals from adverse decisions in said Municipal Court, when either
required by law or authorized by the Township Committee of said
Township or required by the rules of the Supreme Court of the State of
New Jersey.
B. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to his official duties and report thereon from time to time, when
requested, to the Township Committee of said Township.
A. The salary of the Municipal Prosecutor shall be provided by ordinance
of the Township of Union. The sum shall be paid in equal installments as
other salaries in the Township are paid.
B. The Municipal Prosecutor shall be eligible to participate in the group
medical coverage provided by the Township, provided he or she
reimburses the Township for the full amount of the premiums paid on
their behalf on a monthly basis.
§ 93-3 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-7
82:91

ARTICLE III
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 1-24-1989 by Ord. No. 4007 (Ch. 19 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 93-8. Office established.
In accordance with Chapter 110 of the Laws of 1988,25 there is hereby
created the office of Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Union of the
County of Union.26
§ 93-9. Term; tenure.
The term of office for any subsequent appointee shall be two years
commencing January 1 of the year of appointment, unless and until said
appointee becomes qualified for tenure under the statutes then in force.
§ 93-10. Responsibilities.
Said Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for carrying out the duties
set forth in N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: Original Section 2 of this ordinance, which provided for the appointment of
Joseph J. Kmet as Chief Financial Officer, and original Section 3 of this ordinance, which
provided for the salary of the Officer, previously followed this section, but have been
omitted from the Code. See now Ch. 130, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 93-8 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-10
82:93

ARTICLE IV
Public Defender
[Adopted 1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 4175 (Ch. 70 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 93-11. Office created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Public Defender who shall
be appointed annually by the Township Committee.
§ 93-12. Qualifications of appointee.
The person to be appointed to said office shall have been duly admitted to
the practice of law in the State of New Jersey and must be a member in
good standing at the bar of the State of New Jersey at the time of his or her
appointment and during the term of his or her office.
§ 93-13. Term of office.
The term of office of said Municipal Public Defender shall be one year.
§ 93-14. Functions and duties.
§ 93-15. Compensation and benefits.
A. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Public Defender to represent such
indigent defendants before the Municipal Court of the Township of
Union as shall be assigned to him by the Municipal Judge in the exercise
of the Municipal Judge's inherent discretion to assign free counsel
whenever justice so requires.
B. The Municipal Public Defender shall have and exercise all powers and
duties assigned him or her by the statutes of the State of New Jersey
and the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey and such
other authority as may be granted by the Township Committee.
C. The Municipal Public Defender reports to and is directed by the
Township Administrator.
D. The Municipal Public Defender is responsible for submitting an annual
report to the Township Committee within 21 days after the end of the
year.
A. The salary of the Municipal Public Defender shall be provided by
ordinance of the Township of Union. The sum shall be paid in equal
installments as other salaries in the Township are paid.27
B. The Municipal Public Defender shall be eligible to participate in the
group medical coverage provided by the Township, provided he or she
reimburses the Township for the full amount of the premiums paid on
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 93-11 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-15
82:95
§ 93-16. Application fee for representation. [Added 2-8-1994 by
Ord. No. 4290; amended 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 4535]
The Township of Union hereby requires a person applying for
representation by a Municipal Public Defender to pay an application fee
of not more than $200. The Municipal Court may waive any required
application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in its discretion,
that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking representation.28
their behalf on a monthly basis. [Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord. No.
4902]
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
§ 93-15 UNION CODE § 93-16
82:96
ARTICLE V
Township Clerk Duties
[Adopted 4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 4186 (Ch. 55, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 93-17. Direction of Township Committee.
The Township Clerk shall perform the following duties subject to the sole
and exclusive direction of the Township Committee, which duties may be
amended or altered at the discretion of the Township Committee.
§ 93-18. Secretary to governing body.
As Secretary to the governing body, the Clerk shall perform the following
duties:
A. At the discretion of the Township Committee, prepare meeting and
conference agendas.
B. At the discretion of the Township Committee, be present at meetings of
the Township Committee and keep a journal of the proceeding and
record the minutes of the meeting.
C. Retain the original copies of all ordinances and resolutions.
D. At the discretion of the Township Committee, act as custodian of the
Township Seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts and
archival records of the municipal corporation.
E. Act as liaison between the citizens and the Township Committee.
F. Coordinate with the Township Attorney all official documents in the
form of ordinances and resolutions.
G. Prepare all legal advertisements in connection with ordinances,
contracts, certain resolutions, amendments to the budget, bond sales,
bids, capital budget, Sunshine Law notices and any other matters that
require publication.
H. Prepare and distribute all correspondence relative to action taken by
the Township Committee.
I. Prepare and distribute all materials in connection with the execution of
contracts entered into by the Township of Union.
J. Certify the Township budget and forward to the appropriate state
agency.
K. Distribute all ordinances to the appropriate department.
L. Receive all lawsuits on behalf of the Township and direct them to the
proper authority.
§ 93-17 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-18
82:97
§ 93-19. Alcoholic Beverages Official.29
As Alcoholic Beverages Official, the Clerk shall perform the following
duties:
§ 93-20. Election Official.
As Election Official, the Clerk shall perform the following duties:
M. Administer oaths of office to all officials of the Township, including
police and fire officers, as well as members of the various appointed
positions within the Township of Union.
N. Any other duties not enumerated above, which the Township
Committee determines should be performed by the Township Clerk.
A. Receive all applications for alcoholic beverage licenses and/or transfer.
B. Advise applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses of all legal
requirements.
C. Schedule hearings on alcoholic beverage license application with the
Township Committee at the Township Committee's convenience.
D. Maintain a record with reference to all alcoholic beverage license
violations.
A. Serve as the Chief Administrative Officer in all elections held in the
Township, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the Revised
Statutes.
B. Serve as Chief Registrar of voters in the Township, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes.
C. Certify to the county all vacancies.
D. Record all nominating petitions and certify to the County Clerk.
E. Decide the validity of all petitions.
F. Furnish materials for local elections.
G. Coordinate the selection of polling places with the Union County Board
of Elections.
H. Maintain a permanent record of voting results.
I. Certify to the County Clerk all election results.
J. Distribute information with reference to the Election Law Enforcement
Commission.
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 160, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 93-18 UNION CODE § 93-21
82:98
§ 93-21. Administrative Official.
As Administrative Official, the Clerk shall perform the following duties:
§ 93-22. Other duties.
The Clerk shall perform the following other duties:
A. Issue all licenses in connection with dogs, cats, amusements, bingo,
raffles, garage sales, flea markets, gas stations, pumps, swimming
pools, taxes, limousines, Christmas trees, pet shops, dance halls, openair
parking and video games.
B. Maintain a register of all multifamily dwellings.
C. Issue assessment searches.
D. Handle complaints and direct the same to the proper authority.
E. Furnish data to public information media.
F. Receive and file bonds and all insurance policies.
G. Be a member of the Insurance Loss Control Committee.
H. Maintain all certificates of ownership of all Township-owned vehicles
and keep updated records.
A. Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the Revised Statutes.
B. Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by statute,
regulation or by Township ordinance or regulation or at the direction of
the Township Committee.
C. Perform each and every of the aforementioned duties, in accordance
with the personnel policy and procedure as now or hereafter may be
established or directed by the Township Committee and be eligible for
benefits pursuant to such personnel policy and procedure.
§ 93-21 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-22
82:99

ARTICLE VI
Police Director
[Adopted 12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5076]
§ 93-23. Office created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of Police Director. The appointment to
said office shall be made by the Township Committee.
§ 93-24. Term of office.
The term of office of said Police Director shall be one year.
§ 93-25. Functions and duties.
The Police Director shall be the appropriate authority pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40a:14-118 and shall be responsible for the overall performance of the
Police Division, including but not limited to establishing rules and
regulations for the Police Division, establishing a disciplinary process for
major and minor discipline, establishing a table of organization, requiring
the Police Chief to report on a regular basis, review operations of the Police
Division, and act as a liaison between the Township Administrator and the
Police Chief.
§ 93-26. Salary.
The salary of the Police Director shall be provided by ordinance of the
Township of Union. The sum shall be paid in equal installments as other
salaries in the Township are paid.
§ 93-23 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 93-26
82:101
Chapter 98
PAYROLL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 130.
§ 93-26 UNION CODE § 93-26
82:102
ARTICLE I
Third-Party Payroll Disbursement
[Adopted 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5152]
§ 98-1. Purpose and intent; definitions.
§ 98-2. Authorization; applicability.
§ 98-3. Township requirements.
A. The purpose and intent of these regulations is to abide by the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-20.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq.,
governing electronic disbursement controls for payroll purposes.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPROVAL OFFICER — Person(s) responsible for authorizing and
supervising the activities of the payroll service.
PAYROLL SERVICE — Third-party payroll service organization.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Union.
A. The Township is authorized to use a payroll service to prepare payment
documentation, take possession of Township funds, and make such
disbursements itself on behalf of the Township.
B. The following payroll service providers shall be required to comply with
these regulations:
(1) Payroll service providers who use their own customized
programming process to execute disbursements for the Township;
(2) Payroll service providers who use a third-party processor to
execute disbursements for the Township.
A. The appointment of a payroll service shall be pursuant to the Local
Public Contracts Law (See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and shall require
the contractor to do the following, not by way of limitation: data
collection, agency report preparation, calculation of withholding, direct
deposit of payroll disbursements, and/or transfer of Township funds to
contractor's account for subsequent disbursement of payment.
B. Any renewal or extension of a contract under these regulations shall be
by resolution.
C. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby appointed the approval officer and
is responsible for authorizing and supervising the activities of the
payroll service and shall further be charged with the reconciliation and
analysis of all general ledger accounts affected by the activities of the
disbursing organization.
§ 98-1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 98-3
82:103
§ 98-4. Payroll service requirements.
§ 98-5. Establishment of service.
Upon the adoption of these regulations, the Township Administrator, with
the assistance of the Chief Financial Officer and Township Attorney, as
necessary, is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract for
payroll service in accordance with all local public contracting laws and
N.J.A.C. 5:30-17. Appointment of the payroll service shall be by separate
resolution of the Township.
D. If required by the contract between the Township and the payroll
service, the payroll service is permitted to hold Township funds pending
transmittal to a payee.
A. A payroll service must meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Report any irregularities that may indicate potential fraud,
noncompliance with appropriate laws, dishonesty or gross
incompetence on the part of the approval officer;
(2) Report circumstances that could jeopardize its ability to continue
operations or otherwise interrupt the services provided to the
Township.
B. A payroll service must meet the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5,
requiring that the approval officer be assured that the servicer has its
own internal controls and appropriately guard against theft and other
adverse conditions.
C. All contracts entered into pursuant to these regulations and the laws
authorizing the same shall comply with the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:30-17.6, which sets out a series of mandatory contractual terms and
conditions.
§ 98-3 UNION CODE § 98-5
82:104
Chapter 102
PERSONNEL BENEFITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 93.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 124.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 130.
§ 98-5 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 98-5
82:105

ARTICLE I
Medical Benefits for Township Committee
[Adopted 12-23-1991 by Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 4173 (Ch. 61, Art. I of
the 1986 Code); amended in its entirety 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
§ 102-1. Medical benefits package plan.
Members of the Township Committee shall be entitled to the medical
benefits package plan.
§ 102-1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-1
82:107

ARTICLE II
Widows, Widowers and Minors of Volunteer Firemen
[Adopted 8-8-1972 by Ord. No. 2739A (Ch. 61, Art. II of the 1986
Code); amended in its entirety 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
§ 102-2. Lump-sum payment.
A lump-sum pension of $5,000 shall be paid to the widow, widower or minor
children of a volunteer fire fighter or first-aid or rescue squad worker who
has died as the result of injuries sustained in the performance of duty, as
the same is defined in Chapter 331 of the Laws of 1968,30 whenever the
recipient or recipients of such payment shall qualify for the receipt of the
same pursuant to the aforementioned statute.
§ 102-3. Proof requirements.
Said payment shall be made upon proof of death and proof of the fact
that the claimant therefor is either the widow or widower of or the minor
children of the decedent.
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 43:12-28.1.
§ 102-2 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-3
82:109

ARTICLE III
Municipal Officials Benefits
[Adopted 6-25-1985 by Ord. No. 3799 (Ch. 61, Art. III of the 1986
Code)]
§ 102-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL — Any officer occupying any of the following
positions: Township Administrator; Assistant Administrator; Township
Clerk; Treasurer and Tax Collector-Tax Searcher; Township Attorney;
Assistant Township Attorney; Superintendent of Public Works; Supervisor of
Accounts; Chief Municipal Finance Officer; Construction Official/Secretary,
Board of Adjustment; Tax Assessor; Superintendent of Recreation; Director
of Economic Development; Municipal Court Administrator; Chief of
Administrative Services; Supervisor of Senior Citizens Activities; Police
Director; Director of Human Resources; Director of Recreation, Purchasing
Agent.[Amended 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 4084; 12-28-1995 by Ord.
No. 4420; 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 4542; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842;
12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5076; 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5191; 3-26-2013
by Ord. No. 5262; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 5410]
§ 102-5. Holidays.
A. The following official holidays, with pay, shall be observed by the
Township unless an alternate day or an additional holiday is authorized
by the Township Committee or the Township Administrator: [Amended
4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 4084]
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Lincoln's Birthday
Washington's Birthday
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
General Election Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
§ 102-4 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-5
82:111
§ 102-6. Vacations and personal leave. [Amended 10-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 4842]
All Township officials shall receive vacation and personal leave in
accordance with the following schedule:
§ 102-7. Assignment of vacations and personal leave.
B. If a holiday falls on Saturday, it shall be observed on the preceding
Friday. If a holiday falls on a Sunday; it shall be observed on the
following Monday.
C. In the event that one of the official holidays hereinabove enumerated
occurs during a Township official's vacation or while an official is on
sick leave, no charge therefor will be made against the accrued balance
of the official's account.
D. The Friday after Thanksgiving shall be considered as a paid holiday.
A. Personal days: six per year.
B. Vacation leave.
(1) First year: one working day per month.
(2) After the first year:
Beginning Ending Number of days
2nd year 5th year 15
6th year 15th year 20
16th year 20th year 25
21st year and over 30
(3) Employees hired after August 17, 2000, shall be entitled to
vacation leave with pay according to the following schedule:
(a) First year: one working day per month to a maximum of 10
days.
(b) After the first year:
Beginning Ending Number of days
2nd year 5th year 10
6th year 10th year 15
11th year 15th year 20
16th year 20th year 25
21st year and over 30
A. Vacation and personal leave is assigned to the account of a Township
official at the beginning of the calendar year. The Municipal
§ 102-5 UNION CODE § 102-7
82:112
§ 102-8. Sick leave.
§ 102-9. Absence due to injury or disease received in the line of
duty.
Absence due to injury or occupational disease received in the line of duty
shall not be chargeable to the sick leave account of the Township official;
provided, however, that such absence will be paid for a period not exceeding
one year.
Administrator shall be advised as to the vacations of all Township
officials. Personal days may not be taken directly contiguous with
vacations and shall not accumulate from year to year. A Township
official's vacation leave may be accumulated from year to year upon
written request to and approval of the Municipal Administrator, up to a
limit of 150 days. This approval must be obtained for each year that the
official desires to accumulate vacation leave. Accumulated leave may
not be used without approval of the governing body.
B. A Township official may surrender and receive payment at the current
rate of pay of up to 1/2 of his or her allotted vacation leave. The
surrender and payment option must be implemented prior to January
31 of the current year by written request to and approval of the
Municipal Administrator. The Township official's remaining allotment of
vacation leave must be utilized in the current year if the surrender and
payment option is utilized or the vacation leave shall be forfeited.
A. All Township officials shall receive 15 days' sick leave per annum.
B. Sick leave may be taken in the following circumstances:
(1) The Township official is sick or disabled so that it is impossible or
impracticable for him to perform his duties.
(2) The Township official is quarantined by the Board of Health.
(3) Illness in the immediate family of the Township official which
requires his personal attendance. The term "immediate family," as
used in this section, shall mean father, mother, grandparents,
spouse, child, foster child, brother, sister, mother-in-law or fatherin-
law living in the same dwelling as the Township official.
C. The Municipal Administrator may request the Township official to
submit official certificates or documents or to submit to a medical
examination, at Township expense and by a doctor of the Township's
choosing, that is necessary to establish the legitimacy of the Township
official's use of sick leave. Failure of the Township official to comply
with such a request may result in the disapproval of the sick leave by
the Municipal Administrator. Sick leave may be accumulated without
limit.
§ 102-7 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-10
82:113
§ 102-10. Absence without pay.
If sick leave over and above the allotted days is taken by the Township
official or if the sick leave is taken after disapproval by the Municipal
Administrator, such sick leave shall be charged as absence without pay.
§ 102-11. Jury duty.
If an official is required to serve jury duty, such an official shall be paid the
regular rate of pay upon presentation of proper evidence of jury service and
shall not be required to remit the jury pay to the Township.
§ 102-12. Maternity leave.
A. Any pregnant Township official who requests a maternity leave of
absence shall be required to apply to the Municipal Administrator, in
writing, for such leave. The request shall be made as soon as the
Township official has received medical proof that she is pregnant, and
the request shall contain the date when the Township official desires
the maternity leave to commence and a return date which shall not
exceed 90 days from the date of delivery of the child; provided,
however, that the period shall be extended if medical proof is submitted
to support the grant of an extension beyond 90 days. The request for
the leave shall be accompanied by a written medical statement that the
date of the requested commencement of the leave of absence will not be
harmful to the health or well-being of the Township official. In the event
that a doctor, designated by the Township, advises the Township that a
Township official is incapable of continuing her duties, the Township
may then demand commencement of the leave at a time earlier than
requested; provided, however, that no such extension or extensions may
be granted for periods in excess of 30 days at one time. No such
Township official on maternity leave shall receive any pay during the
period.
B. The Township shall consider the official's requested date of return;
however, the Township's determination shall be final and binding upon
the Township official.
C. No official shall be required to return in less than 60 days from the date
of delivery of the child, nor may a maternity leave exceed 90 days from
the date of delivery, unless extended as hereinabove provided for.
Maternity leaves may be approved, in writing, by the Municipal
Administrator, designating the term thereof and the date of return to
employment.
D. Leave of absence for maternity will be granted in accordance with the
provision of the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act and the New
Jersey Family Leave Act. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5191]
E. If a Township official fails to return to work on the termination of the
leave, the official will be considered as having resigned.
§ 102-10 UNION CODE § 102-13
82:114
§ 102-13. National Guard and reserves.
Leave to members of the National Guard and to members of reserve
components of the armed forces shall be granted in accordance with the
statute in such case made and provided.
§ 102-14. Death in the family.
§ 102-15. Leaves of absence.
The Municipal Administrator may grant the privilege of absence without
pay to any Township official for a period not to exceed three months at any
one time. Such leave of absence may be renewed for additional periods not
to exceed three months by the Municipal Administrator, provided that the
aggregate of all such leave shall not exceed a period of one year. Leave
for periods of more than one year cannot be granted except upon approval
of the Township Committee and/or the Department of Civil Service, where
applicable. Notice of all leaves of absence without pay under this section
and renewals thereof shall be forwarded to the Department of Civil Service,
where required.
§ 102-16. Request for approval of leave.
A request for approval of leave shall be made, in writing, to the Municipal
Administrator. Such request, whenever possible, shall be made far enough
in advance to permit adequate approval and to further permit duty coverage
by another Township official.
§ 102-17. Overtime.
Overtime put in by any Township official shall not be compensated by any
extra pay or compensatory time, but shall be considered as part of the
normal workweek of any official. An exception to the above may be made
only with the approval of the Township Committee. This section shall not
abrogate any state statutes governing overtime pay nor shall it be intended
to deprive any Township official, as herein described, of any accumulated
compensatory pay that may have already accrued to his or her salary
account, which said sum shall be paid to him in addition to any other
benefits provided for within this article.
A. In the event of a death in the immediate family of a Township official,
the Municipal Administrator shall grant three days' leave with pay.
Such leave shall be in addition to vacation leave and sick leave.
B. "Immediate family," for the purposes of this section, is defined as father,
mother, spouse, child, foster child, sister, brother, father-in-law, motherin-
law, grandfather and grandmother.
C. In the event of a death in the family other than as herein defined, a
Township official shall be excused from duty on the day of burial
without such absence being charged to any leave account.
§ 102-13 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-18
82:115
§ 102-18. Longevity pay. [Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 4467]
§ 102-19. Medical benefits package plan. [Amended 7-25-1989 by
Ord. No. 4046; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Township officials shall be entitled to the medical benefits package plan
offering the greatest benefits in effect during any year.
§ 102-20. Continuance of medical plan.31
The Township agrees to pay the premium for the continuance of all medical
plans in existence at the date of voluntary termination for all Township
officials, including recognized dependents, terminating said employment
with the Township after 20 years of credited employment with the
Township, provided that said official has reached the age of 50 years.
Such coverage shall not be afforded to any official otherwise covered by
any medical plan, and each such official terminating employment with the
Township shall annually certify to the Treasurer of the Township of Union
A. A longevity payment shall be paid as hereinafter fixed and determined.
Such longevity pay is to be considered as additional compensation
based upon the length of service of said Township officials according to
the following schedule:
Years of Service
Additional Compensation
(percentage of annual salary)
5 2%
10 4%
15 6%
20 10%
24 12%
B. For any person hired after July 1, 1996, who is not already employed by
the Township of Union, longevity shall be:
Years of Service
Additional Compensation
(percentage of annual salary)
10 2%
15 4%
20 6%
C. Longevity pay shall not be provided to any Township official hired after
October 1, 2013. [Added 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 5282]
31.Editor’s Note: See also Art. VIII, adopted 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5190, which ordinance
clarified the health benefit policy of the Township and, in § 102-53, provided for the repeal
of §§ 102-20 and 102-26 as to any inconsistencies with the ordinance and modification of
the two sections to reflect the requirements of the ordinance.
§ 102-18 UNION CODE § 102-20
82:116
that as of the date of said certification said official is not covered by any
other medical plan level offering the greatest benefits to any employee
group presently employed by the Township.
§ 102-21. Accumulated unused vacation and compensatory time.
Upon voluntary termination of employment or the death of a Township
official, payment for all accumulated unused vacation leave and
compensatory time earned as of December 31, 1984, shall be paid at
the rate of pay for each official effective as of December 31, 1984. All
accumulated unused vacation leave earned after December 31, 1984, shall
be paid at the rate of pay in effect for the year earned. Payment shall be
made to the Township official or to his or her estate in a lump sum or by a
mutually agreeable schedule of payment.
§ 102-22. Termination incentive bonus.
Upon voluntary termination of employment of a Township official having
reached the age of 50 years and having 15 years of honorable service
or upon the death of an official having 15 years of honorable service,
said official or his or her estate will receive a termination incentive bonus
consisting of 40% of the monetary value of unused sick leave accrued as
of December 31, 1984, paid at the rate of pay in effect on December 31,
1984, and 40% of the monetary value of unused sick leave accumulated
after December 31, 1984, to be paid at the rate of pay in effect for the year
earned. Payment may be made to the official or his or her estate in a lump
sum or by a mutually agreeable schedule of payments.
§ 102-20 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-22
82:117

ARTICLE IV
Police and Fire Personnel Benefits
[Adopted 6-24-1986 by Ord. No. 3861 (Ch. 61, Art. IV of the 1986
Code)]
§ 102-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any employee occupying any of the following positions:
Director of Public Safety; Police Chief; Fire Chief; Deputy Police Chief;
Deputy Fire Chief.32[Amended 12-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4420]
§ 102-24. Uniforms.
§ 102-25. Legal representation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-28 or 40A:14-155, whichever is applicable,
whenever an employee is a defendant in any action or legal proceeding
arising out of or incidental to the performance of his or her duties, the
governing body of the municipality shall provide said employee with
necessary means for the defense of such action or proceeding, but not
for his or her defense in a disciplinary proceeding instituted as a result
of a complaint on behalf of the municipality. If any such disciplinary or
A. Each employee shall maintain his or her work uniform in a clean and
presentable condition at all times. If any part of an employee's uniform
is damaged or destroyed in the line of duty, the Township shall pay for
the replacement or repair thereof upon voucher submitted therefor and
approved by the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief. If an employee's
personal property, other than his or her uniform, is damaged or
destroyed in the line of duty, the Township, subject to the approval of
the Chief of Police, or the Fire Chief, shall pay for the replacement or
repair thereof upon voucher submitted therefor, upon recommendation
of the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief and approval of the Township
Administrator.
B. Uniform incidents involving the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief will
require the approval of the Township Administrator.
C. The Township shall supply police or fire-fighting equipment as is
appropriate to employees and will repair or replace such equipment
when necessary.
D. Uniforms shall be worn during official duty hours, or while on official
department business, except that civilian attire may be worn when
practical to perform certain functions of the office, all at the discretion
of the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 61-27, Holidays, which previously followed this section, was
deleted 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842.
§ 102-23 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-25
82:119
criminal proceeding instituted by or on complaint of the municipality shall
be dismissed or finally determined in favor of the employee, he or she shall
be reimbursed for the expense of his or her defense.
§ 102-26. Medical benefits package plan; insurance.33
§ 102-27. Hours of work.
§ 102-28. Vacation leave.
A. Employees shall be entitled to the medical benefits package plan
offering the greatest benefits in effect for all other Township employees
during any year.
B. The Township agrees to pay the premium for the continuance of all
medical plans in existence at the date of voluntary termination for all
employees, including recognized dependents, terminating said
employment with the Township. Such coverage shall not be afforded to
any official otherwise covered by any medical plan, and each such
official terminating employment with the Township shall annually
certify to the Treasurer of the Township of Union that as of the date of
said certification said official is not covered by any other medical plan
level offering the greatest benefits to any employee group presently
employed by the Township.
C. The Township agrees to pay the premium for the continuance of all
medical plans in existence on the date of death of all employees with 20
years of credited employment for recognized dependents.
D. The Township shall pay an additional death benefit of $10,000 to the
named beneficiary of the deceased employee of his or her estate for
accidental death, which said benefit is exclusive of any workers'
compensation award or judgments resulting from a civil action or
pension benefits. Said payment shall be funded by a group insurance
policy to be maintained by the Township, and payment therefrom shall
be made by said insurance carrier upon the proper application being
made thereto. The aforesaid death benefits shall only be afforded to
employees while they continue to be employees of the Township. It shall
not continue in force upon the resignation, dismissal or retirement of
the employee.
A. The workday and workweek shall be established for their respective
departments by the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, predicated on the
needs of the departments and the subdivisions therein.
B. The workday and workweek for the Chief of Police and for the Fire
Chief shall be established by the Municipal Administrator.
33.Editor’s Note: See also Art. VIII, adopted 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5190, which ordinance
clarified the health benefit policy of the Township and, in § 102-53, provided for the repeal
of §§ 102-20 and 102-26 as to any inconsistencies with the ordinance and modification of
the two sections to reflect the requirements of the ordinance.
§ 102-25 UNION CODE § 102-28
82:120
§ 102-29. Sick leave.
A. The vacation schedule shall be as follows:
(1) One year to four years: 15 working days.
(2) Beginning fifth year to nine years: 20 working days.
(3) Beginning 10th year to 14 years: 25 working days.
(4) Beginning 15th year to 19 years: 30 working days.
(5) Beginning 20th year to 24 years: 35 working days.
(6) Beginning 25th year and thereafter: 42 working days.
B. The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief shall allot vacation periods in
order to assure orderly operation and adequate continuous service, but
will grant vacations so far as possible in accordance with the desires of
employees in order of their seniority in rank.
C. In the event that the selected period of time is not available, then it is
agreed that employees should take their vacations in broken periods
mutually acceptable to the Chief and the employee.
D. Each employee will receive his or her vacation pay in full prior to the
commencement of each vacation period.
E. In the event that an employee is out of work on sick leave or injury leave
at the time when said leave falls within his or her vacation period, said
vacation, or that part of it which the employee had not yet taken, will be
postponed until the employee returns from sick leave or injury leave.
F. The Municipal Administrator shall be advised as to the vacations of the
Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
G. Vacation leave may be accumulated from year to year upon written
request to the Municipal Administrator up to a limit of 150 days.
Employees who currently have accumulated more than 150 vacation
days may retain such accumulated vacation leave. However, such
employees may not accumulate any additional vacation leave.
H. An employee may surrender and receive payment at the current rate of
pay of up to 1/2 of his or her allotted vacation leave. The surrender and
payment option must be implemented prior to January 31 of the current
year, by written request and approval of the Municipal Administrator.
The employee's remaining allotment of vacation leave must be utilized
in the current year or forfeit the remaining allotted vacation.
A. All employees shall be entitled to sick leave with pay based on their
aggregate years of service.
B. Sick leave may be utilized by employees when they are unable to
perform their work by reason of personal illness, accident or exposure
§ 102-28 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-29
82:121
to contagious disease or illness, accident or exposure to contagious
disease on the part of the employee's spouse, children, parents or any
other person who is a member of the family of the employee, actually
residing therewith.
C. Sick leave days shall accrue and accumulate as follows:
(1) First year of service: one day per month.
(2) Second through fifth year: 15 days per year.
(3) Sixth through 10th year: 16 days per year.
(4) Eleventh through 15th year: 17 days per year.
(5) Sixteenth through 20th year: 18 days per year.
(6) Twenty-first through 25th year: 19 days per year.
(7) Twenty-sixth year plus: 20 days per year.
D. Any employee shall not be reimbursed for accrued sick leave at the time
of termination of his or her employment for cause or resignation under
less than honorable circumstances. Upon termination, the Township
shall certify to the Department of Civil Service the employee's
accumulated sick leave, which shall be made part of the employee's
permanent record.
E. If an employee is absent for reasons that entitled him or her to sick
leave, his or her supervisor shall be notified promptly as of the
employee's usual reporting time, except in those work situations where
notice must be made prior to the employee's starting time.
(1) Failure to so notify his or her supervisor may be cause of denial of
the use of sick leave for that absence and constitute cause for
disciplinary action.
(2) Absence without notice for five consecutive days shall constitute a
resignation.
F. Service-connected sickness, injury or disability leave.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-7, employees covered under this
agreement will be paid their regular straight time rate of pay for a
period not in excess of 52 weeks for each new and separate serviceconnected
sickness, injury or disability, commencing on the first
day of any such service-connected injury or disability. Temporary
disability benefits paid by workers' compensation insurance to the
employee will be paid over to the Township.
(2) Intentional self-inflicted injuries or those service-connected injuries
or disabilities resulting from gross negligence shall not be covered
by the provisions of this section.
§ 102-29 UNION CODE § 102-29
82:122
§ 102-30. Funeral leave.
(3) Any employee who accepts outside employment whose physical
demands are equal to or greater than his or her normal duties
during the periods of service-connected sickness, injury or
disability leave shall be deemed physically fit to return to duty and
shall be subject to loss of service-connected sickness, injury or
disability pay.
(4) When such sickness, injury or disability leave is granted, the
employee shall not be charged with any sick leave time for such
time lost due to such sickness, injury or disability.
G. Verification of sick leave.
(1) An employee who shall be absent on sick leave may be required to
submit acceptable medical evidence substantiating the illness.
Abuse of sick leave shall be cause for disciplinary action.
(a) If the Township is not satisfied with the medical evidence
supplied by the employee, the Township may require the
employee to be examined by a Township physician at Township
expense.
(b) In the case of an employee utilizing sick leave to attend to a
sick or injured relative, the employee must supply acceptable
medical evidence that:
[1] The relative was sick or injured.
[2] The employee's presence was required.
(2) In case of leave of absence due to exposure to contagious disease, a
certificate from the Department of Health shall be required.
(3) The Township may require an employee who has been absent
because of personal illness, as a condition of his or her return to
duty, to be examined, at the expense of the Township, by a
physician chosen by the employee from a panel of physicians
designated by the Township. Such examination shall establish
whether the employee is capable of performing his or her normal
duties and that his or her return will not jeopardize the health of
the employee or other employees.
A. In the event of a death in the immediate family of the employee or his or
her spouse, employees in the Police Department will be allowed
necessary time off with pay to make funeral arrangements and attend
funeral services for a period not to exceed four working days.
Employees in the Fire Department shall be granted leave necessary to
make funeral arrangements and attend funeral services from the time
of death until 48 hours after the funeral for personnel assigned to the
§ 102-29 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-30
82:123
§ 102-31. Other leave.
§ 102-32. Longevity pay.
twenty-four-hour shift and for a period not to exceed four working days
for employees on the 40 hours per week work schedule.
B. For the purpose of this section, "immediate family" means father,
mother, spouse, child, stepchild, sister, brother, father-in-law, motherin-
law, grandchild, grandparent or any other relative who is a member
of the household actually residing with the employee.
C. In the event of a death in the family other than herein defined, an
employee shall be excused from duty on the day of burial without loss of
pay.
A. With the prior approval of the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief, each
employee shall receive three personal days annually at eight hours
straight time on December 1. Employees shall receive three
administrative days to be used within the calendar year. Administrative
days may not be converted to pay.34
B. Employees shall be entitled to military and National Guard leave in
accordance with existing law.
A. In addition to his or her annual salary, each employee shall receive
longevity pay in equal biweekly installments according to the following
schedule: [Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 4467]
Years of Service Completed Percent of Base Pay
5 2%
10 4%
15 6%
20 8%
24 12%
B. Longevity payments shall commence with the first pay period
immediately following the employee's anniversary date, as indicated
above, and shall be paid in equal installments thereafter.
C. For any person hired after July 1, 1996, who is not already employed by
the Township of Union, longevity shall be: [Added 7-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 4467]
Years of Service Completed Percent of Base Pay
10 2%
15 4%
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 102-30 UNION CODE § 102-32
82:124
§ 102-33. Meals; mileage.
§ 102-34. Personnel files.
§ 102-35. Termination of service.
Years of Service Completed Percent of Base Pay
20 6%
A. Meals.
(1) Whenever an employee is out of town on official police and fire
business, whether for attendance at public schools, training
sessions, court appearances or other assignments, he or she shall
receive a meal allowance of $9 where the time involved extends
through a meal period.35
(2) In the case of a snow emergency or other natural disaster which
precludes employees from leaving headquarters for meals, the
Township shall provide meals at its own cost and expense.
B. Mileage.
(1) Employees shall be reimbursed for required or authorized use of
personal vehicles at the established rate of $0.23 per mile, to be
applied only when it is not practical to use the department assigned
vehicle. Mileage shall be computed from police or fire
headquarters as applicable to the point of destination. Whenever
possible, employees traveling to the same destination at the same
time shall travel in one vehicle.
(2) All tolls and parking expenses incurred on official business or in
connection with authorized or required travel shall be reimbursed
upon presentation of valid receipts therefor.
A. One master personnel file on each employee shall be maintained in the
Human Resources Office.36
B. In the event that charges are preferred against an employee, such
employee, or his or her counsel, may have access to the contents of said
file in order that said employee may properly prepare his or her defense
to such charges.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein:
(1) Upon the retirement, death or other termination of service of an
employee after 25 years of service, he or she shall be entitled to the
following:
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 102-32 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-35
82:125
(a) Money value of such vacation as may have been earned by him
or her in the year prior to his or her retirement not taken by
him or her, and the money value of the full term of vacation to
which he or she would be entitled in the year of retirement,
resignation or death.37
(b) The money value of the unused sick leave days based upon the
salary in the year of the retirement in accordance with the
following:
[1] Employees shall be entitled to an honorable termination
incentive bonus whereby any employee terminating his or
her service with the Township after 15 years of honorable
service will be entitled to 40% of the monetary value at the
time of termination of the accumulated unused sick days in
the account of each of said employees.
[2] Such payment shall be made at the time any such
employee so terminating his or her service enters on to
terminal leave.
[3] In the instance of the death of any employee entitled to the
payment herein authorized after the same has accrued,
such payment shall be made to the estate of such decedent
or to such person as may be designated by him or her, in
writing, during his or her lifetime.
(c) Salary to date of retirement.
(d) Reimbursement for unused compensatory time.
(e) Payment for unused personal days.
B. Employees terminating their employment within the meaning of
Subsection A(1) prior to July 1 shall receive 1/2 of the benefits listed in
Subsection A(1)(a) through (d). Employees terminating their
employment within the meaning of Subsection A after July 1 shall
receive the full benefits listed in Subsection A(1)(a) through (d). This
provision shall be effective January 1, 1987.
C. Except as provided in Subsection D hereof, any employee of the
Township retiring or dying or otherwise terminating his or her service
with the Township prior to 25 years of service will be entitled to the
following:
(1) Money value of such vacation as may have been earned by him or
her in the year prior to his or her retirement not taken by him or
her and the money value of that part of the vacation earned by him
or her in the year of his or her retirement.38
37.Editor's Note: Former § 61-39A(1)(b), regarding the money value of holidays, which
previously followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 102-35 UNION CODE § 102-35
82:126
(2) The money value of the unused sick leave days based upon the
salary in the year of the retirement in accordance with Subsection
A(1)(b) above.
(3) Salary to date of termination.
(4) Reimbursement of unused compensatory time.
D. Any employee resigning prior of 15 years of service therewith will be
entitled to the following:
(1) Money value of such vacation as may have been earned by him or
her in the year prior to his or her resignation and not taken by him
or her and the money value of the full term of vacation to which he
or she would be entitled in the year of his or her resignation in
accordance with past practice.
(2) Reimbursement for unused compensatory time.
E. Any employee dismissed from employment with the Township for any
cause whatsoever shall forfeit any and all continuing medical benefits
provided for in this contract.
F. Upon the death of any employee, or upon retirement after 25 years of
service, the Township shall pay to the employee or the employee's
estate, whichever is applicable, the sum of $4,000.
38.Editor's Note: Former § 61-39C(2), regarding the money value of holidays, which
previously followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 102-35 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-35
82:127

ARTICLE V
Confidential Employees and Managerial Executives
[Adopted 2-27-1990 by Ord. No. 4072 (Ch. 61, Art. V of the 1986
Code)]
§ 102-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE — An employee whose functional
responsibility or knowledge in connection with the issues involved in the
collective negotiation process would make his or her membership on any
negotiating unit incompatible with his or her official duties.
MANAGERIAL EXECUTIVE — One who either formulates management
policies and practices or one who is charged with the responsibility of
directing the effectuation of such management policies and practices. The
ability to discipline an employee or to effectively recommend the same will
suffice for this designation.
§ 102-37. Purpose.
Since confidential employees and managerial executives have no statutory
right to join in or participate in an employee labor organization, this article
will provide legislative authorization for salary and benefits pertaining to
those employees.
§ 102-38. Salary increases.
Salary increases will be provided annually to all confidential employees and
managerial executives at a rate at least equal to the rate negotiated by the
Council 8 bargaining unit. Said increases may be provided in the Annual
Municipal Officials Salary Ordinance.39
§ 102-39. Fringe benefits.40
Fringe benefits provided to confidential employees and managerial
executives shall not be less than those provided to all civilian employees
by contract. Confidential employees and managerial executives shall be
entitled to vacation, sick leave, personal leave, bereavement leave, holidays,
jury duty, overtime, retirement incentive bonus and workweek benefits
to the same extent as employees covered under the Council 8 contract.
Should any of these benefits be modified after the approval of this article,
this article will be deemed modified to the same extent as the contract
negotiated by Council 8.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Salaries and Compensation.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 102-36 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-40
82:129
§ 102-40. Grievance procedure.
The grievance procedure for all confidential employees and managerial
executives shall be in accordance with the following steps: Step 1,
department head; Step 2, Township Administrator or designee; Step 3, New
Jersey Department of Personnel. Step 3 is only available to those employees
who are members of the classified service, as defined by the Civil Service
Act and the Merit System Board.
§ 102-40 UNION CODE § 102-40
82:130
ARTICLE VI
Additional Benefits
[Adopted 3-27-1990 by Ord. No. 4080 (Ch. 61, Art. VI of the 1986
Code)]
§ 102-41. Longevity pay.
§ 102-42. Contractual benefits.
Benefits provided to employees by collective bargaining agreement (Council
No. 8) shall not be modified by ordinance. Rather, said benefits shall be
negotiated and incorporated into said agreement and shall only be
incorporated herein by reference to said contract.
§ 102-43. Department of Personnel benefits, rules and regulations.
All benefits, rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of
Personnel or State Legislature which affect municipal employees are herein
incorporated by reference to applicable provisions in the New Jersey
Administrative Code and Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
A. A longevity payment shall be paid as hereinafter fixed and determined.
Such longevity pay is to be considered as additional compensation
based upon the length of service of each Township employee according
to the following schedule: [Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 4467]
Years of Service
Additional Compensation
(percentage of annual salary)
5 2%
10 4%
15 6%
20 10%
24 12%
B. Longevity pay shall not be provided to anyone hired after April 1, 1990.
§ 102-41 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-43
82:131

ARTICLE VII
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5075]
§ 102-44. Eligible Positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 102-45. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 102-46. Exception.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 102-44 hereof
and the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 102-45
hereinabove, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may
determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
A. Municipal Administrator, Assistant Municipal Administrator;
B. Municipal Department Head, Director of Public Works, Director of
Human Resources, Superintendent of Public Works;
C. Township Attorney, Assistant Township Attorney;
D. Municipal Prosecutor;
E. Municipal Court Judge;
F. Board of Adjustment member.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Registered Municipal Clerk;
H. Licensed Uniform Sub-code Inspector; and
I. Principal Public Works Manager:
§ 102-44 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-46
82:133
§ 102-47. Applicability of other provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 102-48. Filing of article.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time;
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process, or is
appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 102-45 hereinabove, and is
in pursuit of the required certification; or
C. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 102-46 UNION CODE § 102-48
82:134
ARTICLE VIII
Retirement Health Benefits
[Adopted 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5190]
§ 102-49. Eligibility.
To receive retiree health benefits from the Township of Union an eligible
retiring nonbargaining unit employee and/or official must meet the
following criteria (unless otherwise expressly provided by personal service
contract, or by law):
§ 102-50. Health plan provided.
§ 102-51. Medicare enrollment.
A. The retiring employee has 25 years or more of service credit in a state
or locally administered retirement system and a period of service of at
least 20 years with the Township of Union at the time of retirement; or
B. The retiring employee is 62 years or older with at least 15 years of
service with the Township; and
C. The retiring employee was eligible for employee medical coverage
during the last five years of his/her employment with the Township; and
D. The employee retires from an employment position with the Township
of Union under "service retirement" as defined by the Public
Employee's Retirement System ("PERS") or the Police and Firemen's
Retirement System ("PFRS").
A. The eligible retiring employee will be enrolled in the plan provided by
the Township with the appropriate status (employee only, employee and
spouse, employee and family, etc.). The Township shall have the right, in
the future, to change, modify or eliminate health insurance plans.
B. If the Township modifies or change in health insurance plans occurs,
any retiree receiving such benefits shall be covered by the health
insurance plan selected by the Township.
A. Any eligible retiree provided medical benefits and who is eligible for
enrollment in Medicare must enroll in and purchase Medicare Part B
coverage, with the cost of such purchase to be reimbursed by the
Township. By law, upon retirement and upon attaining age 65, Medicare
is the primary carrier and the Township's health insurance carrier is
secondary. Reimbursement by the Township for the cost of Medicare
Part B coverage is subject to modification and/or elimination in the
future as the Township deems necessary.
B. If a retiree required to purchase Medicare Part B coverage pursuant to
Subsection A above fails to do so, the Township's insurance carrier shall
be released from paying medical bills incurred while Part B was not in
effect.
§ 102-49 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-52
82:135
§ 102-52. Conflict with other provisions.
To the extent the terms and provisions of this article differ or conflict with
any policy, practice or custom of the Township of Union with respect to
retiree health benefits prior to April 24, 2011, the terms and provisions of
this article shall supplant and supersede any such practice or custom.
§ 102-53. Repealer.
All ordinances, Municipal Code sections and resolutions inconsistent with
the provisions of this article, including but not limited to §§ 102-20 and
102-26 of the Municipal Code, are hereby repealed as to such
inconsistencies and will be modified to reflect the requirements of this
article.
§ 102-52 UNION CODE § 102-53
82:136
Chapter 109
PUBLIC SAFETY, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 5.
Offices and employees — See Ch. 93.
Personnel benefits — See Ch. 102.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 79.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 130.
Alarms — See Ch. 156.
Fees for documents — See Ch. 268.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 277.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
§ 102-53 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 102-53
82:137

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 109-1. Creation.
There is hereby created and established within the organizational structure
of the Township of Union, in the County of Union, a Department of Public
Safety.
§ 109-2. Composition. [Amended 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210;
2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 4229; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 12-9-2008
by Ord. No. 5078; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
The Department shall consist of three divisions, namely the Division of
Police, the Division of Fire and the Division of Administration. The Division
of Police shall be operated under the control of the Police Director and the
Division of Fire shall be operated under the direction and control of a Chief.
The Division of Administration shall be operated under the direction and
control of the Director of Public Safety. These divisions shall be comprised
of as many officers, patrolmen, firefighters, civilians, part-paid personnel
and/or volunteers as may be directed by the Township Committee. Further
allocations of duties into respective bureaus or assignments shall be
determined as needs require, in the discretion of the Police Director or Fire
Chief regarding the Police and Fire Divisions and the Director of Public
Safety regarding the Administrative Division, except that the Director shall
not have assignment powers regarding sworn personnel.
§ 109-3. Director. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4371; 12-9-2008
by Ord. No. 5078]
The Director of the Public Safety shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
Township Committee and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Township
Committee. The Director may be a full-time or contract employee of the
Township. The Director shall be knowledgeable, by reason of education and
experience, in administering a department of the size, type and complexity
of the Department of Public Safety. Direct experience in one of the
disciplines included in the Department is required. In the absence of a
Director, the Township Administrator will assume the administrative duties
of the Director.
§ 109-4. Administration; chain of command. [Amended 2-12-1991
by Ord. No. 4134; 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 2-9-1993 by Ord. No.
4229; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. 5033]
A. The Police Director is designated hereby as the appropriate authority
and shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Division of
Police, including the promulgation and adoption of the rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Division and for the
discipline of its members. [Amended 12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5078]
§ 109-1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-4
82:139
§ 109-5. Responsibilities of Director. [Amended 2-12-1991 by Ord.
No. 4134; 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 4229;
2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
The Fire and Administrative Divisions and all their personnel shall be
under the direction of the Director of Public Safety, subject to the terms
of this chapter and applicable state law and such rules and regulations as
may from time to time be promulgated by the Township Committee with
reference to the discipline of members of the Divisions, the training and
efficiency of the personnel thereof and the use and care of equipment and
apparatus. The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to administer
and enforce such rules as may be delegated, except that he may delegate, in
his discretion, such administration and enforcement thereof to the Division
head. The rules, as herein authorized, and all other Division ordinances,
rules and regulations and orders, both verbal and written, shall apply to all
paid personnel, but also to all volunteers and civilian personnel. The Police
Division shall report to the Director of Public Safety on routine personnel
B. The Appropriate Authority, or his/her designee, shall sit as Hearing
Officer for the Township on any complaint against a permanent or
probationary police officer charging violation of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147, or
N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.3, or violation of the internal rules and regulations of the
Police Department. In the event the Appropriate Authority does not act
as Hearing Officer, the individual so designated to hear the disciplinary
matter shall, at the conclusion of the hearing, forward his/her findings
and recommendations to the Appropriate Authority, who shall make the
final determination. The Appropriate Authority's decision shall be
reviewable as provided by N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.8, as amended from time to
time, or through a collective negotiations agreement procedure. In the
event an individual not employed by the Township is considered by the
Appropriate Authority to act as the Hearing Officer, the alternate
Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
C. The Division of Police shall be under the supervision and control of the
Police Director and the Division of Fire shall be under the supervision
and control of a Chief. The Chief of Fire shall implement the policies
established by the Director of Public Safety and be accountable to the
Director of Public Safety, who in turn shall report to the Township
Committee through the Township Administrator. The Police Director
shall implement the policies established by the Township Committee,
and be accountable to and report to the Township Committee. The
Division of Administration shall be under the supervision and control of
the Director of Public Safety, who in turn shall report to the Township
Committee through the Township Administrator. [Amended
12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5078; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
D. The second in command of the Police Division shall be the Deputy Chief
of Police, and the second in command of the Fire Division shall be the
Deputy Chief of the Fire Division. The Deputy Chief of each division
shall perform such duties as are assigned to him or her by the Chief.
§ 109-4 UNION CODE § 109-5
82:140
matters, budgetary issues and all other non-police matters necessary for the
internal administrative functions for the operation of local government. In
order to carry out these responsibilities, the Director of Public Safety may:
A. Direct the preparation of annual budget requests to the Township
Administrator and monitor budget expenditures.
B. Coordinate the preparation and submission of monthly and annual
reports, when appropriate.
C. Coordinate training of the Divisions in a variety of matters with respect
to the duties of said Divisions.
D. Coordinate drills with any or all Divisions.
E. Develop plans and programs for dealing with public safety issues and
emergency situations.
F. Keep records and review and analyze the performance of all Divisions of
the Department.
G. Coordinate emergency activities with the Department of Emergency
Management.
H. Direct the preparation of quarterly financial status reports.
I. Keep the Township Administrator advised of significant issues affecting
the Department.
J. Communicate the Township Committee's goals and objectives to the
Department.
K. Develop the long-term capital planning needs for the Department.
L. Facilitate the setting of goals and objectives for the Department.
M. Serve as an advocate for the departmental needs to the Township
Administrator.
N. Interface with area departments and represent the Township at
professional conferences.
O. Identify new technologies and the implementation of new approaches to
law enforcement and fire services.
P. Facilitate resolution of problems which cannot be resolved within or
between the Police and Fire Divisions.
Q. Coordinate research and development necessary for policy formulation.
R. Perform such other duties as shall be assigned by the Township
Administrator.
§ 109-5 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-6
82:141
§ 109-6. Designation of Commissioners; duties.
Annually, the Township Committee shall designate one of its members to
be Commissioner of the Division of Police and one to be Commissioner
of the Division of Fire. Subject to administrative control and practice, the
Commissioner shall become knowledgeable about the general functioning
of the Division and act as a liaison between the Division, Department and
the Township Committee.
§ 109-6 UNION CODE § 109-6
82:142
ARTICLE II
Division of Police
§ 109-7. Establishment; preparedness.
§ 109-8. Maintenance and support.
Said Division shall be maintained and supported through appropriation to
be made by the Township Committee out of general funds of the Township
and such other fund as may be mandated by New Jersey state statutes
and/or regulations set forth by the Township Committee of the Township of
Union, in the County of Union, New Jersey. Any such funds shall be included
in the budget under the caption "Department of Public Safety."
§ 109-9. Composition. [Amended 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. 5033;
12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5078; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
The Police Division shall consist of one Police Director, one Deputy Chief,
no more than three captains, seven lieutenants, 19 sergeants, 108 patrol
officers and as many civilians as the Township Committee deems necessary.
Composition of the Division may be changed from time to time, as required,
in accordance with law.
§ 109-10. Police Director. [Added 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 512741]
The duties of supervising and establishing the policies for the operation of
the Police Department and such other duties and responsibilities as created
by this article are hereby established. The Police Director shall constitute
the appropriate authority in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 109-10.1. Appointment: removal of Police Director. [Added
2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
A. There is hereby established a Division of Police in the Department of
Public Safety, the official title of which shall be the "Police Division of
the Township of Union."
B. Every member of the police force shall, at all times, remain in a state of
physical and mental preparedness, allowing no other calling or
business to interfere with said preparedness. Although certain hours
are allotted to the members for the performance of duty on ordinary
occasions, at all times each member must be prepared to act
immediately on notice that his or her services are required.
A. The Police Director shall be appointed by the Township Committee and
shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body.
B. Removal from office.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of §§ 109-11 through
109-15 as §§ 109-12 through 109-16, respectively.
§ 109-7 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-10.1
82:143
§ 109-10.2. Salary of Police Director. [Added 2-23-2010 by Ord. No.
5127]
The salary of the Police Director shall be as set forth in a salary ordinance
adopted by the Township Committee as such ordinance shall be amended
from time to time.
§ 109-10.3. Responsibilities of Police Director.
The Police Director shall be charged with the duties of supervising and
establishing the policies for the operation of the Police Department and
shall be directly responsible to the Township Committee for the efficiency
and operation of the Police Department.
§ 109-10.4. Powers and duties of Police Director. [Added 2-23-2010
by Ord. No. 5127]
The Police Director shall be the executive officer of the Police Department
and, under the supervision of the Township Committee, shall:
(1) The Police Director may be removed from office at anytime, with or
without cause; "for cause" is defined as:
(a) Failure to perform the duties of the Police Director as defined
in this article.
(b) Mental and/or physical incompetence to perform the duties of
the position of Police Director.
(c) Conviction of a felony.
(2) If the Police Director is notified that he is to be removed for cause,
he may request a public hearing which shall be held not earlier
than 15 days nor later than 30 days after his submission of his
request to the office of the Township Administrator. Within five
days after the submission of a request for a public hearing, the
specification of charges shall be supplied to the Police Director.
A. Exercise such powers as set forth in the applicable statutes, which shall
specifically include the powers granted to the appropriate authority,
who shall be the Police Director, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118,
including but not limited to promulgation and adoption of rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department and discipline
of its members.
B. Be responsible for the efficiency and day-to-day operations of the Police
Department and be the person to whom the Deputy Chief of Police shall
directly report.
C. Provide recommendations to the Township Administrator and the
Township Committee for the establishment of ordinances to assist in the
governance and management of the Police Department.
§ 109-10.1 UNION CODE § 109-10.4
82:144
§ 109-10.5. Maintenance of table of organization by Police Director.
[Added 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
A graphic table of organization shall be maintained by the Police Director
to show the divisional structure of the Police Department, subject to the
approval of the Township Committee. The function and duties of each
position in the table of organization shall be defined by policies established
by the Police Director and be in accordance with the job description for each
position.
§ 109-10.6. Policies of Police Director. [Added 2-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 5127]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Police Director shall issue any
operations orders, general orders or standard operating procedures or
policies as the Director deems necessary for the efficiency and operation of
the Police Department.
§ 109-11. Bureau of Parking established.
There is hereby created and established a Bureau of Parking within the
Division of Police in the Township of Union in the County of Union.
D. Provide monthly reports to the Township Administrator and Township
Committee concerning the state of the Police Department during the
preceding month in such form as shall be prescribed by the Township
Administrator. The Director shall make such other reports as may be
requested by the Township Committee.
E. Issue special emergency directives, as necessary, to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the municipality in an emergency.
F. Receive daily reports or other periodic reports, as designated by the
Police Director, from the Deputy Chief and Captains of Police, including
but not limited to:
(1) Budget and expenses.
(2) Manpower allocations, including overtime, vacation, sick and
compensatory time accumulation and usage reports for all
personnel, as well as the schedules of the Deputy Chief and
Captains of Police.
(3) Accident reports.
(4) Incident reports.
(5) Personnel-related issues.
§ 109-10.4 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-12
82:145
§ 109-12. Supervision of Bureau of Parking. [Amended 8-11-1992 by
Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No.
5127]
The Bureau of Parking shall operate under the supervision and direction
of the Police Director or his designee. All parking-related functions, duties,
responsibilities and programs shall be as directed by the Police Director or
his designee.
§ 109-13. Responsibilities of Bureau of Parking.
The Police Division shall be charged with the responsibility of the operation
of, but not limited thereby, the following functions and services within the
Bureau of Parking:
§ 109-14. Positions and duties of Bureau of Parking enumerated.
A. Supervise and maintain all vehicle parking areas under the jurisdiction
of the Township of Union.
B. Supervise and direct all personnel assigned to the Bureau of Parking.
C. Prepare, maintain and preserve all necessary records pertaining to the
Bureau of Parking.
D. Conduct all investigations, surveys and reports directed by the
Township Committee or Municipal Administrator.
E. Perform the various tasks involved in the purchase, installation,
removal, repair, maintenance and adjustment of parking meters and
appurtenances.
F. Perform the various tasks involved in the purchase, installation,
removal, repair and maintenance and signage and appurtenances
associated with vehicle parking.
G. Provide for the proper collection, safeguarding and reporting of all
parking meter fees.
H. Provide for the enforcement of all parking regulations pertaining to
both on- and off-street parking.
I. Prepare weekly and monthly financial and annual reports on the
activities of the Bureau of Parking furnishing the same to the Township
Committee and Municipal Administrator.
A. The Bureau of Parking shall be comprised of the following positions:
(1) One senior parking meter collector and repairer.
(2) Three parking enforcement officers.
§ 109-12 UNION CODE § 109-14
82:146
§ 109-15. Appointments; residency.
The Township Administrator shall appoint said officers, personnel and
callmen subject to the provisions of the statutes relating to such
appointments in municipalities operating under the New Jersey Civil
Service Act and in accordance with all New Jersey state statutes governing
such appointments. The Township shall use residency as of the date of
appointment in addition to residency as of the closing date of the
examination as the criteria for determining residency for purposes of
appointment to the position of police officer or civilian.
§ 109-16. Rules and regulations. [Amended 8-11-1992 by Ord. No.
4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 512742]
The Division of Police and all its personnel shall be under the control of the
Police Director of the Police Division and subject to the terms of this chapter
and such rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated
by the Police Director of the Township of Union with reference to the
discipline of the members of the Department, the training and efficiency
of the personnel thereof and the use and care of equipment. The rules, as
herein authorized, and all other Police Department ordinances, rules and
regulations and departmental orders, both verbal and written, shall apply to
all personnel volunteers, special police and personnel working jobs in blue.
§ 109-17. Deputy Chief. [Added 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 512743]
The Deputy Chief shall be the second in command of the Police Division and
shall perform such duties as assigned to him or her by the Police Director,
and shall enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations and policies of the
Police Division.
§ 109-18. Captain. [Amended 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
The Captain is responsible to the Chief of the Police Division in command of
his bureau or division and shall enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations
and policies of the Public Safety Department.
§ 109-19. Lieutenant.
The Lieutenant is responsible to the Captain in command of his bureau,
division or assignment.
B. The duties and responsibilities of said positions shall be those
promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Personnel rules or by
order of the Public Safety Director.
42.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 109-16, Chief of Police Division, as
amended.
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of §§ 109-16 through
109-39.1 as §§ 109-17 through 109-39.2, respectively.
§ 109-14 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-20
82:147
§ 109-20. Sergeant.
The Sergeant is responsible to the Lieutenant who is designated to oversee
the particular project on which the Sergeant is working. If no Lieutenant
is designated, the next higher available rank will oversee the Sergeant and
will be the officer to whom the Sergeant will report.
§ 109-21. Police officers.
Police officers are responsible to their assigned supervisor and are
responsible for carrying out their assigned police functions in accordance
with departmental rules and regulations and laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 109-22. Reporting to assigned officers.
In some instances, lower ranks will not report to the next higher rank. In
those instances where Department requirements so dictate, lower ranks
will report to the officer they are assigned to report to.
§ 109-23. Terms of office; hours and compensation; conditions of
employment.
The terms of office of the officers of the Police Division shall be fixed
by a resolution of the Township Committee, except when such term is
otherwise regulated by laws applying to municipalities operating under
the New Jersey Civil Service Act. The Township Committee shall, either
by resolution, ordinance or contractually, fix the hours of duty and
compensation of the officers, patrolmen and civilians and shall also
determine the conditions of employment in accordance with all applicable
laws and contracted agreements.
§ 109-24. Identification cards and badges.
Identification cards and/or badges designating office and/or rank shall be
furnished to all personnel of the Police Division.
§ 109-25. Notification of resignation or retirement. [Amended
2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
A member resigning or retiring must notify the Police Director and the
Township Administrator, in writing, at least 14 days in advance. Anticipated
retirements must be reported to the Director and Township Administrator
six months in advance if known to the retiree.
§ 109-26. Policies and rules and regulations. [Amended 11-27-2007
by Ord. No. 5033]
All employees of the Police Division shall obey all Township policies,
Department policies and Department rules and regulations.
§ 109-20 UNION CODE § 109-27
82:148
§ 109-27. Disciplinary action; procedure. [Amended 8-11-1992 by
Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 11-27-2007 by Ord. No.
5033; 12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5078; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
§ 109-28. Suspension, demotion or dismissal. [Amended 11-27-2007
by Ord. No. 5033; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
All employees of the Division are subject to the discipline in § 109-27, which
shall be handled in accordance with Police Department policy on minor
discipline. In addition to minor discipline, all Division employees shall be
subject to suspension of greater than five days, demotion or dismissal from
the Division upon notice and hearing before the Police Director or his or her
designee, in accordance with the procedures of the New Jersey Department
of Personnel.
A. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter or in any
amendments or supplements thereof or in the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, the Township Committee, by the adoption of this section,
hereby delegates to the Police Director of the Police Division the
authority to discipline members of said Division and to impose
punishment in individual instances in his discretion in the following
categories:
(1) Verbal reprimand.
(2) Written reprimand.
(3) Suspension of not more than five days without pay.
(4) Fines of not more than the equivalent of five days' pay, in
accordance with applicable Department of Personnel rules.
B. A report of all minor suspensions taken pursuant to this section shall be
submitted by the Police Director to the Township Administrator and the
Township Committee. The Township Administrator shall forward such
reports as are required by law to the New Jersey Department of
Personnel.
C. Terminations, demotions, suspensions in excess of five days and fines
exceeding the equivalent of five days' pay may be issued by the Police
Director, with the approval of the Township Committee and forwarded
to the Township Administrator, who shall forward a copy to the New
Jersey Department of Personnel. Hearings on penalties greater than
five days shall be conducted by the Police Director or his or her
designee, as set forth in § 109-4.
D. Any disciplinary actions not herein delineated shall be approved by the
Township Committee.
§ 109-27 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-29
82:149
§ 109-29. Conduct and responsibilities.
Every member of the Township of Union Police Division is expected to
operate in a highly self-disciplined manner and is responsible to regulate
his own conduct in a positive, productive and mature way. It is the
responsibility of all members of the Police Division to become familiar with
all rules and regulations as well as all general and special orders governing
the terms and conditions of their employment. All rules, regulations and
orders, as well as the policy and procedures manual of the Township of
Union, shall be obeyed by every employee at all times.
§ 109-30. Special police force established; officers. [Amended
7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 5642]
There is hereby established a special police force in the Township of Union
in the County of Union. Such a force may consist of Class One, Class Two
and Class Three special law enforcement officers defined as follows:
§ 109-31. Appointment of special law enforcement officers;
qualifications; revocation.
A. Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Class One officers
shall have the power to issue summonses, violations of municipal
ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The use of
a firearm by an officer of this class shall be strictly prohibited, and no
Class One officer shall be assigned any duties which may require the
carrying or use of a firearm.
B. Class Two. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent regularly appointed
full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by any officer of this class
shall be authorized only after the officer has been fully certified as
successfully completing training as prescribed by the Police Training
Commission of the State of New Jersey.
C. Class Three. See § 109-31.1.
A. The governing body of the Township of Union in the County of Union
may appoint such Class One and Class Two special law enforcement
officers for terms not to exceed one year. The number of Class Two
special police officer appointments shall not exceed 60 persons.
B. No person may be appointed as a special law enforcement officer unless
the person:
(1) Is a resident of the Township of Union for at least one year
preceding such appointment, except that the Chief of the Police
Division may, at his discretion, waive such residency requirement if
the Chief of the Police Division deems it to be in the best interest of
the Township of Union. [Amended 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210;
3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
§ 109-29 UNION CODE § 109-31
82:150
§ 109-31.1. Appointment of special law enforcement officers-Class
Three; qualifications; revocation. [Added 7-23-2019 by Ord. No.
5642]
(2) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent.
(3) Is sound in body and of good health.
(4) Is of good moral character.
(5) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him unfit to perform the duties of his office.
(6) Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing
required of all full-time police officers in the Township of Union.
C. Every applicant for the position of special law enforcement officer
appointed shall have fingerprints taken, which shall be filed with the
Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
D. Before any special law enforcement officer is appointed, the Chief of the
Police Division shall ascertain the eligibility and qualifications of the
applicant and report these determinations in writing to the Township
Committee. [Amended 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by
Ord. No. 4303]
E. The appointment of a special law enforcement officer may be revoked
for cause after adequate hearing. A special law enforcement officer
whose appointment has been revoked will not be eligible for
reappointment for at least two years.
A. Creation of position. In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1986, c.2,
of the New Jersey Statutes, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., there is
hereby created the position of special law enforcement officer Class
Three for the Township of Union in the County of Union.
B. Qualifications. In order to be eligible for appointment to the position of
a Special Law Enforcement Officer Class Three, each applicant must:
(1) Be a resident of this state during the term of appointment;
(2) Be able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and have a high school diploma or its equivalent;
(3) Be sound in body and of good health;
(4) Be of good moral character;
(5) Have not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him/her unfit to perform the duties of this
position;
§ 109-31 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-31.1
82:151
(6) Have successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is
required of all full-time police officers in this municipality;
(7) Be a retired law enforcement officer who is less than 65 years of
age; for the purposes of this subsection, a law enforcement officer
shall not be considered retired if the officer's return to employment
violates any federal or state law or regulation which would deem
the officer's retirement as not being bona fide;
(8) Have served as a duly qualified, fully trained, full-time officer in any
municipality or county of this state or as a member of the State
Police and was separated from that prior service in good standing:
(9) Be physically capable of performing the functions of the position,
determined in accordance with Police Training Commission
guidelines;
(10) Possess a New Jersey Police Training Commission basic police
officer certification or New Jersey, State Police Academy
certification;
(11) Have completed the training course for safe schools resource
officers developed pursuant to Subsection a of Section 2 of P.L.
2005. c.276 (N.J.S.A. 52:17B-71.8).
C. Classification; powers and duties. The classification of the special law
enforcement officers shall be based upon the duties to be performed by
said officers and are established as follows:
(1) Special law enforcement Class Three officers shall be authorized to
exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent,
regularly appointed full-time police officer while providing security
at a public school on the school premises during hours when the
public school is normally in session or when it is occupied by public
school students or their teachers. While on duty in the jurisdiction
of employment, an officer may respond to offenses or emergencies
off school grounds if they occur in the officer's presence while
traveling to a school facility, but an officer shall not otherwise be
dispatched or dedicated to any assignment off school property. The
use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be authorized
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection b of Section 7 of P.L. 1985,
c.439 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14). An officer of this class shall not be
authorized to carry a firearm while off duty unless the officer
complies with the requirements set forth in Subsection 1 of N.J.S.A.
2C:39-6 authorizing a retired law enforcement officer to carry a
firearm.
(2) A special law enforcmenet class Three officer shall be employed
only to assist the Police Department with security duties at public
schools and shall not supplant a law enforcement officer employed
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 18A:17-43 or a safe schools
§ 109-31.1 UNION CODE § 109-31.1
82:152
§ 109-32. Training; issuance of firearms.
No person may commence his duties as a special law enforcement officer
unless he has successfully completed a course of training approved by
the Police Training Commission, and no special law enforcement officer
may be issued a firearm unless he has successfully completed the basic
firearms course approved by the Police Training Commission for permanent
regularly appointed police officers. A special law enforcement officer cannot
be reappointed unless he has successfully completed the Division's firearms
requalification requirements. No special law enforcement officer shall carry
a firearm when off duty.
resource officer employed pursuant to the provisions of Section 3
of P.L. 2005, c.276 (N.J.S.A. 18A:17-43.1).
(3) A special law enforcement Class Three officer appointed pursuant
to the provisions of P.L. 1985, c.439 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.)
shall not, based on this appointment, be eligible for health care
benefits or enrollment in any state-administered retirement
system.
(4) Payment shall be based on an hourly rate.
D. Compliance with legislation of Police Department. All duly appointed
special law enforcement officers Class Three shall be subject to the
rules and regulations governing the Police Department of the Township
of Union as adopted by previous ordinances, including, by description
but not limitation, the Standard Operating Procedures Police Manual of
the Township of Union.
E. Supervision and direction.
(1) A special law enforcement officer Class Three shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Chief of Police of the Police
Division or his designee and shall perform his/her duties only in the
Township of Union, unless in fresh pursuit of any person pursuant
to Chapter 156 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes.
(2) The special law enforcement Class Three officer shall comply with
the rules and regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of
the permanent, regularly appointed police officers of the Police
Division, as well as any rules and regulations applicable to the
conduct and decorum of special officers.
F. Training. No special law enforcement officer Class Three shall
commence his/her duties until he/she has completed the training as
required under N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11, as amended from time to time.
G. Uniforms. The uniform of special law enforcement officer Class Three
shall be determined by the Chief of Police and shall be in compliance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.12.
§ 109-31.1 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-33
82:153
§ 109-33. Carrying of firearms; performance of duties. [Amended
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
No special law enforcement officer may carry a firearm except while
engaged in the actual performance of the officer's official duties and when
specifically authorized by the Chief of the Police Division or his designee.
A special law enforcement officer shall perform his duties only within
the Township of Union, unless in fresh pursuit of any person pursuant to
Chapter 156 of Title 2A of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 109-34. Conduct; construal of appointment.
§ 109-35. Special police force official insignia or badge. [Amended
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210]
Members of such special police force, while on active duty, shall wear a
uniform designed so as to clearly distinguish them from the uniforms of fulltime
members of the regular police force. They shall also bear an official
insignia or badge of authority indicating membership in said special police
force.
§ 109-36. Supervision and control of special police force. [Amended
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 2-23-2010
by Ord. No. 5127]
Supervision and control of the special police force shall be vested in an
assigned officer in charge, who shall be a member of the regular Police
Department and who shall be appointed by and subject to the direction of
the Police Director of the Police Division or his designee.
§ 109-37. Composition of special police force. [Amended 8-11-1992
by Ord. No. 4210]
The special police force shall consist of only special law enforcement
officers. There shall be no rank structure in said special police force.
§ 109-38. Rules and regulations of special police force. [Amended
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 2-23-2010
by Ord. No. 5127]
All members of the special police force shall be subject to all applicable
rules and regulations of the Department as may be promulgated from time
to time by the Police Director.
A. Every such member of the special police force shall comply with the
rules and regulations governing the conduct and decorum of the
regular members of the Police Division.
B. Appointment as a special police officer will not be construed to
constitute the officer as a member of the regular Police Division.
§ 109-33 UNION CODE § 109-39
82:154
§ 109-39. (Reserved)44
§ 109-39.1. Hours of duty of special police force. [Amended
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303; 2-23-2010
by Ord. No. 5127]
All special law enforcement officers shall be prepared to serve the Township
of Union as such in an official capacity by devoting at least four hours
weekly to police work of the Township and such additional assignments as
they may be called upon to perform as designated by the Police Director.
Such hours shall be served, whenever possible, in accordance with an
assigned schedule each and every week rather than upon a cumulative
basis. Relief from Township duty hours shall be had only upon application,
in writing, to the Police Director.
§ 109-39.2. Off-duty employment. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No.
4941; amended 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 5113; 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
5117; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5127]
A. For the convenience of those persons and entities which utilize the
services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Township of Union
Police Department, and to authorize the outside employment of
municipal police while off-duty, the Township of Union hereby
establishes a policy regarding the use of said officers in compliance
with N.J.S.A. 45:19-9 et seq., as amended by the Security Officers
Registration Act, P.L. 2004, c. 134.
(1) Members of the Township of Union Police Department, at their
option, shall be permitted to accept police-related employment for
private employers, who are separate and independent from the
Township of Union, only during off-duty hours and at such time as
will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly
scheduled or emergency duty of the Township.
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Police Director or his or her designee,
which approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of the Police
Director or his or her designee, such employment is necessary and
would not be inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good
reputation of the Police Department and would not unreasonably
endanger or threaten the safety of the officer or officers who are to
perform the work.
B. Trust Account.
(1) To assure the timely payment of wages to police officers who
perform off-duty services, and to meet the requirements of the Fair
Labor Standards Act, the Township of Union has established a trust
44.Editor’s Note: Former § 109-39, Work in blue, as amended, was repealed 4-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 5578.
§ 109-39 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-39.2
82:155
fund known as the "Off-Duty Employment Trust Account," which
trust fund is dedicated for the receipt of fees collected from private
persons or entities for the payment to police officers for off-duty
or outside employment services. The Off-Duty Employment Trust
Account shall be administered by the Accounts Office of the
Township of Union, which shall make a report to the Township
Committee every 90 days regarding said account.
(2) Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Township of Union shall estimate the
number of hours such law enforcement services are required,
which estimate shall be approved in writing by the Police Director
or his or her designee, and upon Police Director approval, a copy of
said approval shall be forwarded to the Accounts Office of the
Township of Union. The person or entity requesting the services
shall then forward payment for services for the total estimated
hours of service, the rates of compensation and administrative fees
as set forth in Subsection D to the Accounts Office for deposit in a
Trust Account within the Off-Duty Employment Trust Account.
(3) In any instance where the number of hours required is unknown
and cannot be reasonably estimated, or is anticipated to be in
excess of 10 days, the person or entity requesting the services of an
off-duty law enforcement officer shall deposit an amount sufficient
to cover the rate of compensation and administrative fees set forth
in Subsection D for the equivalent of 10 days prior to the
commencement of any work. Any unused portion of the deposit
shall be returned or credited against the final amount owed.
(4) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Police Director or his or her designee
shall verify that the balance in the Trust Account of the person or
entity requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation
and fees for the number of hours specified in the request for
services. The Police Director or his or her designee shall not post a
request for services from any person or entity unless all fees and
compensation required in the manner described above have been
deposited in the Off-Duty Employment Trust Account. All payments
must be remitted directly to the Township for said account. No
officer shall be paid directly by any employer for requested services
nor provide any such services for more hours than are specified in
the request for services.
(5) In the event that the funds in such a Trust Account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease,
and further requests for further or future services shall not be
performed or posted until additional funds have been deposited in
the Trust Account in the manner prescribed above. In the event of
an unforeseen emergency situation that would require an officer to
remain beyond the time for which funds have been posted, the
Police Director or his or her designee may waive the requirement
§ 109-39.2 UNION CODE § 109-39.2
82:156
for posting additional funds after the first 10 hours for any person
or entity exhibiting a previous satisfactory payment history.
However, payment for the additional hours shall be made by the
person or entity requiring the extended service within 48 hours.
(6) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the Trust Account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
(7) Exemption. All public utility companies that are under the
jurisdiction of, and regulated by, the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities are exempt from the provisions set forth in this section
requiring advance payment to the Trust Account; provided,
however, that there are no amounts previously due that are
outstanding for a period in excess of 30 days. Any such delinquent
balances shall require advance payment of the amount outstanding
prior to any officer engaging in any further off-duty assignments.
C. Requests for services.
(1) All requests to the Township for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers in the Township of Union Police Department
for a period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Police
Director or his or her designee for posting at least 10 days before
such services are required. Any law enforcement officers, when so
employed by private employers, shall be compensated at the rate
set forth in Subsection D hereafter.
(2) All requests to the Township for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers in the Township of Union Police Department
for a period of less than one week shall be forwarded to the Police
Director or his or her designee for posting as soon as practicable,
but in no event less than 24 hours before such services are
required, except in emergency situations. Any law enforcement
officers, when so employed by private employers, shall be
compensated at the rates set forth in Subsection D hereafter.
(3) In emergency situations, requests to the Township for the services
of off-duty law enforcement officers in the Township of Union Police
Department shall be made as necessary to the Police Director or his
or her designee, who shall make every effort to accommodate such
request in a reasonable manner in his or her discretion. Any law
enforcement officers, when so employed by private employers,
shall be compensated at the rates set forth in Subsection D
hereafter.
D. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for services. Rates
of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers are established as follows: [Amended 9-8-2010
by Ord. No. 5159; 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 5578]
§ 109-39.2 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-39.2
82:157
(1) Rate of compensation for police officer for inside employment: $30
per hour, gross pay before taxes. An additional $10 per hour shall
be added for inside employment on the following days: Christmas
Eve, Christmas, Easter, Black Friday, Thanksgiving, New Year's
Eve, New Year's Day and July 4.
(2) Rate of compensation for police officer for construction: $65 per
hour, gross pay before taxes. An additional $10 per hour shall be
added for construction jobs scheduled less than 24 hours in
advance (emergency jobs), or jobs scheduled for the weekends or
jobs that are scheduled to commence after 1,900 hours.
(3) Rate of compensation for traffic duty: $45 per hour, gross pay
before taxes.
(4) Rate of compensation for security for Board of Education: $40 per
hour, gross pay before taxes.
(5) Rate of compensation for strike duty: $50 per hour, gross pay
before taxes.
(6) Any detail involving the services of four or more police officers will
require a supervisor who shall receive compensation at an
additional $2 per hour, gross pay before taxes, above the hourly
rate of police officers assigned to said details.
(7) The off-duty compensation of work in blue for grants provided by
the State of New Jersey Division of Highway Traffic Safety, for such
programs known as "Click it or Ticket," "Pedestrian Safety," DWI,
and other similar programs promulgated by the state, should be
fixed at a rate of $50 per hour or the rate per hour, if set forth in the
terms of the grant.
(8) Additional fee of 10% per officer hour is hereby established to
cover the administrative costs, overhead and out-of-pocket
expenses of the Township of Union. This fee shall not apply to the
Township of Union Board of Education.
(9) All off-duty employment law enforcement officers shall be
guaranteed a minimum of four hours and be compensated for any
fraction thereof or whole hour in addition thereto.
(10)Rate of compensation for usage of a Department vehicle shall be
$30 per hour, except that if the Township of Union is paying for any
road improvement job, such fee shall be waived.
E. Cancellation. In the event that the person or entity requesting the offduty
law enforcement officers fails to contact the Township of Union at
least two hours prior to the scheduled start time to cancel the job, or
the officer works less than four hours and the job is completed, the
officer is entitled to be paid for the minimum of four hours at the rate of
compensation set forth in Subsection D.
§ 109-39.2 UNION CODE § 109-39.2
82:158
F. Public emergency. The Police Director or his or her designee shall have
the authority to order any police officer engaged in off-duty
assignments within the Township to respond to an emergency situation
within the Township of Union. The Police Director or his or her designee
shall also have the right to order any off-duty assignment to be
terminated whenever said assignment creates an unacceptable risk to
the health, safety and welfare of the off-duty officer and/or the citizens
of the Township of Union. In the event that a police officer is assigned to
an emergency situation, the Police Director or his or her designee shall
make note of said off-duty assignment. In any situation where an offduty
police officer is called to an emergency situation, said person shall
not be responsible for the payment of the officer's hourly rate,
administrative fee or any other fees to the Township of Union until such
time as said police officer and/or equipment returns to the assignment
of off-duty employer.
G. The Police Department Policy and Procedures shall be revised to be in
compliance with this section and N.J.S.A. 45:19-9 et seq., as amended
by P.L. 2004, c. 134.
§ 109-39.2 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-39.2
82:159

ARTICLE III
Division of Fire
§ 109-40. Creation.
There is hereby created a Fire Division within the Department of Public
Safety for the Township of Union, in the County of Union, which said
Division will be regulated and maintained pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 109-41. Official name.
The official name of the Division shall be the "Fire Division of the Township
of Union."
§ 109-42. Administrative regulation and control. [Amended
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
The Division of Fire, its officers, members and volunteers shall be under
the control of the Chief. The Chief of the Fire Division is solely responsible
for the day-to-day operations of the Division and shall be responsible to
the Director of Public Safety for carrying out all duties assigned by said
Director, and subject to such rules and regulations that may, from time
to time, be adopted by the Township Committee, either by ordinance or
resolution.
§ 109-43. Maintenance and support.
Said Division shall be maintained and supported through appropriation to
be made by the Township Committee out of general funds of the Township
and such other funds as may be mandated by New Jersey state statutes and/
or regulations as set forth and also by such ordinances and/or resolutions
set forth by the Township Committee of the Township of Union in the County
of Union, New Jersey. Any such funds shall be included in the budget under
the caption "Department of Public Safety."
§ 109-44. Composition.
The Division shall consist of as many companies and fire stations as directed
by the Township Committee. Such companies and stations shall be located
in the manner approved by the Township Committee.
§ 109-45. Manpower levels.
The manpower levels of said Division shall be regulated by resolution of the
Township Committee as appropriate needs require.
§ 109-46. Appointments.
The Township Administrator shall appoint all officers, fire fighters, civilian
personnel and volunteers subject to the provisions of the statutes relating
§ 109-40 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-46
82:161
to such appointments in municipalities operating under the New Jersey
Civil Service Act and shall be in accordance with all New Jersey state
statutes governing such appointments. The Township shall use residency as
of the date of appointment in addition to residency as of the closing date
of the examination as the criteria for determining residency for purposes of
appointment to the position of fire fighter and/or volunteer.
§ 109-47. Rules and regulations. [Amended 8-11-1992 by Ord. No.
4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
The Division, its officers, members and volunteers shall be under the
direction of the Directors of Public Safety and subject to the terms of
this chapter and such rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be
promulgated by the Director of Public Safety of the Township of Union,
with reference to the discipline of the members of the Division and the
various bureaus thereof, the training and efficiency of the personnel thereof
and the use and care of equipment and apparatus. Said Director is hereby
authorized to administer and enforce such rules as may be promulgated
by him, except that he may delegate the administration and enforcement
thereof to the Chiefs of his Department within their respective jurisdictions.
The rules herein authorized and all other Fire Division ordinances, rules and
regulations and orders, both verbal and written, shall not only apply to all
paid personnel but also to all volunteers and civilian personnel.
§ 109-48. Chief of Fire Division. [Amended 8-11-1992 by Ord. No.
4210; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
The Chief of the Fire Division shall be the chief officer solely responsible
for the day-to-day operations of the Division and shall be responsible to
the Director of Public Safety for carrying out all duties assigned by said
Director.
§ 109-49. Battalion Chief. [Amended 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
The Battalion Chief is under direct command of a Chief of the Fire Division
and shall be guided by all rules and regulations promulgated by the Director
of Public Safety and shall enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations and
policies of the Fire Department.
§ 109-50. Captain.
The Captain is responsible to the Battalion Chief in command of his tour
or bureau and also shall enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations and
policies of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 109-51. Lieutenant.
The Lieutenant is responsible to the Chief Officer or the Captain in
command of his tour or division and also shall enforce all ordinances, rules,
regulations and policies of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 109-46 UNION CODE § 109-52
82:162
§ 109-52. Fire fighters.
Any sworn personnel in the Fire Division below the rank of Lieutenant
shall be referred to as "fire fighters," regardless of whether they are First,
Second, Third, Fourth or Fifth Class fire fighters. Such personnel shall
dutifully carry out all orders of a superior officer, regardless of the superior
officer's rank. All fire fighters shall obey all ordinances, rules and
regulations and policies of the Fire Department.
§ 109-53. Terms of office; hours and compensation; conditions of
employment.
The terms of office of the officers of the Fire Division shall be fixed by a
resolution of the Township Committee except when such term is otherwise
regulated by laws applying to municipalities operating under the New
Jersey Civil Service Act. The Township Committee shall, either by
resolution, ordinance or contractually, fix the hours of duty and
compensation of the officers, paid personnel and volunteers and shall also
determine the conditions of employment of volunteers.
§ 109-54. Membership certificates and badges.
Membership certificates and badges designating office and/or rank shall be
furnished to all personnel of the Fire Division.
§ 109-55. Exempt certificates.
Exempt certificates shall be supplied to those members of the Division who
may be entitled to them.
§ 109-56. Notice of resignation or retirement.
A member resigning or retiring must notify the Director of Public Safety and
Township Administrator, in writing, at least 14 days in advance. Anticipated
retirements must be reported to the Director and Township Administrator
six months in advance if known to the retiree.
§ 109-57. Disciplinary action; procedure. [Amended 8-11-1992 by
Ord. No. 4210]
A. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter or in any
amendments or supplements thereof or in the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, the Township Committee, by the adoption of this supplement,45
hereby delegates to the Chief of the Fire Division the authority to
discipline members of said Division and to impose punishment in
individual instances in his discretion in the following categories:
[Amended 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4303]
(1) Verbal reprimand.
45.Editor's Note: "This supplement" refers to the amendment made by Ord. No. 4210,
adopted 8-11-1992.
§ 109-52 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-57
82:163
§ 109-58. Censure, suspension or dismissal.
Any member of the Division, whether officer, fire fighter, volunteer or
civilian, shall be subject to the above discipline and shall be subject to
censure, suspension or dismissal from the Department of Public Safety upon
notice and after hearing before the Township Administrator or his designee
that such person has been found guilty of acts, conduct or omission which,
in the judgment and discretion of the hearing officer, is or are detrimental;
provided, however, that no member shall be dismissed unless he shall first
have been served with a copy of the charges preferred against him and
unless he shall first have been given a full, fair and impartial hearing;
and provided further that any such action by the hearing officer shall
be subject to provisions of the statutes affecting the subject matter in
municipalities operating under the New Jersey Civil Service Act and New
Jersey Department of Personnel Rules and Regulations.
§ 109-59. Conduct and responsibilities.
The following list of directives represents the personal conduct standards
for members of the Township of Union Department of Public Safety. The
basis for these regulations is the following policy: Every member of the
Township of Union Department of Public Safety is expected to operate in
a highly self-disciplined manner and is responsible to regulate his own
conduct in a positive, productive and mature way.
§ 109-60. Directives enumerated.
All members, employees and volunteers shall:
(2) Written reprimand.
(3) Suspension of not more than five days without pay.
(4) Fines of not more than the equivalent of five days' pay, in
accordance with applicable Department of Personnel rules.
(5) Disciplinary demotions. All demotions must be approved by the
Township Administrator.
B. The powers in § 109-57A(1) and (2) above may be delegated to all
personnel holding the rank of Battalion Chief or above.
C. A report of all disciplinary action taken pursuant to this chapter, other
than the powers in § 109-57A(1) and (2) above, shall be submitted to the
Municipal Administrator, who shall forward such reports as are
required by law to the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
D. Terminations, suspensions in excess of five days and fines exceeding the
equivalent of five days' pay shall be issued by the Township
Administrator, who will forward a copy to the New Jersey Department of
Personnel. Hearings on penalties greater than five days shall be
conducted by the Township Administrator or his designee.
§ 109-57 UNION CODE § 109-60
82:164
§ 109-61. Prohibited acts.
Members and volunteers shall not:
A. Follow operations manuals and written directives of both the Fire
Division and the Township of Union.
B. Use their training and capabilities to protect the public at all times,
both on and off duty.
C. Work competently in their positions to cause all Department and
Division programs to operate effectively.
D. Always conduct themselves to reflect credit on the Department and
Division.
E. Supervisors will manage in an effective, considerate manner.
Subordinates will follow instructions in a positive, cooperative manner.
F. Always conduct themselves in a manner that creates good order inside
the Department and Division.
G. Keep themselves informed to do their jobs effectively.
H. Be concerned and protective of each member's welfare.
I. Operate safely and use good judgment.
J. Keep themselves physically fit.
K. Observe the work hours for their position.
L. Obey the law.
M. Be careful of Department equipment and property.
A. Engage in any activity that is detrimental to the Department.
B. Engage in a conflict of interest to the Department or use their position
with the Department for personal gain or influence.
C. Use alcoholic beverages, debilitating drugs or any substance which
could impair their physical or mental capacities while on duty.
D. Fight.
E. Engage in any sexual activity while on duty.
F. Abuse their sick leave.
G. Steal.
H. Engage in any conduct which is unbecoming an employee in the public
service.
§ 109-60 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-61
82:165

ARTICLE IV
Mutual Police Aid
[Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 4131]
§ 109-62. Establishment of agreement; requests for assistance;
costs.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there is hereby established a mutual
aid agreement with all other municipalities in Union County, New
Jersey, who adopt a reciprocal ordinance to provide mutual police aid in
case of emergency. This agreement shall apply whenever the Township
of Union may have an emergency within its boundaries requiring
additional police assistance to protect life and property or to assist in
suppressing a riot or disorder; and whenever another municipality in
this county has enacted a reciprocal ordinance may experience a
similar emergency requiring additional police assistance.
B. The Director of Public Safety or the commanding officer of the Police
Division is authorized to request assistance from the Chief or other
head of the Police Department of another municipality within Union
County to provide aid during and after said emergency.
C. The Director of Public Safety or the commanding officer of the Police
Division of the Township of Union shall provide assistance to another
municipality or municipalities in Union County, making a valid request
to supply such personnel and equipment as required to the extent
possible without endangering person or property within the Township
of Union. The members of the Police Division supplying aid shall have
the same powers, authority, rights and immunities of the members of
the police force of the municipality to which assistance is rendered.
D. The Township of Union shall, upon providing assistance to another
municipality who has enacted a reciprocal mutual aid ordinance,
assume the cost and expense of providing its personnel and equipment
to the requesting municipality, except in such instances when the
requesting municipality receives state or federal aid by way of
reimbursement. In such circumstances, the cost incurred shall be
submitted to the community requesting assistance.
E. Members of the police force of the Township of Union suffering injury,
or their legal representatives, if death results, while rendering
assistance in another municipality, shall be entitled to all such benefits
they would have realized if injury or death had occurred in the
performance of normal duties in the Township of Union.
F. A copy of this article shall be transmitted to the Municipal Clerk of each
municipality within the County of Union no later than five business days
following adoption. The Clerk of the Township of Union shall maintain a
record of all such ordinances adopted by other municipalities within the
County of Union.
§ 109-62 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-62
82:167

ARTICLE V
Division of Administration
[Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 4229]
§ 109-63. Establishment; title.
There is hereby established a Division of Administration in the Department
of Public Safety, the official title of which shall be the "Administrative
Division of the Department of Public Safety."
§ 109-64. Composition.
The Administrative Division of the Department of Public Safety shall consist
of as many personnel as may be directed by the Township Committee.
Composition may be changed from time to time, as required, by resolution
of the Township Committee.
§ 109-65. Responsibilities.
The Administrative Division of the Department of Public Safety shall be
charged with the responsibility of the operation of, but not limited thereby,
the following functions and services within the Department:
§ 109-66. Appointments.
The Township Administrator shall appoint said personnel subject to the
provisions of the statutes relating to such appointments in municipalities
operating under the New Jersey Civil Service Act46 and in accordance with
all New Jersey State statutes governing such appointments. The Township
shall use residency as of the date of appointment in addition to residency
as of the closing date of the examination as the criteria for determining
residency for purposes of appointment.
§ 109-67. Rules and regulations.
The Division of Administration and all its personnel and volunteers shall be
under the control of the Director of Public Safety and subject to the terms
of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may from time to time be
promulgated by the Director of Public Safety of the Township of Union with
reference to the discipline of the members of the Department, the training
and efficiency of the personnel thereof and the use and care of equipment.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to administer and enforce
A. Unclassified records and communications.
B. Support services.
C. Maintenance.
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq.
§ 109-63 LAW, DEPARTMENT OF § 109-67
82:169
such rules as may be promulgated by him, except that he may delegate the
administration and enforcement thereof to his designee.
§ 109-67 UNION CODE § 109-67
82:170
Chapter 113
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreational areas — See Ch. 397.
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 415.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 434.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
Trees — See Ch. 516.
§ 113-1. Creation.
There is hereby created for the Township of Union in the County of Union a
Department of Public Works.
§ 113-2. Functions and duties of Department.
A. Under the supervision of the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works and such deputies and supervisors as may be appointed
thereto, the Department of Public Works shall provide for the proper
and efficient conduct of all public works functions of the Township of
Union and shall provide assistance and services, as may be required
and needed, to all Township departments.
B. Said Department shall be charged with the responsibility of the
operation of, but not limited thereby, the following services:
(1) Issue permits for curb cuts and maintain all records pertaining
thereto and supervise the inspection of all curb construction.
(2) The maintenance and operation of the shade tree program of the
Township.47
(3) All matters relating to the maintenance of public streets and
sidewalks.
(4) Supervision and control of all automotive equipment of the
Department.
(5) Removal of snow.
(6) Cleaning of streets.
(7) Such other duties as may be delegated to said Department by the
governing body or the Township Administrator.
(8) Supervise street openings and issue permits therefor.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 516, Trees.
§ 109-67 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 113-2
113:171
§ 113-3. Superintendent of Public Works; compensation.
§ 113-4. Division of Solid Waste and Recycling.48 [Added 11-24-1987
by Ord. No. 394449]
(9) Maintain and repair all Township streets, bridges, culverts and
drains.
(10) Construct and reconstruct, as directed, streets, roads, culverts and
drains.
(11) Treat road surfaces and resurface streets and roads in accordance
with directions received from the Township Administrator.
(12) Remove leaves from the streets of the Township.
(13) Maintain, repair and clean storm and sanitary sewers, lines and
mains.
(14) Parks and playground maintenance.
(15) The operation, maintenance and repair of public buildings,
excluding library, school buildings, police and fire buildings.
(16) The maintenance of Township-owned property and public grounds.
A. There is hereby created the position of Superintendent of Public Works
in the Department of Public Works, who has the responsibility to
oversee the general operation of the Department of Public Works.
B. Said Superintendent of Public Works shall have a knowledge of
principles, practices, methods and techniques required for directing
and supervising the general work performed by a Municipal Public
Works Department; a knowledge of field and office techniques and
practices; a knowledge of administrative methods, procedures and
techniques; a knowledge of municipal functions, ordinances and
regulations; an ability to prepare reports and interpret policy decisions;
an ability to establish and maintain effective work relationships with
associates, subordinates and the general public.
C. The salary of the Superintendent of Public Works shall be as provided in
Chapter 130, Salaries and Compensation, per annum, payable biweekly
in the same manner as are other municipal employees. [Amended
10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879]
A. There is hereby created for the Township of Union in the County of
Union within the Department of Public Works a Division of Solid Waste
and Recycling.
48.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 462, Solid Waste; Recycling.
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the appointment and salaries of certain
employees.
§ 113-2 UNION CODE § 113-4
113:172
Chapter 117
PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 8. Claims approval and payment — See Ch. 17.
§ 117-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the Participant," namely, Township of Union in the County of
Union.
§ 117-2. Authority to enter agreement.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Chairman of the
Township Committee and the Clerk of the Township of Union, as the case
may be, are hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing
agreement with the County of Union for the purchase of work, materials
B. Said Division shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works and such deputies and supervisors as
may be appointed in connection therewith.
C. Said Division is required to conduct investigations in order to enforce
codes, ordinances and policies relating to the collection, haulage and
disposal of refuse, litter and solid waste. The Division is also required to
conduct investigations and inquiries as to the collection, haulage and
sale of recyclable materials which are collected within the Township of
Union.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the Division to:
(1) Inspect and investigate practices and procedures related to refuse
and recyclable containment, placement, disposal, separation of
recyclables, etc.
(2) Inspect and report on compliance with the terms of the work
contract and Township ordinances and policies.
(3) Investigate complaints regarding solid waste and/or recyclables
and issue summonses for the violation thereof.
(4) Verify weight of all solid waste and recyclables removed from the
Township and reconcile weight slips with monthly payment
vouchers or, in the case of recyclables, reimbursement checks.
(5) Periodically inspect the equipment and vehicles being used by the
contractor to ensure compliance with the contract and ordinances.
§ 113-4 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 117-2
117:173
and supplies and to participate in the County of Union cooperative pricing
system.
§ 117-3. Compliance with statutory provisions.
The county entering into contracts on behalf of the participant shall be
responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts
Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 121
RECREATION, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 397. Recreational facilities — See Ch. 415.
§ 121-1. Creation of Department.
There is hereby created a Department of Recreation.
§ 121-2. Creation of position of Superintendent of Recreation.
Pursuant to New Jersey Department of Personnel rules, the position of
Superintendent of Recreation is hereby created.
§ 121-3. Control of Department.
The Department of Recreation shall be under the control of the Township
Administrator and subject to such rules and regulations that may, from time
to time, be adopted by the Township Committee by either ordinance or
resolution.
§ 121-4. Organization and management.
Subject to budgetary appropriations and direction of the Township
Administrator, the Superintendent of Recreation shall coordinate and
supervise daily operations.
§ 121-5. Duties and responsibilities.
The Superintendent of Recreation shall administer and control the following
functions thereto:
A. Plan, promote, organize and administer a comprehensive recreation
service for the community.
B. Establish administrative procedures to provide maximum service at a
reasonable cost.
§ 117-2 UNION CODE § 121-5
121:174
Chapter 124
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 93. Department of Public Safety residency
requirements — See Ch. 109.
§ 124-1. Residency requirements for municipal employees and
officials; exemptions granted. [Amended 2-25-1975 by Ord. No.
2953; 5-24-1983 by Ord. No. 3631]
C. Review effectiveness of the recreation service.
D. Study community recreation needs and develop immediate and longrange
plans to meet these needs.
E. Establish and maintain cooperative planning and working relationships
with other local community agencies and interested individuals.
F. Organize, train and supervise subordinates and provide them with
needed advice and assistance.
G. Prepare budget estimates and maintain records of expenditures.
H. Stimulate public interest in recreation activities.
I. Establish and maintain records of recreation activities and services,
correspondence, personnel and property.
J. Direct the acquisition, design, construction and operation of
recreational facilities and arrange for their maintenance and operation.
A. All full-time municipal officials and employees, other than those
exempted by statute, appointed or employed subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter, must be, as of the date of such
appointment or employment, bona fide residents of the Township of
Union in the County of Union. Such appointees or employees must
continue as such bona fide residents during their entire employment or
appointment with the Township of Union. [Amended 3-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 4431; 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 4471]
B. The Township Committee may grant individual exemptions to the
requirements of this chapter in the instance of specialized or
professional positions upon a determination that bona fide residents of
Union Township are unavailable.
§ 121-5 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 124-2
124:175
§ 124-2. Nonapplicability. [Amended 5-24-1983 by Ord. No. 3631]
This chapter shall not be applicable to any present municipal employee who
is, as of the effective date of this chapter, a non-bona-fide resident of said
Township.
§ 124-3. Failure to comply.
Failure on the part of any municipal employee to comply with the terms of
this chapter shall be cause for dismissal.
Chapter 130
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 138
TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 487.
§ 138-1. Created; composition.
There is hereby created a Department of Tax Assessment. Said office shall
consist of one Tax Assessor, one Deputy Tax Assessor and a number of
support personnel to be designated by the Township Committee.
Composition may be changed from time to time, as required by resolution
of the Township Committee.
§ 138-2. Qualification of Tax Assessor.50
The Tax Assessor shall possess a valid tax assessor certificate issued by the
Director of the Division of Taxation of the State of New Jersey as of the date
of appointment.
§ 138-3. Qualifications and duties of Deputy Tax Assessor.51
The Deputy Tax Assessor shall possess a valid tax assessor certificate issued
by the Director of the Division of Taxation of the State of New Jersey as of
the date of appointment and shall act under the direct supervision of the
Tax Assessor. The Deputy Tax Assessor shall assist the Tax Assessor in the
fulfillment of his or her legislatively prescribed duties.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 124-2 UNION CODE § 138-4
130:176
§ 138-4. Control of Department.52
The Assessor is accountable to the Director of the Division of Taxation of
the State of New Jersey as well as the County Tax Administrator, under the
control of the County Board of Taxation. The Department of Tax Assessment
shall be under the control of the Tax Assessor subject to such appropriate
administrative rules and regulations that may, from time to time, be adopted
by the Township Committee by ordinance or resolution.
§ 138-5. Powers and duties of Tax Assessor.53
The Tax Assessor shall be responsible for the fair assessment of all real
property in the Township of Union in order that the tax burden may be
distributed equitably. The Tax Assessor is subject to municipal control for
maintaining regular office hours during which he or she or a member of his
or her staff is to be available to the general public.
§ 138-6. Salary.54
The annual salary for the Assessor shall be established pursuant to the
Township's Salary Ordinance as determined by the Township Committee
and in compliance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-165 and any other pertinent state
statutes.55
§ 138-7. Terms of office.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148, the Municipal Tax Assessor and
Deputy Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years from the first day
of July next following said appointment.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 150
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Rent control — See Ch. 421.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 130,. Salaries and Compensation.
§ 138-4 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 138-7
138:177

ARTICLE I
Regulations
[Adopted 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 558856]
§ 150-1. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
The Township of Union shall comply with the following monitoring and
reporting requirements regarding the status of the implementation of its
Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. Beginning on April 1, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date
through July 1, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual reporting
of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing, or
Local Government Services, or other entity designated by the State of
New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC)
and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this
purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA),
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), or Local Government Services
(NJLGS). The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and amount of funds
collected and the amount and purpose for which any funds have been
expended.
B. Beginning on April 1, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date
through July 27, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual reporting
of the status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality
through posting on the municipal website with a copy of such posting
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously
developed for this purpose by COAH or any other forms endorsed by the
Special Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its plan and an
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites no
longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing
before the Court regarding these issues.
D. By March 1, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, the Township will post on its municipal website,
with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its
56.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Regulations, adopted 3-13-2018
by Ord. No. 5569.
§ 150-1 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-1
138:179
§ 150-2. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.57
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,58
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a one-hundred-percent affordable housing
development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
very-low-income requirements, including its family very-low-income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low-income and family very-lowincome
housing obligations.
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14.
58.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired on October 16, 2016.
§ 150-1 UNION CODE § 150-2
138:180
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Committee on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62
years of age or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of
age or older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 150-2 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-2
138:181
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
§ 150-2 UNION CODE § 150-2
138:182
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 150-3. Applicability and mandatory set-aside.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Union pursuant to
the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. Moreover, this article shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units and including any developments funded with lowincome
housing tax credits.
C. If the Township permits the construction of multifamily or single-family
attached residential development that is "approvable" and
"developable," as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3,59 at a gross residential
§ 150-2 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-3
138:183
§ 150-4. Alternative living arrangements.
density of 20 units to the acre or more, the Township shall require
that an appropriate percentage of the residential units be set aside
for low- and moderate-income households. This requirement shall apply
beginning on July 25, 2017. The requirement shall apply throughout
the Township except through the entirety of the Stuyvesant Avenue/
Downtown corridor as depicted in Exhibit C to this article, which shall
be and remain exempt from the requirements contained herein.60
Where applicable within the Township, this requirement shall apply
to any multifamily or single-family attached residential development,
including the residential portion of a mixed-use project and including
the conversion of a nonresidential structure to a residential
development, which development consists of 20 or more new
residential units, whether permitted by a zoning amendment, a
variance granted by the Township's Land Use Board, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas in need
of redevelopment or rehabilitation.
D. For any such development for which the Township's land use
ordinances (e.g., zoning or an adopted redevelopment plan) already
permitted residential development as of July 25, 2017, this requirement
shall only apply if the Township permits an increase in approvable and
developable gross residential density to at least twice the permitted
approvable and developable gross residential density as of the effective
date of this agreement. Nothing in this subsection precludes the
Township from imposing an affordable housing set-aside in a
development not required to have a set-aside pursuant to this
subsection consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311(h) and other applicable
law.
E. For inclusionary projects in which the low- and moderate-income units
are to be offered for sale, the appropriate set-aside percentage is 20%;
for projects in which the low and moderate income units are to be
offered for rent, the appropriate set-aside percentage is 15%.
F. This requirement does not create any entitlement for a property owner
or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas in need of
redevelopment or rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular
proposed project. This requirement does not apply to any sites or
specific zones otherwise identified in the settlement agreement or Fair
Share Plan, for which density and set-aside standards shall be governed
by the specific standards set forth therein.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
59.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired on October 16, 2016.
60.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 150-3 UNION CODE § 150-4
138:184
§ 150-5. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 150-6. New construction.
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very-low-income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very-low- or low-income
units.
§ 150-4 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-6
138:185
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-761 and the following:
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through B(2)(d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a)
through B(2)(d) above have been satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories
within an individual unit; and
61.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14.
§ 150-6 UNION CODE § 150-6
138:186
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Union has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Union's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(e)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Union for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of Union for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds
are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(g) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier
Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design:
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
§ 150-6 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-6
138:187
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and using calculation procedures approved by the Court. Income
limits for all units that are part of the Township's Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan and for which income limits are not already
established through a federal program exempted from the UHAC
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, shall be updated by the Borough
annually within 30 days of the publication of determinations of
median income by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development ("HUD") as follows:
(a) Regional income limits shall be established for the region that
the Township is located within based on the median income by
household size, which shall be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD. To compute this regional income limit, the
HUD determination of median county income for a family of
four is multiplied by the estimated households within the
county according to the most recent decennial Census. The
resulting product for each county within the housing region is
summed. The sum is divided by the estimated total households
from the most recent decennial Census in the Township's
housing region. This quotient represents the regional weighted
average of median income for a household of four. The income
limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of four shall
be 80% of the regional weighted average median income for a
family of four. The income limit for a low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination of
the regional weighted average median income for a family of
four. The income limit for a very-low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 30% of the regional weighted
average median income for a family of four. These income
limits shall be adjusted by household size based on multipliers
used by HUD to adjust median income by household size. In no
event shall the income limits be less than those for the previous
year.
(b) The income limits are the result of applying the percentages
set forth in Subsection D(1)(a) above to HUD's determination
of median income for the fiscal year 2017, and shall be utilized
until the Township updates the income limits after HUD has
published revised determinations of median income for the
next fiscal year.
§ 150-6 UNION CODE § 150-6
138:188
(c) The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's
eligibility for affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16(b)(3) shall be calculated by the Township annually
by taking the percentage increase of the income limits
calculated pursuant to Subsection D(1)(a) above over the
previous year's income limits, and applying the same
percentage increase to the regional asset limit from the prior
year. In no event shall the regional asset limit be less than that
for the previous year.
(d) In establishing sale prices and rents of affordable housing
units, the Township's administrative agent shall follow the
procedures set forth in UHAC, utilizing the regional income
limits established pursuant to the process defined above:
[1] The resale prices of owner-occupied low- and moderateincome
units may increase annually based on the
percentage increase in the regional median income limit
for each housing region determined pursuant to the above
methodology. In no event shall the maximum resale price
established by the administrative agent be lower than the
last recorded purchase price.
[2] The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income
units may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for the
Northeast Urban Area, upon its publication for the prior
calendar year. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one
year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to low-income
housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to
the regulations governing low-income housing tax credits.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, which very-low-income units shall be
part of the low-income requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
§ 150-6 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-6
138:189
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
§ 150-6 UNION CODE § 150-6
138:190
§ 150-7. Utilities.
§ 150-8. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 150-9. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rent increases
for units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing
low-income housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for the Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until Union takes action
to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action, a
restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
§ 150-6 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-9
138:191
§ 150-10. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
§ 150-9 UNION CODE § 150-10
138:192
§ 150-11. Buyer income eligibility.
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 150-13.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income
unit if and only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there is
an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing
region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable
efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold
to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and subject to Court's approval,
permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income unit if and
only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there is an
insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing
region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable
efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold
to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
§ 150-10 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-11
138:193
§ 150-12. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 150-13. Capital improvements to ownership units.
F. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as a certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of a hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year. Violations of this
provision shall be subject to the applicable enforcement provisions of
§ 150-20 of this article.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
§ 150-11 UNION CODE § 150-13
138:194
§ 150-14. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 150-15. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 30 years, until Union takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Union. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
§ 150-13 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-15
138:195
§ 150-16. Tenant income eligibility.
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection A and B above with the
administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
§ 150-15 UNION CODE § 150-17
138:196
§ 150-17. Municipal Housing Liaison.
A. The Township of Union shall appoint a specific municipal employee to
serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for overseeing the
Township's affordable housing program, including overseeing the
administration of affordability controls on the affordable units and the
affirmative marketing of available affordable units in accordance with
the Township's affirmative marketing plan; fulfilling monitoring and
reporting requirements; and supervising administrative agent(s). Union
shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing
Liaison and a resolution appointing the person to fulfill the position of
Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by the governing body and may be a full or part time
municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved
by the Court and shall be duly qualified through a training program
sponsored by Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey before
assuming the duties of Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Union, including
the following responsibilities which may not be contracted out to the
administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Union's primary point of contact for all inquiries from
the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents and
interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Union's Fair Share
Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the Court and by this article;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Township of Union shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer and to
affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in the Township in
accordance with UHAC and this article. An operating manual for each
affordable housing program shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject
to approval of the Court. The operating manual(s) shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk, in the office of the
Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative
agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the work of the
administrative agent(s).
§ 150-17 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-18
138:197
§ 150-18. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. The fees of the administrative
agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as
set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in §§ 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18
thereof, which includes:
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of
the Township of Union and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15;
and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Union when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Union: Fair Share Housing Center,
the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action
Network, East Orange NAACP, Newark NAACP, Morris County
NAACP and Elizabeth NAACP.
§ 150-18 UNION CODE § 150-18
138:198
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Union County Register of Deeds or Union County Clerk's office
after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- (or very-low-) and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central airconditioning
systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
§ 150-18 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-18
138:199
§ 150-19. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Township Committee and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the
Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this article.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Township of Union shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
§ 150-18 UNION CODE § 150-19
138:200
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing.
The affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in
that region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 2 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 2, comprised of
Union, Essex, Morris and Warren Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township of Union shall implement the affirmative marketing plan to
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the county administration building
and/or the county library for each county within the housing region; the
municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the administrative
agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in Union, and copies of the application forms, to the
following entities: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey State
Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network, East Orange
NAACP, Newark NAACP, Morris County NAACP and Elizabeth NAACP.
§ 150-19 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-19
138:201
§ 150-20. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of Union Affordable
Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally
collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
§ 150-19 UNION CODE § 150-20
138:202
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
§ 150-20 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-20
138:203
§ 150-21. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this article shall be filed in writing with the Court.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 150-20 UNION CODE § 150-21
138:204
ARTICLE II
Mandatory Development Fees
[Adopted 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 557062]
§ 150-22. Purpose.
This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees that are consistent with COAH's
regulations developed in response to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32
through 38 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7). Fees collected
pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
very-low, low- and moderate-income housing in accordance with a Courtapproved
spending plan.
§ 150-23. Basic requirements.
§ 150-24. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable housing development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement
of property as authorized by Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel
Township. 121 N.J. 550 (1990) and the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A.
52:27d-301, et seq., and regulated by applicable COAH Rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 1-35c).
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
B. The Township of Union shall not spend development fees until the Court
has approved a plan for spending such fees (spending plan).
62.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Mandatory Development Fees,
adopted 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 5136.
§ 150-22 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-24
138:205
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 150-25. Residential development fees.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within the Township of Union, all residential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below and developers of developments that include affordable
housing, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
all new residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted. Development fees shall also be imposed and collected
when an additional dwelling unit is added to an existing residential
structure; in such cases, the fee shall be calculated based on the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the property due to the
additional dwelling unit.
(2) When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a
"d" variance granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers
shall be required to pay a "bonus" development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized, except that this provision shall not be applicable to a
development that will include affordable housing. If the zoning on a
site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing
of the variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
developments.
(1) Affordable housing developments and/or developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units, if permitted by ordinance or by agreement with
the Township of Union, shall be exempt from the payment of
development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of this article and any preceding
ordinance permitting the collection of development fees shall be
exempt from the payment of development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the original approval.
Where site plan approval is not applicable, the issuance of a zoning
permit and/or construction permit shall be synonymous with
preliminary or final site plan approval for the purpose of
determining the right to an exemption. In all cases, the applicable
§ 150-24 UNION CODE § 150-25
138:206
§ 150-26. Nonresidential development fees.
fee percentage shall be determined based upon the development
fee ordinance in effect on the date that the construction permit is
issued.
(3) Improvements or additions to existing one- and two-family
dwellings on individual lots shall not be required to pay a
development fee, but a development fee shall be charged for any
new dwelling constructed as a replacement for a previously
existing dwelling on the same lot that was or will be demolished,
unless the owner resided in the previous dwelling for a period of
one year or more prior to obtaining a demolition permit. Where a
development fee is charged for a replacement dwelling, the
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the new structure as compared to the
previous structure.
(4) Homes replaced as a result of a natural disaster, fire or flood shall
be exempt from the payment of a development fee.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value
of the land and improvements, for all new nonresidential
construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing
structures to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvements and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvements, and such calculation shall be made at the time a
final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required
under this section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to a development fee of 2.5%,
unless otherwise exempted below.
§ 150-25 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-26
138:207
§ 150-27. Collection procedures.
(2) The development fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within the existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and
repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), as
specified in Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential
Development Certification/Exemption." Any exemption claimed by
a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to the Statewide Non-
Residential Development Fee Act shall be subject to the fee at such
time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and shall
make the payment of the nonresidential development fee, in that
event, within three years after that event or after the issuance of
the final certificate of occupancy for the nonresidential
development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Township of Union as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the approving authority or entity shall notify or
direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the
issuance of a construction permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a construction
permit shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
§ 150-26 UNION CODE § 150-27
138:208
construction permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the Township Tax
Assessor shall prepare an estimate of the equalized assessed value of
the development based on the plans filed.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of any
and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on a property
which is subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Township Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
associated with the development; calculate the development fee; and
thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township of Union fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due
and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set
forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46 (N.J.A.C.
40:55D-8.6).
H. Except as provided in § 150-26A(3) hereinabove, 50% of the initially
calculated development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the construction permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at the
time of issuance of the construction permit and that determined at the
time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Township of
Union. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to
the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Township of Union. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
§ 150-27 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-27
138:209
§ 150-28. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Affordable
Housing Trust Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of
the Township of Union for the purpose of depositing development fees
collected from residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of a fraction of an
affordable unit, where permitted by ordinance or by agreement
with the Township of Union;
(2) Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached dwelling
unit development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Union's affordable
housing program.
C. In the event of a failure by the Township of Union to comply with trust
fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate
monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the
judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance;
or a failure to implement the approved spending plan and to expend
funds within the applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp.
of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super.
563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the
Court; or for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of
funds, the Court may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services (LGS), to
direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund shall be expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the extent
practicable, be utilized for affordable housing programs within the
Township of Union, or, if not practicable, then within the County or the
Housing Region.
§ 150-27 UNION CODE § 150-28
138:210
§ 150-29. Use of funds.
D. Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting
evidence of such condition(s), and the Court may, after considering the
evidence and providing the municipality a reasonable opportunity to
respond and/or to remedy the noncompliant condition(s), and upon a
finding of continuing and deliberate noncompliance, determine to
authorize LGS to direct the expenditure of funds in the Trust Fund or
impose such other remedies as may be reasonable and appropriate to
the circumstances.
E. Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be
used to fund eligible affordable housing activities approved by the
Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
may be used for any activity approved by the Court to address the
Township of Union's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant
or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining
or implementing affordability controls; housing rehabilitation; new
construction of affordable housing units and related costs; accessory
apartments; a market to affordable program; Regional Housing
Partnership programs; conversion of existing nonresidential buildings
to create new affordable units; green building strategies designed to be
cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or state
standards; purchase of land for affordable housing; improvement of
land to be used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements of
roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial
assistance designed to increase affordability; administration necessary
for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan; and/or
any other activity permitted by the Court and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of Union for
past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned on
such fees shall be used to provide affordability assistance to very-low-,
low- and moderate-income households in affordable units included in
the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to very-low-income households earning 30% or
less of the regional median household income by household size for
Housing Region 2, in which Union is located.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
§ 150-28 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-29
138:211
§ 150-30. Monitoring.
The Township of Union shall provide annual reporting of Affordable Housing
Trust Fund activity to the State of New Jersey, Department of Community
Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local Government Services or
other entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided
to Fair Share Housing Center and posted on the municipal website, using
forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local Government
Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity, including the sources and amounts of funds
emergency repairs. The specific programs to be used for
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of the
regional median household income by household size may include
buying down the cost of low- or moderate-income units in the
municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to households
earning 30% or less of median income. The specific programs to be
used for very-low-income affordability assistance shall be identified
and described within the spending plan.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site, if
permitted by ordinance or by agreement with the Township of
Union, and funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls
shall be exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Township of Union may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including its programs for affordability assistance.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultants' fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, prepare a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or administer an affirmative
marketing program or a rehabilitation program.
(1) In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative costs of
the rehabilitation program shall be included as part of the 20% of
collected development fees that may be expended on
administration.
(2) Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other
fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
related to securing or appealing a judgment from the Court are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 150-29 UNION CODE § 150-30
138:212
collected and the amounts and purposes for which any funds have been
expended. Such reporting shall include an accounting of development fees
collected from residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu
of constructing affordable units on site (if permitted by ordinance or by
agreement with the Township), funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income from
Township-owned affordable housing units, repayments from affordable
housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with
Union's affordable housing programs, as well as an accounting of the
expenditures of revenues and implementation of the spending plan
approved by the Court.
§ 150-31. Ongoing collection of fees.
A. The ability for the Township of Union to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with the expiration of the repose period
covered by its judgment of compliance unless the Township of Union
has first filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the
Court or with a designated state administrative agency, has petitioned
for a judgment of compliance from the Court or for substantive
certification or its equivalent from a state administrative agency
authorized to approve and administer municipal affordable housing
compliance and has received approval of its development fee ordinance
from the entity that will be reviewing and approving the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan.
B. If the Township of Union fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of compliance,
it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be
deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund"
established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-320).
C. The Township of Union shall not impose a residential development fee
on a development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval
after the expiration of its judgment of compliance, nor shall the
Township of Union retroactively impose a development fee on such a
development. The Township of Union also shall not expend any of its
collected development fees after the expiration of its judgment of
compliance.
§ 150-30 TAX ASSESSMENT, DEPARTMENT OF § 150-31
138:213
Chapter 156
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285. Noise — See Ch. 378.
§ 156-1. Purpose.63
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of fire and burglar and other emergency alarm devices,
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means, and requiring a
response thereto by the Police Department of the Township of Union.
§ 156-2. Scope.64
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person, firm or corporation
that operates, maintains, installs, repairs or owns any alarm device or local
alarm designed to summon the Union Police Department to any location
in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall in
no way prohibit alarm companies, persons, firms and/or corporations from
providing service by private source to other dwellings or buildings within
the Township of Union, so long as such activity is not connected to the alarm
console at the Township of Union Public Safety Answering Point; except,
however, that any person, firm or corporation having a premises protected
by an alarm device shall still be responsible for the registration thereof in
accordance with § 156-6 hereof.
§ 156-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel or devices giving a visual
or audio response, or both, and localized within the confines of the Public
Safety Answering Point of the Township of Union.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any alarm device providing a signal to the Public Safety
Answering Point by any means, providing warning or intrusion, fire, smoke,
flood or other peril, or any other device, audible or otherwise, resulting in
public safety response.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one or more buildings at a location other than the alarm
console.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 150-31 UNION CODE § 156-3
156:214
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits,
where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
CENTRAL STATION EQUIPMENT — The signal-receiving, recording or
retransmitting equipment owned and maintained by the central station.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM — A system in which the operation of
electrical protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to,
recorded in, maintained by and supervised from a central station having
trained operators and guards in attendance at all times.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police for the Township of Union or his
designated representative.[Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4376]
DIALER ALARM — That type of device using telephone lines or radio
alarms or other means transmitting to the Township of Union Public Safety
Answering Point.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system by inadvertence,
negligence, malfunction or unintentional act of someone, but does not
include alarms caused by hurricanes, storms or other climatic conditions,
and shall also include the deliberate activation of an alarm system in order
to test the alarm without prior notification to the Public Safety Answering
Point of the alarm test.
LICENSEE — The person obtaining the license to maintain the alarm
console as hereinafter set forth.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when actuated, produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console or a central station, such as an
actuating bell device or any other type of audible or visual identification.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning, operation and/or maintaining an alarm
device or a local alarm within the scope of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association.
PUBLIC SAFETY — Includes police, fire or emergency medical responders.
§ 156-4. Alarm console license.
A. There is established an alarm console license which shall be granted as
set forth in § 156-5 of this chapter. Any such licensee shall have
exclusive use and control of the alarm console, except for use by the
public safety of the Township of Union, and such licensee will be
responsible, at no cost to the Township of Union, for the establishment,
construction, installation, maintenance and management thereafter of
said console, containing equipment and being of a design recommended
or approved by the Chief of Police, and for the care, maintenance and
management thereafter of said console. Said licensee shall locate said
console, and relocate said console if necessary, under the supervision of
the designated representative at no cost to the Township of Union for
any such license granted hereunder. The licensee will assume all
§ 156-3 ALARMS § 156-4
156:215
liability and agree to indemnify and save harmless the Township of
Union, its agents, public officials and the Township of Union Police
Department and its officers and members for any acts in conjunction
therewith the operation of said alarm console. The licensee shall furnish
annually to the Township Clerk a noncancelable insurance certificate
indicating complete liability coverage in an amount no less than
$300,000 for each person, $500,000 for each accident and $1,000,000
property damage for each accident. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord.
No. 437665]
B. Any connection to the alarm console shall be of a type inspected and
approved by the designated representative, and any person aggrieved
by said decision may appeal said decision, in writing, within 10 days to
the Township Committee of the Township of Union, which shall resolve
the appeal within a reasonable time, after hearing. The decision of the
Township Committee shall be final.
C. The licensee shall install initially an annunciator and/or display console
and remotes having no less than one-thousand-subscriber capability,
available for present systems and future connections, which console
shall be approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. The licensee
should be Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. listed. Such installation
described above shall be at no cost to the Township of Union, its officers
or members.
D. The licensee for the alarm console shall be permitted to charge
subscribers an installation fee and a monthly retainer or maintenance
fee. No fee shall be charged to the Township of Union, the Board of
Education or any of its subsidiaries for monthly charges or console
connection charges for any existing or future systems in public
buildings owned and/or operated by the Township of Union, its agents
or subsidiaries.
E. Except as provided in § 156-7 of this chapter, any license issued
hereunder shall be for a term of five years from January 1 following the
adoption of this chapter; such licensee shall post with the Township
Clerk a performance bond in the amount of $10,000, noncancelable
without notification to the Township Committee of the Township of
Union, guaranteeing performance for the full term of the license and
ensuring maintenance of said console and alarm system during said
period when such license is in force.
F. The licensee shall pay to the Township of Union, in consideration for the
exclusive franchise given, a franchise fee equaling 15% of the gross
revenues that the licensee derives from the charges paid by subscribers
for the monthly retainer and maintenance fee set forth above. Said
franchise fee shall be paid to the Township of Union within 30 days after
January 1 of every year, based on the revenues collected in the prior 12
months.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-4 UNION CODE § 156-4
156:216
§ 156-5. Application for license.
§ 156-6. Registration; issuance of permits; fees.
G. Any indemnification under this chapter shall be such indemnification as
is permitted by appropriate law and regulations. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to residential alarm systems. [Added
3-26-1991 by Ord. No. 4139]
A. Prequalification persons desiring to bid for said license shall make
application to the Chief of Police and Township Administrator, which
application shall disclose whatever information may be required by the
Township of Union concerning the ability of the proposed applicant to
comply with the requirements of this chapter and shall indicate, in any
event, that said licensee has satisfactory financial and personal
references indicating his, her or its ability to comply with the terms of
this chapter; that said licensee has an office with adequate personnel,
available on a twenty-four-hour basis, to service said equipment; and
that such office shall be located within 10 miles of the center of the
Township of Union. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4376]
B. The governing body shall designate the time and place for receiving
sealed bids, as set forth above, which bid shall indicate the bond and
other requirements of this chapter and the minimum installation and
monthly charges. Upon the return of the sealed bids, the governing
body may award said license to the person whose bid, taken as a whole,
is the most advantageous to the subscribers to the system from a cost
standpoint, and, in conjunction therewith, the governing body reserves
the right to reject any and all bids.
C. Renewals of said license or award of new licenses, should any license be
terminated in accordance with sections of this chapter, shall be
accomplished by following the procedures outlined herein.
A. Any person who desires to install an alarm device or local alarm within
the Township of Union or who currently owns, operates or maintains an
alarm device or a local alarm shall make application for a permit to
install or continue said alarm, in writing, to the designated
representative of the Township of Union Police Department. The
application shall be in such form as the designated representative shall
prescribe and shall set forth all information required by the designated
representative to enable him to carry out effectively his public safety
responsibilities, but shall contain at least the location of the device, the
name of the installer of said device, the type of device, provisions
relating to false alarms and testing procedures, a list of persons to be
contacted in the event of an alarm and other information as may be
required by the designated representative of the Township of Union
Police Department.66
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-4 ALARMS § 156-6
156:217
B. The subscriber or central station or installer of each alarm system shall
register each alarm system with the Police Department.67
C. A registration fee of $10 shall accompany each application submitted,
except no registration fee shall be charged to any owner of an alarm
currently in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter, if such
registration takes place within 90 days of said adoption. There shall be
no registration fee for any application for an alarm for a nonprofit
organization or for a house of worship or a residential alarm or an alarm
on municipal property under this section of this chapter. [Amended
3-26-1991 by Ord. No. 4139; 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 4243]
D. The permittee of each alarm system shall pay to the Township of Union
an annual registration fee of $10 to cover the cost of maintaining,
testing and to amortize the cost of necessary equipment for the proper
functioning of this alarm equipment. There shall be no annual
registration fee for an alarm for a nonprofit organization or for a house
of worship or a residential alarm or an alarm on municipal property
under this section of this chapter. [Amended 3-26-1991 by Ord. No.
4139; 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 4243]
E. Any permit granted hereunder shall be granted upon the express
condition that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the Township of
Union harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out
of the activities of the permittee, its alarm contractor or the alarm
console licensee of the Township of Union.
F. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed as
having consented to the inspection of the alarm system, at reasonable
hours, by the designated representative and shall accept the
responsibility for the proper operation of the alarm system up to and
including the line connection, if any, to the Public Safety Answering
Point.
G. Any persons installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for violation of this chapter, and each and every day the
equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate violation.
H. Any person who currently has an alarm device in existence at the time
of the passage of this chapter shall have 60 days from the effective date
of this chapter to register said alarm. [Amended 3-26-1991 by Ord.
No. 4139]
I. Any licensee and/or permittee for an alarm shall provide for a
representative to be on call for emergency repair service. In each case
wherein the alarm is connected directly to the Public Safety Answering
Point, the service shall be provided within 24 hours of notification by
the Public Safety Answering Point of any malfunction of any equipment.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-6 UNION CODE § 156-7
156:218
§ 156-7. Limitation of Township obligations. [Amended 3-14-1995
by Ord. No. 4376]
The Township of Union shall be under no obligation to any permittee,
subscriber, licensee or alarm console licensee hereunder, the alarm console
and allied equipment being maintained at will and subject to termination at
any time by cancellation of the system, by resolution duly adopted by the
governing body of the Township of Union, and any individual permit issued
hereunder may be revoked at any time by the recommendation of the Chief
of Police, provided that 30 days' notice is given, in writing, to said permittee
by certified mail.
§ 156-8. General regulations.
A. Any licensee for the alarm console and any permittee utilizing the
services of any other alarm company connected to said console shall
provide for a representative to be on call at all times, and such service
shall be provided immediately, when necessary, after notification by the
Police Department of any malfunction of any equipment. No permittee
utilizing the services of any other alarm company shall be denied access
to the alarm console because of the use of another alarm company and
shall not be discriminated against respecting any fees charged by the
licensee.68
B. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Public Safety Answering Point in a manner to be
prescribed by rules and regulations in accordance with this chapter. In
addition, in the case of a false alarm, the Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation to be made and keep a record of said alarms on file. Where
the investigation by the Chief of Police demonstrates continued abuse
of the privilege of connection to the alarm console and/or a disregard of
the permittee for taking remedial steps to avoid false alarms and/or the
failure of the permittee to pay any fine or administrative charge, the
Chief of Police reserves the right to require disconnection from the
alarm console for a limited or permanent time or require the
disconnection of any dial alarm device, provided that no such permit
shall be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee the
opportunity to show cause, before the Chief of Police, why such action
should not be taken. An alarm owner shall not be charged with a false
alarm, provided that such owner makes immediate proper notification
in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4376]
C. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
chapter, and any person installing or maintaining unauthorized
equipment shall be prosecuted for violation of this chapter, and each
and every day that said equipment is in operation shall be considered a
separate violation. Any permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-7 ALARMS § 156-8
156:219
§ 156-9. Alarm systems.
deemed as having consented to inspection of the premises on which
said alarm devices are installed, at reasonable hours, by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord.
No. 4376]
D. Any person testing an alarm system covered by the provisions of this
chapter shall notify the Public Safety Answering Point immediately
prior to and after the testing is completed. Failure to do so shall
constitute a violation herein and subject an alarm owner or maintainer
to such penalties as set forth in this chapter.
E. Proper maintenance of private alarm systems or local alarms. Every
person who installs, maintains or uses a private alarm system or
warning device to serve an improved property within the Township
shall maintain it in good repair and proper working condition, shall
meet the standards which may from time to time be promulgated by the
Chief of Police to prevent faulty systems or devices and shall promptly
correct or disconnect any faulty system or device upon notice from the
Chief of Police that the system or device is sounding an inordinate
number of false alarms. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4376]
A. Dialer alarms.
(1) Dialer prohibition against new tape dialer systems. No application
for initial permits shall be filed or accepted for any tape dialer
system. This prohibition against new tape dialer systems shall have
no effect upon the renewal of a permit for any such system as to
which an initial permit has previously been issued to the same
person.
(2) No dial alarm shall be permitted unless it shall have first been
registered and approved by the Chief of Police after approval by the
telephone company. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a separate
special number to be provided by the Chief of Police. All such
alarms shall be capable of being disconnected to allow a call to the
Public Safety Answering Point in the event of a false alarm. If any
person has any dial alarm in existence at the time of the effective
date of this chapter, it shall be reprogrammed within 60 days to
comply with this chapter. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No.
4376]
(3) If any dial alarm hereafter shall be found to be dialing the Public
Safety general number, rather than the special number being
provided, the Chief of Police shall send the person in whose name
the telephone is listed a written notice requiring compliance with
this chapter. If the occupant or telephone subscriber fails to comply
within 60 days after service of such notice, said failure shall
constitute a violation of this chapter, and the person shall be liable
to the penalties set forth in this chapter. Each and every day for
§ 156-8 UNION CODE § 156-9
156:220
§ 156-10. Testing procedures.
§ 156-11. Appeals.
Whenever, under the provisions of this chapter, the designated
representative is empowered to make a decision with respect to the
installation, operation and maintenance of any alarm equipment or with
respect to the issuance or denial of any application relating thereto or in
the imposition of any administrative charge, any person aggrieved by said
decision may, within 10 days following said decision, file a written appeal
therefrom with the Township Administrator of the Township of Union, who
shall conduct a hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed
from. The decision of the Township Administrator shall be final.
§ 156-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty by the Judge of the Municipal
Court of the Township of Union for violation of the terms of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 156-13. False alarms; penalties.
which this notice has not been complied with shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4376]
(4) The contents of a dial alarm message shall be clean and intelligible
and in the format approved by the Chief of Police. No such message
shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a single
stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15 seconds,
and the time gap between each shall not exceed three minutes.
[Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4376]
B. Local alarms. Every private alarm system or local alarm which has a
sounding device shall be equipped with a cutoff mechanism which will
terminate the sound after 15 minutes.
A. Testing of any alarm system must be conducted between 9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.
B. Before a test of any alarm, the Township of Union Public Safety
Answering Point must be notified that the alarm will be activated.
Verification of receipt of signal will be given when a second call is made
to notify the Public Safety Answering Point that the testing is
completed.
C. Local alarms should be tested by owners during the same hours, and
owners should allow audible signals to sound for only a short period of
time.
§ 156-9 ALARMS § 156-13
156:221
§ 156-14. Revocation of permit.
The governing body reserves the right to revoke any issued permit when the
permittee continues to operate any alarm system that continues to generate
false alarms.
§ 156-15. Enforcement.69
This chapter shall be enforced by the Township of Union Police Department.
Chapter 160
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements; adult uses — See Ch. 164.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 390, Art. I.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 397.
A. No false alarm shall occur when an alarm permittee makes a telephone
call indicating that a test is in progress and such signal is
misinterpreted by the Public Safety Answering Point.
B. For continuing false alarms, within a calendar year, the following
administrative fees will prevail: [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No.
4376]
(1) For the first, second and third false alarms, no fee will be assessed,
but the permittee shall be issued a warning by the Chief of Police or
a designated representative.
(2) For the fourth and fifth false alarms, a penalty of $25 shall be
charged to the permittee of such alarm system.
(3) For a sixth false alarm, the fee shall increase to $75; and for the
seventh or subsequent false alarms, the fee shall increase to $100,
to be charged to the permittee of the alarm system.
C. Any permittee of such alarm system may appeal any administrative fee
to the Chief of Police or his designee. [Added 3-14-1995 by Ord. No.
4376]
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-13 UNION CODE § 156-15
156:222
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control
[Adopted 6-26-1934 by Ord. No. 793A (Ch. 88, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 160-1. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of regulating the sale and transportation of
alcoholic beverages in the Township of Union, in the County of Union, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act of the Legislature entitled "An
Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," being Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and in accordance with the rules
and regulations issued, or to be promulgated by the State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, applicable thereto.70
§ 160-2. License applications subject to regulations.
All applications for licenses under this article and all licenses issued
thereunder and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to said
Act and said rules and regulations of said State Commissioner of Alcoholic
Beverage Control of New Jersey, applicable thereto, and shall be subject to
any other statutes of New Jersey, or of the United States, now extant or
hereafter enacted, affecting said subject matters.
§ 160-3. Administrative authority.
The Township Committee of the Township of Union, being the governing
body of said municipality, shall constitute the authority for the
administration of issuance of licenses under this article and shall forthwith
report the issuance of all such licenses to said State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 160-4. Written applications for license. [Amended 5-14-1955 by
Ord. No. 815]
No license shall be issued, except after written application presented by the
proposed licensee, upon forms approved by the governing body and after
conformity with publication of notice and otherwise, as required by said Act.
§ 160-5. Sale or distribution without license unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the Township
of Union, in the County of Union, without a license previously applied for
and granted pursuant to the provisions of this article and/or said Act.
§ 160-6. Plenary retail consumption license. [Amended 5-14-1935
by Ord. No. 815; 12-26-1972 by Ord. No. 2752; 5-14-1974 by Ord.
No. 2876; 4-25-1975 by Ord. No. 2975; 4-22-1980 by Ord. No. 3442;
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 160-1 ALARMS § 160-6
156:223
4-24-1984 by Ord. No. 3705; 1-24-1989 by Ord. No. 4005;
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745; 9-9-2003
by Ord. No. 480171]
The fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be $2,160, subject to
the provisions in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.
§ 160-7. Seasonal retail consumption license. [Amended 11-12-1935
by Ord. No. 824; 12-26-1972 by Ord. No. 2752; 9-10-2002 by Ord.
No. 4745; 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. 480172]
The fee for a seasonal retail consumption license shall be $1,620, subject to
the provisions in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.
§ 160-8. Plenary retail distribution license. [Amended 5-14-1935 by
Ord. No. 815; 12-26-1972 by Ord. No. 2752, 5-14-1974 by Ord. No.
2876; 4-22-1975 by Ord. No. 2975; 4-22-1980 by Ord. No. 3442;
4-24-1984 by Ord. No. 3705; 1-24-1989 by Ord. No. 4005;
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745; 9-9-2003
by Ord. No. 4801]
The fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be $2,030, and the
holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations, to
sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the licensed premises, but
only in original containers.
§ 160-9. Limited retail distribution license. [Added 8-28-1934 by
Ord. No. 795; amended 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745; 9-9-2003 by
Ord. No. 480173]
The fee for a limited retail distribution license shall be $63, and the holder
of such license shall, subject to rules and regulations, be permitted to sell
for consumption off the licensed premises, but only in original containers,
any unchilled, brewed malt alcoholic beverages in quantities of not less than
72 fluid ounces.
§ 160-10. Club licenses.
A. The fee for a club license shall be the sum of $188, and the holder of
such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations, to sell
only to bona fide club members and their guests, alcoholic beverages
intended for immediate consumption on the licensed premises.
[Amended 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745; 9-9-2003 by Ord. No.
480174]
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 160-6 UNION CODE § 160-10
156:224
§ 160-11. Applications for licenses.
All applications for licenses shall set forth, in full, answers to questions
prescribed by the aforesaid Act and by the rules and regulations of said
State Commissioner and shall include declarations called for by said
provisions.
§ 160-12. Licenses to be denied to unqualified persons.
No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation, group or
partnership not fully qualified under the provisions of said Act and said
rules and regulations.
§ 160-13. Duration of licenses.
All licenses shall be for a term of one year from the first day of July in
each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance, upon presentation of the
application; provided, however, that any licensee, except a seasonal retail
consumption licensee, who shall voluntarily surrender his license and who
shall not have committed any violation of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation and who shall have paid all taxes, setoffs or counterclaims that
may have become due to the State of New Jersey, or to the Township of
Union, shall be entitled, after deduction of 50% of said fee, as a surrender
fee, to the prorated fee for the unexpired term.
§ 160-14. Separate licenses for each place of business; transfer fee.
[Amended 12-26-1972 by Ord. No. 2752]
A separate license shall be required for each specific place of business, and
each license shall be effectual only for the licensed premises mentioned
therein; provided, however, that upon application for a transfer in the same
manner as for an original application, and upon publication of intention to
transfer, in the same manner as in the case of an original application, the
governing body may issue a transfer of such license to a different place
of business, by endorsing such permission upon such license, and upon
payment of a fee for such transfer of 10% of the annual license fee.
§ 160-15. Suspension or revocation procedures.
B. Club licenses shall be issued only to such corporations, associations and
organizations as are operated for benevolent, charitable, fraternal,
social, religious, recreational, athletic or similar purposes and not for
private gain, and such licenses shall be subject to the qualifications,
conditions and restrictions imposed by said State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
C. Each application for a club license shall set forth the names and
addresses of all officers, trustees, directors or other governing officials,
together with the names and addresses of all the members of the
applying club corporation or association.
§ 160-10 ALARMS § 160-15
156:225
§ 160-16. Access to light from public highway.
All premises in which said alcoholic beverage shall be sold or otherwise
dispensed, except those which hold a club license, shall have reasonable
access of light from the public highway, and such premises shall be deemed
to have reasonable access of light when a normal sized adult can, on
inspection, from the exterior, view the interior of said licensed premises.
§ 160-17. Hours of sale. [Amended 2-26-1935 by Ord. No. 807;
5-14-1935 by Ord. No. 815; 5-12-1936 by Ord. No. 835; 12-27-1949
by Ord. No. 1264; 5-27-1952 by Ord. No. 1395; 7-27-1954 by Ord.
No. 1521; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 4922]
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any of the provisions
of said Act, or said statutes heretofore mentioned, or of any of the
regulations and rules prescribed by said State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of said Act, by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee, as provided in said Act, and affording of
a reasonable opportunity for a hearing, and such suspension or
revocation shall carry the penalties and prohibitions provided for in
said Act.
A. No plenary retail consumption licensee or other person shall sell, serve,
deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery or
consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon licensed premises during
the following hours on the following days:
(1) On New Year's Day, when it is a weekday, between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(2) On New Year's Day, when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 4:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon.
(3) On other weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(4) On other Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
B. No plenary retail distribution licensee shall allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage at retail in its original
container (package goods) for consumption off the licensed premises,
or allow permit or suffer the removal of any alcoholic beverage in its
original container (package goods) from the retail licensed premises,
before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and
before 12:00 noon or after 10:00 p.m. on Sundays. Whenever the sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premise is authorized in
any municipality for the holder of a retail consumption license, the sale,
service or delivery by any licensee with retail off-premise package
goods privileges of wine and malt alcoholic beverages in original
§ 160-15 UNION CODE § 160-17
156:226
§ 160-18. Fingerprinting. [Amended 12-26-1972 by Ord. No. 2752]
Every applicant for a license or a transfer thereof to be issued under this
article shall, before the license is issued, permit the Police Department to
take an impression of the thumb- and fingerprints of both hands. In the
instance of a corporate applicant, all stockholders holding more than 10% of
the corporate stock of said corporate applicant and all officers and directors
of said corporation shall, likewise, be fingerprinted.
§ 160-19. Service in back or side rooms restricted.
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally, except that, in hotels, guests may be
served in their rooms or in private or public dining rooms, and provided also
that this prohibition shall not apply to club licenses.
§ 160-20. Procuring illicit beverages; penalties. [Amended
1-26-1972 by Ord. No. 2752; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879;
12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Any person, except an officer or other person authorized by and acting
pursuant to instructions from such officer, so doing in the course of and for
the purpose of enforcing said Act, who shall knowingly purchase, receive or
procure any illicit beverage, on conviction thereof, shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 160-22, Violations and penalties, of this article.
containers for consumption off the premise shall be authorized on the
same days and during the same hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premise is permitted and reflected in § 160-17A.
C. The hours set forth shall be according to the time standard officially in
effect in the Township of Union.
D. During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited, all
premises operating under a plenary retail consumption license or a
seasonal retail consumption license shall be closed; provided, however,
that any such licensee operating a bona fide restaurant shall be
permitted to remain open during the prohibited hours, but the sale,
service, delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverages upon said
licensed premises is hereby forbidden during said prohibited hours as
above set forth.
E. A "bona fide restaurant," as herein mentioned, is defined as an
establishment regularly and principally used for the purpose of
providing meals to the public, having an adequate kitchen and dining
room equipped for the preparing, cooking and serving of foods for its
customers, and in which no other business, except such as is incidental
to such establishment, is conducted.75
75.Editor's Note: Former § 88-18, Minors, as amended, which previously followed this section,
was deleted 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842.
§ 160-17 ALARMS § 160-21
156:227
§ 160-21. Licensee to report disputes and brawls. [Added
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
The licensee, or his or her representative or employee, is required to
report immediately any dispute, assault and/or brawl to the Township Police
Department.
§ 160-22. Distance between licensed premises. [Added 1-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 5176; amended 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 5225; 2-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 5288; 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 530276]
§ 160-22.1. Go-go dancing. [Added 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 530277]
A. No plenary retail consumption license may be transferred to any
location within 500 feet of any other plenary retail consumption license
or any church or public schoolhouse or private schoolhouse not
conducted for pecuniary profit. Such distance shall be calculated in the
normal way that a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest
entrance of the existing liquor license to the nearest entrance of the
premises seeking the liquor license. This restriction shall not apply to a
license to be transferred to the Special Improvement District.
B. No plenary retail consumption license may be transferred to any
location within 500 feet of any residential zone or residential property
as measured from the point upon the outside walls of the building or
building lease space containing the business to the nearest property
line of the residential property. This restriction shall not apply to a
license to be transferred to the Special Improvement District.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GO-GO DANCING — Includes any dancing exhibition involving:
(1) Dancing in a licentious or sexually suggestive manner;
(2) Nude or nearly nude dancing;
Dancing in insufficient attire, which shall include attire that:
Is so thinly veiled as to allow viewing of most of the female
breasts or any of the male or female genital areas;
(a)
Is so tight as to allow visual observation of the shape of the
female breasts or of the female or male genitals; or
(b)
Is so minimal as to visually expose most or all of the female
breasts or any of the male or female genital areas; or
(c)
(3)
76.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 160-22 as
§ 160-22.2.
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 160-22.1 as
§ 160-22.
§ 160-21 UNION CODE § 160-22.1
156:228
§ 160-22.2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
Unless otherwise provided for in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county jail or in
any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners
for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by
LOCATION RESTRICTION — An establishment's distance from a
residential zone or residential property, for purposes of this section,
is the shortest linear distance between any part of the outside of the
building in which the establishment is located to any part of the outside
of the nearest property line of the residential property.
NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITY —
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — An owner of an establishment with a retail
alcoholic beverage consumption license, an officer or director of a
corporate owner of such establishment, an on-premises manager of the
establishment, or an on premises person in charge of the establishment.
(4) Touching between a hired dancer and a patron.
Includes any person performing, showing, exhibiting, acting or
representing in such a manner or attire as to expose to view any
portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva or genitals, or any simulation
thereof, or any female showing, performing, exhibiting, acting or
representing in such a manner or attire as to expose or view
that portion of the breast referred to as the areola or nipple, or
simulation thereof.
(1)
"Nude or nearly nude activity" also includes any person
performing, showing, exhibiting, acting or representing any dance,
episode or musical entertainment in a lewd or indecent manner
so that the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals
to the prurient interest, or for any performer to perform, show,
exhibit, act or represent any dance, episode or musical
entertainment the purpose or effect of which is to direct the
attention of the spectator to the breast, buttocks or genital organs
of the performer, whether clothed or unclothed.
(2)
B. Restrictions on go-go dancing. No dancer shall engage in go-go dancing
in or about any establishment with a retail alcoholic beverage
consumption license in the Township of Union which is located within
1,000 feet of a residential zone or property, and no responsible person
shall suffer, permit or allow go-go dancing in any such establishment in
the Township of Union which is located within 1,000 feet of a residential
zone or property.
§ 160-22.1 ALARMS § 160-22.2
156:229
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective
on the effective date of this section.
§ 160-22.2 UNION CODE § 160-22.2
156:230
ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 8-28-1973 by Ord. No. 2803 (Ch. 88, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 160-23. Restriction. [Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4268]
No person shall place, carry or have in his possession in a public place,
as hereinafter defined, any alcoholic beverage as the same is defined in
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq.) for the purpose of drinking, imbibing or consuming the same
therein, nor shall any person drink, imbibe or consume any such alcoholic
beverage in any such public place. This provision shall not apply to table
service at a licensed outdoor cafe.
§ 160-24. Public places defined. [Amended 8-28-1984 by Ord. No.
3742]
For the purpose of this article, a "public place" shall mean any street,
thoroughfare or alley, any park, recreational area, playground and
properties owned by the Board of Education of the Township of Union,
the Township of Union, the County of Union, the State of New Jersey, the
United States government or any other building, grounds, or area of public
ownership.
§ 160-25. Intoxication in public.
No person shall be drunk or in a state of intoxication in or upon any street,
highway, thoroughfare or public place as hereinabove defined.
§ 160-26. State approval required for use in designated areas.
[Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
All public places, as defined in this article, are alcohol-free, unless a State
of New Jersey Social Affairs Permit is granted or a State of New Jersey
Catering Permit is granted.
§ 160-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
$1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to
become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 160-23 ALARMS § 160-27
156:231

ARTICLE III
Possession or Consumption by Underaged Persons on Private
Property
[Adopted 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4844]
§ 160-28. Underaged possession or consumption.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 160-29. Violations and penalties; suspension of driving privileges.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2, be punished by a fine of $250
for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
B. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privileges of the
defendant. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a
report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2. If a person at the time of the imposition of
sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
C. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color and the sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of
the license suspension period imposed by the court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of written notice in writing. Failure to receive a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If a person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident, the
court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresidential
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit it to the Division of Motor Vehicles on the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
§ 160-28 ALARMS § 160-29
156:233
§ 160-30. Exceptions.
§ 160-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underaged
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
article. Upon receipt of a report from the court, the Division of Motor
Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed,
as prohibiting an underaged person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. Nothing contained in this article is intended nor shall it be construed as
prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages by any such person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or a
hotel management program at a county vocational school or postsecondary
educational institution; provided, however, that this article
shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this
article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a person who
is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 160-29 UNION CODE § 160-31
156:234
Chapter 160A
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION IN RETAIL FOOD
ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 160.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 254.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 390, Art. I.
Board of Health fees — See Ch. 563.
Food service personnel — See Ch. 568.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 596.
§ 160A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL CONSUMPTION LICENSE — Retail food establishments as defined
in New Jersey Administrative Codes Title 8, § 8:24 et seq., and licensed as
same pursuant to the Township of Union Code Chapters 596 and 563 and in
which no other business, except such as is incidental to such establishment,
is conducted.
§ 160A-2. Consumption prohibited in unlicensed commercial
establishment.
Except as otherwise provided in § 160A-4, no person shall drink or
otherwise consume any alcoholic beverage, or offer an alcoholic beverage
to another person for the purpose of consumption, in any commercial
establishment where persons congregate for any purposes whatsoever,
unless such establishment holds a valid retail consumption license issued by
the Township or the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 160A-3. Owner or operator not to permit consumption in
unlicensed commercial establishment.
Except as otherwise provided in § 160A-4, no person owning or operating
any commercial establishment, whether or not food or beverages are sold
or served on the premises, shall serve or permit or allow the consumption
of alcoholic beverages on the premises, unless such establishment holds a
valid retail consumption license issued by the Township or the New Jersey
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 160A-4. Exceptions. [Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 5215]
The prohibitions contained in §§ 160A-2 and 160A-3 of this chapter shall
not apply to a retail food establishment licensed facility as defined in this
section.
§ 160-31 ALARMS § 160A-5
156:235
§ 160A-5. Enforcement. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 523878]
This chapter shall be enforced by any member of the Township of Union
Police Department and any Township of Union Health Inspector who may
issue a summons for a violation of any ordinance of the Board of Health.
§ 160A-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 164
AMUSEMENTS; ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 160.
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 216.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Noise — See Ch. 378.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 390, Art. I.
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 415.
Theaters — See Ch. 499.
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 160A-5 as § 160A-6.
§ 160A-5 UNION CODE § 160A-6
156:236
ARTICLE I
Pinball Machines and Similar Devices
[Adopted 2-13-1945 by Ord. No. 1061A (Ch. 91, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 164-1. Use restrictions. [Amended 11-27-1951 by Ord. No. 1369A;
4-24-1956 by Ord. No. 1651A; 12-22-1959 by Ord. No. 1892;
12-24-1981 by Ord. No. 3507]
§ 164-2. Nonapplicability.
This article shall not apply to machines owned and operated exclusively for
the sale of merchandise in which neither the element of chance nor the
element of skill is involved.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to have, own,
keep, maintain or operate in any store, shop, tavern, restaurant, place
of business or elsewhere in the Township of Union in the County of
Union any pinball machine, bagatelle machine, roulette machine or any
similar machine or device which is operated by depositing a coin
therein for the playing of a game or the engaging in a contest of chance
or skill; provided, however, that any of the aforementioned types of
machines will be permitted in any of the following establishments:
(1) Those having a valid and subsisting plenary retail consumption
license.
(2) Those having a valid and subsisting club liquor license.
(3) Those having at least 15,000 square feet.
(4) Those clubs affiliated with a national or state parent body.
B. None of the aforementioned establishments may maintain any of the
aforementioned machines if they are located within 1,000 feet from any
division line of any plot on which there is located a school building.
C. None of the prohibitions herein contained shall be applicable to the
operation of any of the aforementioned machines in any premises
owned or operated by the Township of Union in the County of Union.
D. The annual license fee for each machine shall be $100 for the calendar
year or any part thereof. [Amended 2-13-1988 by No. 3997;
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
E. Each application for any license for any of the aforesaid machines shall
be made in accordance with the procedure set forth Article II,
Amusement and Entertainment Licensing and Regulation, of this
chapter, and any amendments or supplements thereof; provided,
however, that no application will be entertained from anyone other than
the operator of the business establishment in which the aforesaid
machines are to be located.
§ 164-1 ALARMS § 164-3
156:237
§ 164-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section.
§ 164-3 UNION CODE § 164-3
156:238
ARTICLE II
Amusement and Entertainment Licensing and Regulation
[Adopted 9-26-1967 by Ord. No. 2427 (Ch. 93 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 164-4. License required. [Amended 4-9-1968 by Ord. No. 2468;
1-27-1976 by Ord. No. 3059; 5-23-1989 by Ord. No. 4024;
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
A. It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct in the Township of
Union in the County of Union any billiard room, poolroom, bowling
alley, public dance hall, carnival, circus, swimming pool, skating rink,
automatic or mechanical device or record player from which music
emanates at the insertion of a coin, which said device is commonly
termed a "jukebox," or other automatic amusement device, without first
presenting an application and receiving a license to operate the
respective business, automatic amusement device, jukebox or place of
amusement and paying the fee hereinafter prescribed for such license.
B. It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct in the Township of
Union in the County of Union any facility where patrons are entertained
by persons who pose, exercise or dance or expose themselves for
compensation without first presenting an application and receiving a
license to operate the respective business and paying the fee
hereinafter prescribed for such license. Any applicant pursuant to this
section must comply with N.J.S.A. 2C:34-7, in addition to those required
pursuant to Chapter 164. [Amended 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 5303]
C. It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct in the Township of
Union in the County of Union any facility where patrons are entertained
by persons who pose, exercise or dance for compensation without first
presenting an application and receiving a license to operate the
respective business and paying the fee hereinafter prescribed for such
license. Applications for a license pursuant to this section include any
performance, such as erotic dancing, go-go dancing, or a bikini bar,
performed by men or women, with or without pay. An applicant
pursuant to this section shall meet the following conditions, in addition
to those required pursuant to Chapter 164: [Amended 1-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 5175; 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 5226; 4-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 5226]
(1) No license shall be transferred to any location within 1,000 feet of
an existing license issued pursuant to § 164-4C by the Township.
The distance shall be the shortest linear distance between any part
of the outside of the building in which the establishment is located
to any part of the outside of the building of the other entertainment
licensed.
(2) No license shall be transferred to any location within 1,000 feet of
any residential zone or residential property as measured from the
point upon the outside walls of the building or building lease space
§ 164-4 ALARMS § 164-4
156:239
§ 164-5. Application for licenses; processing of license applications.
[Amended 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 518579]
containing the business to the nearest property line of the
residential property. The distance shall be the shortest linear
distance between any part of the outside of the building in which
the establishment is located to any residential lot line.
A. Any person desiring a license under this chapter shall file with the
Township Clerk an original application under oath, in writing, on a form
furnished by the Township Clerk.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, business name and business address.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation
or another entity and, if another entity, a full explanation and
description thereof.
(3) If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's residence address.
(4) If the applicant is a partnership, the full names, residence
addresses, of each partner.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation or other entity:
(a) In the case of a corporation, the full names, residence
addresses, of each major officer and each stockholder, the
name and address of the registered agent and the address of
the registered agent and the address of the principal office.
The term "stockholder," as used herein, means and includes
any person owning or having an interest, either legal or
equitable, in 10% or more of the stock issued and outstanding
of the applicant corporation.
(b) In the case of another entity, the full names and residence
addresses of each person owning or having an interest, either
legal or equitable, aggregating in value 10% or more of the
total capital of said entity, the name and address of the
registered agent, if any, and the address of the principal office.
(6) The number of plenary retail consumption licenses held by the
applicant, if any.
(7) A specific description of the nature and type of entertainment to be
provided on the licensed premises.
(8) If the premises are not owned by the applicant, the consent of the
owner of the premises for the filing of the application.
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 164-6, Processing license
applications; recommendations.
§ 164-4 UNION CODE § 164-5
156:240
(9) Each individual, regardless of the applicant's name, who is an
owner, must also submit his or her date of birth, social security
number and place of birth.
(10) All applicants seeking any adult entertainment license, or any forprofit
skating rink, miniature golf, arcade, or any application where
children under the age of 18 congregate, which is open to the
public, without direct and personal supervision, will undergo a
criminal background check by either fingerprint, name or both.
(11) Upon an initial application for an entertainment license or in the
event a new individual name is added to the license, applicants
must have their fingerprints taken.
(12)On renewal applications, a name check will be conducted by the
New Jersey State Police for a criminal record check.
C. Upon receipt of such application, the Township Clerk shall submit the
same to the Police Department, the Zoning Officer and the Health
Department for reports with reference to the compliance or
noncompliance with municipal and state rules, regulations, statutes and
ordinances and the truth of the matters contained in the application.
D. Upon receipt of such application and reports, the Township Clerk shall
submit the same to the Township Committee for its consent and
approval.
E. The Township Committee shall consent to and approve the issuance of
such license, unless it reasonably finds that applicant's character and
business responsibility are not satisfactory; that a violation of municipal
or state rules, regulations, statutes and ordinances exists; that untrue
matters are contained in the application for the license; that the
issuance of the license will tend to create a nuisance; or that the
issuance of such license will adversely affect the good government,
order and protection of persons and property and the preservation of
the health, safety and welfare of the Township of Union and its
inhabitants.
F. The Township Committee shall determine that the applicant's character
and business responsibility are satisfactory, unless the application, the
reports of the various departments or other evidence presented shall
tangibly disclose any of the following:
(1) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude or offenses of
public indecency.
(2) Prior violations of statutes ordinances or regulations relevant to
the furnishing of entertainment.
(3) Prior violations of ABC regulations, N.J.A.C. 13:2-23.5, 13:2-23.6,
13:2-23.7 or 13:2-23.14, if applicant holds a plenary license.
(4) Conviction for a disorderly persons offense involving gambling.
§ 164-5 ALARMS § 164-5
156:241
§ 164-6. (Reserved)
§ 164-7. Fees. [Amended 4-9-1968 by Ord. No. 2468; 11-22-1975 by
Ord. No. 3036; 1-27-1976 by Ord. No. 3059; 3-27-1984 by Ord. No.
3699]
(5) Concrete evidence of bad character.
(6) Grounds similar to those listed above which would reasonably
cause the Township Committee to determine that the character and
business responsibility of the applicant or any partner, officer or
stockholder thereof is not satisfactory.
G. Upon the consenting approval of the Township Committee of the
issuance of a license, the Township Clerk shall issue the same; subject,
however, to such appropriate conditions and safeguards, if any,
consistent with the intent and purpose of and reasonably necessary to
accomplish the objectives of this chapter and the statutory authority for
the same as may be imposed by the governing body.
A. The fees payable for licenses issued under this chapter shall be upon
the following basis: [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997;
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
(1) For a license to conduct a pool and billiard parlor: $325.
(2) For a license to conduct a place for bowling alleys: $250.
(3) For a license to conduct a pool and billiard room combined with
bowling alleys: $325.
(4) For a license to conduct a public dance hall: $250.
(5) For a license to conduct a carnival: $2,000 per day.80
(6) For a license to conduct a circus: $2,000 per day.81
(7) For a license to operate a jukebox or other automatic amusement
device: $75 each for each jukebox or device.
(8) For a license to conduct a swimming pool: $525.
(9) For a license to conduct a skating rink: $500.
(10) For a license to conduct a grove for the holding of picnics, outings
and gatherings of a similar nature: $125.
B. Except as to a carnival or circus, the fee for any license issued after
August 1 in any year shall be at the rate of 1/2 the annual fee
hereinabove specified.
80.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 216, Carnivals, Circuses and Traveling Shows.
81.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 216, Carnivals, Circuses and Traveling Shows.
§ 164-5 UNION CODE § 164-7
156:242
§ 164-8. Nontransferability. [Amended 1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 5175;
4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 5303]
Each license shall entitle the licensee to conduct the licensed business
or game only at the place designated in the license and shall not be
transferable as to place. Each such license shall expire on the 31st day of
December of the year in which it was issued, and in the case of a license for
a carnival or for a circus, the license shall be effective only for the specific
period set forth in said license.
§ 164-9. Revocation; prohibitions; sexually explicit material.
C. The fee for a license to operate a facility where patrons are entertained
by persons who pose, exercise, dance or expose themselves for
compensation shall be $3,125 per year. The fee for a license to operate
a facility where patrons are entertained by viewing graphic material,
movies or videos of an explicit nature shall be $4,375. [Added
5-23-1989 by No. 4024; amended 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282;
9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Township Committee of the Township of Union in the County of
Union, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business in an unlawful manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or to constitute a nuisance, a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be forwarded by certified mail,
postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensed premises and at his last
known address at least five days prior to the date for hearing. Notice
may be dispensed with in the event that the Township Committee
determines that a hearing is necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the Township of Union and its inhabitants. [Amended
4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5185]
C. All entertainment by persons who pose, exercise, dance or expose
themselves for compensation shall be subject to the following
regulations: [Added 5-23-1989 by Ord. No. 4024]
§ 164-7 ALARMS § 164-9
156:243
§ 164-10. Inspections.
All places licensed under this article shall be subject to inspection by
the Police Department or an officer or officers designated by the Chief of
Police for such purpose, and by the Health Officer and Chief of the Fire
Department or by subordinates designated by them for such purpose.
§ 164-11. Conduct.
Every place of business licensed under this article shall be conducted in a
law-abiding, clean and sanitary manner and shall provide adequate sanitary
arrangements and facilities in accordance with its necessities and shall
comply with all regulations, provisions and ordinances of the Township of
Union, or of its Board of Health or any law which may be applicable to such
places.
§ 164-12. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of every police officer of the Township of Union to
enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be
violating the same.
§ 164-13. Records of licenses issued.
The Township Clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and
record the reports of any violation on said record.
(1) Dancing on bars and tabletops shall be prohibited.
(2) Indecent exposure by means of unduly abbreviated costumes shall
be prohibited.
(3) Any performer who acts in a lewd, indecent or immoral manner,
causing a charge to be brought against the owner at the time of the
violation, shall also be charged with committing an offense.
(4) Mud wrestling shall be prohibited.
(5) Wrestling between performers and/or any other person shall be
prohibited.
D. All entertainment or amusement whereby patrons view any sexually
explicit material, including but not limited to books, magazines, movies,
videos or other graphic depiction, shall be subject to the following
regulations: [Added 5-23-1989 by Ord. No. 4024]
(1) Depiction of minors in any sexually provocative manner is strictly
forbidden.
(2) Depiction of any human being performing an act of bestiality is
strictly forbidden.
§ 164-9 UNION CODE § 164-14
156:244
§ 164-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm, corporation or association, club, copartnership or
society or any other organization.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — A room or place in which dancing is carried on
with or without the payment of a fee or a charge.
§ 164-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-25-1975 by Ord.
No. 3036; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
3998]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to
become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 164-14 ALARMS § 164-15
156:245

ARTICLE III
Computerized Video Machines
[Adopted 12-22-1981 by Ord. No. 3552 (Ch. 91, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 164-16. License required.
The operation of all automatic mechanical, electrical, electronic or
computerized video machines, games, similar machines or devices
operated, maintained or used in any public or quasi-public place or in any
building, store or other place wherein the public are invited or wherein
the public may enter shall require a license therefor for the placement and
operation thereof.
§ 164-17. Issuance restrictions.
No such license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation who shall
have been convicted of a crime or a violation of any Township ordinance
involving gambling or moral turpitude. In the event of the issuance of a
license and the licensee to whom it has been issued shall thereafter be
convicted of a crime or a violation of any Township ordinance involving
gambling or moral turpitude, then and in such event such license may,
after the exercise of due process, be revoked by action of the Township
Committee.
§ 164-18. Initial application.
The initial application for a license to place or operate any type machine
regulated by this article shall be made on a form to be furnished by the
Township Clerk, which form shall include, but not be necessarily limited to,
the appropriate answers to the following:
A. The name of applicant.
B. The address of applicant.
C. The telephone number of applicant.
D. If an applicant is a corporation, list the names and addresses of all
stockholders, directors and officers holding in excess of 10% of the
corporate stock of said corporation.
E. The name and address of registered agent of corporation and location
of principal office.
F. The name and address and home telephone number of the manager or
other authorized agent of the applicant who shall be in charge of or
conducts the business of the applicant.
G. The type, manufacturer, serial number and precise location of each
machine described in this article.
§ 164-16 ALARMS § 164-18
156:247
§ 164-19. Fees to accompany application.
The fees hereinafter provided shall accompany each application. In the
event of a denial of an application, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 164-20. Investigation. [Amended 9-13-1983 by Ord. No. 3660]
Prior to the issuance of a license, the Township Clerk shall forward a copy
of the application to the Chief of Police, the Construction Code Official, the
Fire Subcode Official and the Fire Prevention Bureau for the purpose of
having an investigation made by said Chief of Police of the applicant and for
the purpose of having the Construction Code Official inspect the premises
to determine if they comply with all municipal ordinances, code and zoning
requirements, having the Fire Subcode Official and the Fire Prevention
Bureau inspect the premises to determine and then post the number of
persons who may be lawfully authorized on said premises and congregate
around each of said machines, and if said premises otherwise comply with
the Fire Prevention Code.82
§ 164-21. Renewal application.
Upon the expiration date of the initial license as hereinafter provided for,
the license may be renewed by the filing of a renewal application form
with the Township Clerk. Such renewal application shall require the same
inspections as provided for in § 164-20 above.
§ 164-22. Investigation recommendations; issuance or denial; right
to appeal. [Amended 9-13-1983 by Ord. No. 3660]
Upon the return of the reports of the Chief of Police, the Construction Code
Official, the Fire Subcode Official and the Fire Prevention Bureau showing
favorable recommendations, the Township Clerk is authorized to issue the
required license or licenses. In the event that the Township Clerk, based
upon the reports of said Chief of Police, the Construction Code Official,
the Fire Subcode Official and the Fire Prevention Bureau or for reasons
determined by said Township Clerk, denies the application, then and in
H. The birth date and social security number of each individual named in
the application.
I. The application must state the total number of square feet of the
premises in which the machine or machines will be located and shall be
accompanied by a floor plan showing the location of each such machine
or machines to be placed in said premises. Excluded from the
calculation of such square footage shall be storage area, offices,
kitchens, counter spaces, walkways, alleys, drives, parking facilities or
such other areas to which the public has no access.
J. The aforesaid application shall be verified.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Fire Prevention.
§ 164-18 UNION CODE § 164-22
156:248
that event the rejected applicant may appeal such denial to the Township
Committee, provided that written notice of such appeal is filed not later
than 10 days from the date of such denial.
§ 164-23. Duration of license. [Amended 8-8-1989 by Ord. No. 4047]
The licenses provided for in this article shall expire on the 31st day of
December of the year in which issued.
§ 164-24. Types of licenses; license fees.
§ 164-25. License required prior to operation of machine; licenses
affixed to each machine.
No such game or machine regulated by this article shall be placed,
operated, maintained or used until the license herein provided for has been
issued. The license for each machine shall be affixed in a prominent place on
each such machine. In addition to the license, there shall likewise be posted
on each machine the name and post office address of the licensee.
A. There shall be and there is hereby created the following types of
licenses: [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997; 12-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 4282; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 4474; 9-10-2002 by Ord.
No. 4745]
(1) Distributor's or owner's license. The fee for a distributor's or
owner's license shall be $325.
(2) Machine or game license. The fee for each machine or game license
in any one location up to a total of five shall be $250 each for a
period of one year or any part thereof; for all machines or game
licenses in any one location in excess of five and up to 15 (i.e., the
next 10 machines or games), the fee shall be the sum of $125 each
for the same period as hereinabove stated. With respect to
locations where the combined number of video games, kiddy rides
and pinball or other nonvideo amusement devices exceeds 15, a flat
additional license fee of $325 shall be imposed, regardless of the
number of devices exceeding 15. In determining which 15 devices
shall constitute the first 15 for application of this section, video
games shall be counted first.
B. In the event that a distributor desires to transfer any machine from one
establishment to another, such transfer is hereby authorized without
the payment of any additional fee; provided, however, that the
distributor having control of such machine or game advises the
Township Clerk of the new location and former location of each such
machine so transferred.
§ 164-22 ALARMS § 164-26
156:249
§ 164-26. Number of machines restricted; aisles to be maintained.
[Amended 9-13-1983 by Ord. No. 3660]
The ratio of machines to be allowed in any one establishment shall be
and there is hereby authorized one machine for each 300 square feet, or
major fraction thereof, of the gross floor area of each such establishment,
calculated as set forth in § 164-18I hereof. A four-foot aisle shall be
maintained between the exterior side of the machines and an eight-foot
aisle between rows of machines and, further, no machine shall be placed
within four feet of the entranceway or exit of said premises.
§ 164-27. Use to be considered accessory.
No license may be issued to any premises wherein the installation,
operation and use of the machines and games described in this article are
considered as the principal use of said premises. It shall be the intention
of this article that the license shall only issue to such locations wherein
the use, operation or maintenance of said machines are considered as an
accessory use.
§ 164-28. Gambling unlawful.
No person shall use or permit to be used any of such machines for the
purpose of gambling.
§ 164-29. Use by certain age groups restricted. [Added 9-13-1983
by Ord. No. 3660]
§ 164-30. Proximity to church or school. [Added 9-13-1983 by Ord.
No. 3660]
No machine described in § 164-16 of this article shall be permitted on any
premises located within 200 feet of any church or public schoolhouse or
private schoolhouse, said distance to be measured in the normal way that a
pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest entrance of said church or
school to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to be licensed for the
operation of said machines.
§ 164-31. Amusement machine complex. [Added 9-13-1983 by Ord.
No. 3660]
A. No distributor or owner shall permit any person under 13 years of age
to operate any of the machines described in § 91-1 of said article unless
such person shall be accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or an
adult member of his family.
B. No distributor or owner shall permit the operation of any machine set
forth in § 164-16 of this article by any person under the age of 16 years
during normal school hours on school days or after 10:00 p.m. on the
eve of school days unless likewise accompanied by his parent, legal
guardian or an adult member of his family.
§ 164-26 UNION CODE § 164-31
156:250
§ 164-32. Nonconforming use. [Added 9-18-1983 by Ord. No. 3660]
Any amusement machine complex in existence as of the effective date of
this article and for which permits have been legally issued shall be allowed
to continue in any zone notwithstanding the provisions of this article as a
nonconforming use.
§ 164-33. Revocation.
Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation by the Township
Clerk, should the licensed operator distribute or operate any amusement or
entertainment machine or device contrary to the provisions of this article
or any other law, ordinance, rule or regulation or fail to cooperate fully with
any enforcement officer or agency. Any material misstatement or omission
in the license application or in any information submitted therewith or the
failure to notify, in writing, the Township Clerk of any changes by addition or
deletion or amendment to said application or information, during the term
of any license or renewal, shall constitute sufficient ground for revocation
of said license by the Township Clerk.
§ 164-34. Impoundment for probable cause.
If the Chief of the Township of Union Police Department shall have probable
cause to believe any amusement or entertainment machine or device is
being used for gambling, such machine or device may be temporarily seized
by the Police Department and impounded and may be considered as
contraband by law.
§ 164-35. Approval by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control. [Added 6-26-1984 by Ord. No. 3731]
No machine regulated by this article shall be authorized and no license
therefor shall issue, if the type of said machine has not been heretofore
approved by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.83
§ 164-36. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 399884]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
A. A group of more than six of the machines set forth in § 164-16 of this
article shall constitute an amusement machine complex.
B. An amusement machine complex may only be operated in a BC Zone.
Said amusement machine complex shall be subject to the distance
requirements set forth in § 164-30 hereof.
83.Editor's Note: As to alcoholic beverages generally, see Ch. 160.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 164-31 ALARMS § 164-36
156:251
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section.
§ 164-36 UNION CODE § 164-36
156:252
ARTICLE IV
Display of Obscene Material
[Adopted 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 4085 (Ch. 84, Art. I of the 1986
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 164-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWINGLY —
OBSCENE FILM — Any motion picture film or preview or trailer to a
film not including news reels portraying actual events or pictorial news of
the day, in which a scene, taken by itself, depicts a specified anatomical
area or specified sexual activity or the simulation of a specified sexual
activity or verbalization concerning a specified sexual activity as set forth
in the definition of that term and emits sensuality sufficient in terms of the
duration and impact of the depiction to appeal to the prurient interest. For
the purpose of this article, all films and rentals which have received a rating
of "X" or its equivalent from the Motion Picture Academy shall be presumed
an "obscene film." For the purpose of this article, it shall be conclusively
presumed that all films rated by the Motion Picture Academy other than "X"
are not "obscene films" [N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection (a)(2)].
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of a specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity
contained in or consisting of a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance or film, which by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality with
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity
[N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection 3(a)(1)].
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
18 years old, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or
other publications at retail, containing pictures, drawings and photographs
(N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.1).
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA —
Having knowledge of the character and content of the material
described herein.
A.
Having failed to reasonably exercise reasonable inspection which would
disclose its character and content [N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection (a)(5)].
B.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
A.
§ 164-37 ALARMS § 164-37
156:253
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —
§ 164-38. Prohibited acts.
§ 164-39. Public display to constitute evidence.
Public display of the obscene material, as defined herein, shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the
display (N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.2).
§ 164-40. Violations and penalties.
Any retailer who violates § 164-38 commits a petty disorderly person's
offense and shall receive a warning from the Municipal Court without
fine but with payment of costs. However, for each violation thereafter, the
retailer shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250, imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, or any combination thereof, for each and every violation.85
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered
[N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, Subsection (a)(3)].
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual
intercourse.
B.
Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast [N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3,
Subsection (a)(4)].
C.
A. It shall be a petty disorderly person's offense for a retailer to knowingly
display or permit to be displayed at his business premises any obscene
materials or obscene films as defined herein:
(1) At a height of less than five feet; or
(2) Without a blinder or other covering placed or printed on the front
of the material displayed, irrespective as to the height of the
material.
B. The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply, however, in the
event that said material is located at a controlled access point behind
which the public at large can reasonably neither observe nor have
access to the material (N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.2).
85.Editor’s Note: Former Art. V, Sexually Oriented Businesses, adopted 8-10-1993 by Ord. No.
4266 (Ch. 84, Art. II of the 1986 Code), as amended, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 4942. See now Ch. 437, Sexually Oriented
Businesses.
§ 164-37 UNION CODE § 164-40
156:254
Chapter 168
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines for unlicensed dogs and cats — See Ch.
271.
Hunting — See Ch. 273.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 397.
Animals at large in trailer camps — See Ch.
510.
Animals as regulated by Board of
Health — See Ch. 551.
Noise — See Ch. 585.
§ 164-40 ALARMS § 164-40
156:255

ARTICLE I
Dog and Exotic Animal Regulations
[Adopted 9-27-1966 by Ord. No. 969 (Ch. 135, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 168-1. Definitions.
A. Words defined. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained an age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
HYBRID ANIMAL — The offspring of a domestic animal and an animal
of wildlife species.[Added 12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 4365]
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such a dog in his keeping.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association
of persons.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not
part of a kennel wherein dogs and other animals or pets are kept for
sale or displayed.[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 3987]
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.86
B. Word usage.
(1) The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably, and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards
the effecting of this article.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the plural,
whichever is applicable and conducive towards the effectuating of
this article. The masculine, feminine or the neuter gender shall be
implied, whichever is appropriate and conducive for the
effectuating of this article.
86.Editor's Note: The definition of "vicious dog (including pit bulls)," which previously
followed this definition, added 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 3987, was repealed 3-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 4076. See now N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
§ 168-1 ALARMS § 168-2
156:257
§ 168-2. License required; wild, exotic and hybrid animals.
[Amended 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 4060]
§ 168-3. Dogs of licensing age. [Amended 8-13-1974 by Ord. No.
2902]
§ 168-4. License and registration fees; exemptions from fees.
[Amended 9-27-1966 by Ord. No. 2349A; 7-27-1971 by Ord. No.
2902; 12-22-1981 by Ord. No. 3550; 12-22-1983 by Ord. No. 3622;
4-10-1984 by Ord. No. 3703; 7-22-1986 by Ord. No. 3864; 8-9-1988
by Ord. No. 3987; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997; 2-25-1992 by Ord.
No. 417987; 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 4273]
A. No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Township of Union in
the County of Union without first obtaining a license therefor, to be
issued by the Clerk of the Township, upon application by the owner and
payment of the prescribed fee; and no person shall keep or harbor any
dog in said Township, except in compliance with the provisions of this
article.
B. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any wild or exotic animals as
pets. The definition of such wild or exotic animals shall be that found in
N.J.A.C. 7:25-4.13.
C. Hybrid animals, such as wolf dogs and other offspring of other domestic
animals crossbred with wildlife species, shall be prohibited within the
Township of Union. [Added 12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 4365]
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
in the month of January of each year, apply for and procure from the
Clerk of the Township a license and official metal registration tag for
each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each
such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto.
B. No such license and official metal registration tag shall be issued for
any dog unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the dog to be
licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a
type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare or has
been certified exempt as provided by the regulations of the State
Department of Health.
A. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee
of $14, which fee shall include the twenty-cents-per-dog fee for the
State Pilot Clinic Fund. In addition, the sum of $1 for the state
registration tag of each dog shall be paid. For each annual renewal, the
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the legislative intent of these
amendments is to conform the Township fee schedule to the fee schedules of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 168-2 UNION CODE § 168-4
156:258
§ 168-5. Applications for licenses of newly acquired dogs.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 168-6. Application information.
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which license and registration are sought and whether it is of
a long- or short-haired variety and also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
The information on said application and the registration number issued for
the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk of the
Township. In addition, he shall forward similar information to the State
Department of Health each month on forms furnished by said Department.
Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the applications.
§ 168-7. Dogs brought into Township.
fee for the license, inclusive of the Pilot Clinic Fund, and for the
registration tag shall be the same as for the original license and tag.
Said licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the
last day of January in each year. [Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No.
5017]
B. In compliance with P.L. 1983, c. 172,88 any person applying for the
license and registration tag above mentioned shall pay an additional
state fee of $3 for any dog of reproductive age which has not had its
reproductive capacity permanently altered through sterilization.
C. The licensee fee for any dog that has been spayed or neutered shall be
reduced to $13. This fee is inclusive of the State Pilot Clinic Fund fee
and the state registration fee. [Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No.
5017]
D. In addition to the fees charged herein for licensing, there shall be an
additional charge of $2 per month for each month that the owner of the
dog requiring licensing fails to renew. Said monthly penalty for failure
to renew shall commence each April 1 of the licensing period.
E. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
[Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
88.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3b.
§ 168-4 ALARMS § 168-7
156:259
§ 168-8. Removal of registration tag restricted.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it is not
issued.
§ 168-9. (Reserved)89
§ 168-10. Fees for kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
[Amended 11-25-1975 by Ord. No. 3043; 12-22-1981 by Ord. No.
3550; 2-22-1983 by Ord. No. 3622; 4-10-1984 by Ord. No. 3703;
7-22-1986 by Ord. No. 3864; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997;
2-25-1992 by Ord. No. 417990]
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
fewer dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual license
fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or
pound. The licenses herein provided for shall expire on the last day of
January of each year.
§ 168-11. Dogs in kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds; leash and
safe controls.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 168-12. Disposition of fees. [Amended 10-12-1993 by Ord. No.
4273]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this article, except registration tag fees, Pilot Clinic Fund and the Animal
Population Control Fund shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Union any dog licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag and shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the Township for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless such dog shall be licensed under § 168-9 of this article.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog
unless such dog shall be licensed under § 168-9 of this article.
89.Editor's Note: Former § 168-9, Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, was repealed
4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5184. See now Ch. 551, Animals.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the legislative intent of these
amendments is to conform the Township fee schedule with the fee schedules of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 168-7 UNION CODE § 168-12
156:260
Township within 30 days after collection or receipt and shall be placed in
a special account separate from any of the other accounts of the Township
and which shall be used for the following purposes only: for collecting,
keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this article; for local
prevention and control of rabies; for providing anti-rabies treatment under
the direction of the local Board of Health for any person known or suspected
to have been exposed to rabies; for all other purposes prescribed by the
statutes of New Jersey governing the subject; and for administering the
provisions of this article. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special
account shall be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year
following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section.
At the end of said third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal
year thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Township any amount then in such account which is in
excess of the total amount paid into said special account during the last two
fiscal year next preceding.
§ 168-13. Information forwarded to State Department of Health.
§ 168-14. Canvass.
The Animal Control Officer of the Township shall promptly, after February
28, 1942, and annually thereafter cause a canvass to be made of all dogs
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Township and shall report
to the Clerk of the Township, the Board of Health of the Township and to
the State Department of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate
columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring
such dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each
of said persons, together with the registration numbers of each of said dogs
and the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with a complete description of each of said unlicensed
dogs.
§ 168-15. Animal Control Officer. [Amended 3-24-1992 by Ord. No.
4184]
The Township Committee shall have the power to appoint an Animal Control
Officer, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article. The
A. The Clerk of the Township shall forward to the State Department of
Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed
within 30 days after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall
include the name and address of the licensee and the kind of license
issued.
B. The registration tag fee of $1 for each dog, $0.20 Pilot Clinic Fund and
$3 Animal Population Control Fund shall be forwarded within 30 days
after collection by the Clerk to the State Department of Health.
[Amended 7-27-1971 by Ord. No. 2902; 11-25-1975 by Ord. No.
3550; 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 4273]
§ 168-12 ALARMS § 168-15
156:261
Township Committee shall also have the power to appoint one or more
persons, to be known as "dog catchers," who may impound unlicensed dogs
running at large in violation of the provisions of this article. In addition, the
Police Department, the Health Officer and the Chief Sanitation Inspector of
the Township of Union and their designees shall be empowered to enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 168-16. Impoundment.
The Animal Control Officer of the Township shall take into custody and
impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter
destroyed or disposed of as provided in this section:
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, which said official or his agent, or agents, have
reason to believe is a stray dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Seized dogs. [Amended 7-27-1971 by Ord. No. 2902]
(1) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
(2) If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or
a registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring
said dog is known, the Animal Control Officer shall forthwith serve
on the person whose address is given on the collar or on the owner
or on the person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice
in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to
be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
the service of the notice.
(3) A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to
the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the
person's usual, or last known place of abode or to the address given
on the collar.
(4) When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after
notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not been and
cannot be given as above set forth, and if the owner or person
keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance not exceeding $5 per day, and if the dog is unlicensed
at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or
harboring said dog has not produced a license and registration tag
for said dog, the Animal Control Officer may cause the dog to be
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible. In such a
case, the owner shall pay to the Township an euthanasia fee of $15.
§ 168-15 UNION CODE § 168-16
156:262
§ 168-17. Authority to enter premises.
Any person or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize, for
impounding, any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound
when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon
the premises of the owner of the dog, if said owner is present and forbids
the same.
§ 168-18. Hindering or interfering with authority.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 168-19. Dogs which habitually bark at night.91 [Amended
11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 4060]
§ 168-20. Dogs running at large.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
run at large upon the public streets or in any public park, or in any public
building, or in any other public place within the Township of Union in the
County of Union.
§ 168-21. Dogs in public to be adequately controlled.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Township of
[Amended 12-22-1981 by Ord. No. 3550; 6-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 4393]
A. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually
barks or cries between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. No person shall harbor, maintain, shelter or in any other manner or
description keep any dog, cat or other animal outside the main confines
of any dwelling or place of business between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
C. For the purposes of this section, detached or attached garages, sheds,
doghouses or similar shelters used in conjunction with outdoor fenced
areas shall likewise be restricted so that no dog, cat or other animal
may be harbored, maintained, sheltered or kept therein between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. It is the specific purpose and intent of this section to assure that the
ownership of any animal, by any individual or establishment, shall not
cause disturbances to the peace, tranquility or quality of life of any
other individual.
91.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 378, Noise.
§ 168-16 ALARMS § 168-21
156:263
Union, unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years
and if securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than
six feet long.92
§ 168-22. Dogs causing damage to property.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or
property.93
§ 168-23. Exotic animals in municipal parks. [Added 6-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 4200; amended 9-9-2008 by Ord. No. 5061]
No exotic animals are allowed in municipal parks.
§ 168-24. Pet waste. [Added 8-25-1987 by Ord. No. 3930; amended
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 4908]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the
proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Township of Union, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
B. Definitions and word usage. For the purpose of this section, the
following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
92.Editor's Note: Former § 135-22, Muzzling, which previously followed this section, was
repealed 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842.
93.Editor's Note: Former § 135-24, Vicious dogs, as amended, and former § 135-25, Licensing
of vicious dogs, added 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 3987, which previously followed this section,
were repealed 3-13-1990 by Ord. No. 4076. See now N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
§ 168-21 UNION CODE § 168-24
156:264
§ 168-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1971 by Ord. No.
2669; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879]
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
C. Requirement for disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
D. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
E. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Union Township Municipal Police Department and an officer of the
Union Township Health Department.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties as set
forth in § 168-25B.
G. Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of
this section is declared to be an independent section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
portion of this section to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any
cause or reason shall not affect any other portion of this section.
H. Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect from and
after its adoption and any publication as may be required by law.
A. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any part of the
following sections, namely §§ 168-3 through 168-9, 168-11 and 168-18,
or with the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department
of Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet
shops, shelters and pounds, to preserve sanitation therein and prevent
the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such
establishments, shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the
Township. A person who refuses or neglects to pay forthwith the
amount of a judgment rendered against him and the costs and charges
incident thereto shall be committed by the court to the county jail for a
period not exceeding 10 days in the case of a first conviction, and in the
case of a conviction for a second, subsequent or continuing violation,
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any part of any of the
following sections, namely, §§ 168-19 through 168-24 of this article,
§ 168-24 ALARMS § 168-25
156:265
shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the
county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a
fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section. [Amended 8-25-1987 by Ord. No. 3930; 12-13-1988 by
Ord. No. 3998; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
§ 168-25 UNION CODE § 168-25
156:266
ARTICLE II
Cat Licensing and Regulations
[Adopted 4-10-1990 by Ord. No. 4083 (Ch. 135, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 168-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of this Township
or any designated representative thereof charged with administering the
issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of
this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction, as
certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 168-27. Rabies vaccination requirements; exemption.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Township, unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of
this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those held by a state
or federal licensed research facility or a veterinary establishment
where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or
other treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet
shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
§ 168-26 ALARMS § 168-27
156:267
§ 168-28. Licensing requirements.
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization, published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of
an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Display of license number. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a
cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and procure from the Clerk
of the municipality, or other official designated by the governing body
thereof to license cats in the municipality in which he/she resides, a
license and official registration tag with license number or a
registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license number
securely fastened thereto or displayed thereon. Acceptable methods of
displaying the license number shall include but are not limited to
breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not
transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
application for a license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Township for no longer than 90
days.
C. Cats brought into Township.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township any cat licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve and shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Township for a period of
more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this
Township any unlicensed cat and shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Township for a period of more than 10
days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or
sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application, contents and preservation of information. The application
shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
the license and registration is sought and whether it is of a longhaired
§ 168-27 UNION CODE § 168-28
156:268
or shorthaired variety; also the name, street and post office address
of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or
other local official designated to license cats in the municipality.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption requirement for license. No Municipal Clerk or other official
designated by the governing body of any municipality to license cats
therein shall grant any such license and official registration tag or
sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the
cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Human Services or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 168-27D of this article. The rabies inoculation
shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
G. License fee schedule. [Added 2-25-1992 by Ord. No. 4178]
(1) A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $18 for each
unneutered cat and $13 for each neutered cat. [Amended
9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 5024]
(2) In addition to the fees charged herein for licensing, there shall be
an additional charge of $2 per month for each month that the
owner of the cat requiring a license fails to renew. The said monthly
penalty for failure to renew shall commence each April 1 of the
licensing period.
H. Payment of fees; renewals; expiration date of license. A license from
another municipality shall be accepted. The person applying for the
license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or
authorized. The fee for the renewal of license and registration tag or
sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and said license,
registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire on the last
day of January in each year. Only one license and registration tag or
sleeve shall be required in the licensing year for any cat in this
Township. Any valid New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New
Jersey municipality shall he accepted by this municipality as evidence of
compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Clerk or other official designated by the governing body may issue a
duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for that particular cat at a
fee of $0.25.
§ 168-28 ALARMS § 168-28
156:269
§ 168-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 4842]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates or who
fails or refuses to comply with any part of any of the sections of this article
shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
$1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to be
recovered by and in the name of the local Board of Health or by and in the
name of the municipality.
§ 168-30. (Reserved)94
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of
any health official, police officer, animal control officer or other
authorized person.
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this article, except registration tag
fees, shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Township within 30
days after collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account
separate from any of the other accounts of the Township and which
shall be used for the following purposes only: for the collecting, keeping
and disposing of animals liable to seizure under this article; for the local
prevention and control of rabies; for providing antirabies treatment
under the direction of the local Board of Health for any person known or
suspected to have been exposed to rabies; for all other purposes
prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey governing the subject; and for
administering the provisions of this article. Any unexpended balance
remaining in such special account shall be retained therein until the
end of the third fiscal year following and may be used for any of the
purposes set forth in this section. At the end of said third fiscal year
following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be
transferred from such special account to the general funds of the
Township any amount then in such account which is in excess of the
total amount paid into said special account during the last two fiscal
year as next preceding.
94.Editor's Note: Former § 168-30, When effective, was repealed 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5184.
§ 168-28 UNION CODE § 168-30
156:270
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)95
§ 168-31. through § 168-32. (Reserved)
95.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Wildlife Feeding, adopted 5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 4141 (Ch.
135, Art. III of the 1986 Code), as amended, was repealed 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5184. See
now Ch. 551, Animals, Art. III, Wildlife Feeding.
§ 168-31 ALARMS § 168-31
156:271

ARTICLE IV
Trapping
[Adopted 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 4549 (Ch. 135, Art. V of the 1986
Code)]
§ 168-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect both the citizens and animals in the
Township of Union from suffering potential severe and substantial injuries
as a result of using a mechanical or artificial device to trap animals and,
therefore, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 168-34. through § 168-41. (Reserved)96
96.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 168-34 through 168-41, regarding the prohibition of trapping,
were repealed 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5184. See now Ch. 551, Animals.
§ 168-33 ALARMS § 168-34
156:273
Chapter 173
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers, peddlers and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 317.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Outdoor displays — See Ch. 390, Art. II.
Sales — See Ch. 428.
§ 173-1. Unlawful auctions.
No real property or goods, wares or merchandise shall be sold at auction
within the Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 173-2. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following:
§ 173-3. Permit required; fee; prohibited locations. [Amended
3-27-1973 by Ord. No. 2768]
A. Auction sales conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy,
executors, administrators, receivers or other public officials acting
under judicial process and also auction sales authorized by the laws of
the State of New Jersey. [Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. 3768]
B. Auction sales conducted by a bona fide religious or charitable
organization conducting an auction on premises regularly occupied or
used by said organization for its activities.
C. Auction sales conducted by the agent of an owner of a business for the
sole purpose of disposing of the equipment used by said owner in the
ordinary conduct of said business.
A. No auction sale may be permitted under the exceptions set forth in
§ 173-2 hereof, unless and until the person intending to conduct said
auction obtains a permit therefor after completing an application for
said permit on forms to be prescribed by the Township Clerk. No
auction sale allowed under the exceptions set forth in said § 173-2
hereof may be conducted upon any street or public place, nor may the
goods to be sold by said auction be exposed to any person or persons
who shall be upon the sidewalk of any said street.
B. A fee shall be paid to the Township for each such auction authorized by
this chapter in the sum of $125. [Added 12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
3997; amended 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282; 9-10-2002 by Ord.
No. 4745]
§ 168-34 UNION CODE § 173-4
173:274
§ 173-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 399897]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
Chapter 179
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic regulations — See Ch.
266.
Human-powered locomotion devices — See
Ch. 362.
Motorcycles and similar vehicles — See Ch.
369.
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A device having two wheels, with tires 16 inches or more
in diameter, connected by a frame of metal or wood and arranged to be
propelled by human power. This definition does not apply to toy bicycles or
velocipedes.
§ 179-2. Registration requirements.
§ 179-3. Application for registration; decals. [Amended 2-22-1994
by Ord. No. 4294]
A. No person residing in the Township of Union shall ride or propel a
bicycle upon any street, public highway or other public property in the
Township of Union in the County of Union without having first
registered said bicycle with the Police Department in the manner
herein provided and without having first attached to such bicycle a
proper registration tag or decal, as also herein provided.
B. No person engaged in the business of renting bicycles for hire in the
Township of Union shall rent or offer for rent any bicycle which has not
been registered as herein provided and does not have attached thereto
a valid registration tag or decal pursuant to this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 173-4 BICYCLES § 179-3
179:275
§ 179-4. Inspection; responsibility for maintenance.
The Police Department may cause an inspection to be made of each bicycle
for which an application is made, under § 179-3 of this chapter, as to its safe
mechanical condition and as to the ability of the applicant to operate the
bicycle safely. Maintenance of a bicycle in proper mechanical condition shall
be the sole responsibility of the owner.
§ 179-5. Form and content of certificates; bicycles without serial
numbers.
A. Application for a registration certificate and registration tag or decal,
or for a transfer thereof, shall be made to the Police Department upon a
form approved by the Township Committee and/or the Police
Department and such authorized agents as may be designated by the
aforementioned. Such application shall set forth the name and address
of the owner, along with a description of the bicycle to include the name
of the manufacturer, color, sex and serial number appearing on the
frame of the bicycle. Applicants will be required to furnish proof of
ownership of such bicycle or proof of prior registration thereof with the
Township of Union. The Chief of Police is authorized to purchase and
have on hand at all times an adequate supply of registration certificates
and tags or decals to be issued as herein provided.
B. Upon receipt of the aforesaid application in proper form, and after
investigation and determination that the person applying for such
registration is entitled thereto, a registration certificate and tag or
decal shall be issued to the applicant.
C. Bicycle license decals/registrations shall be valid for a period of 10
years from the date of application and automatically deleted from
official Township files unless an application to renew said registration is
received from the bicycle owner or said registrations have been
affected pursuant to §§ 179-7, 179-8, 179-9, 179-12, 179-13, 179-14
and/or 179-18 of this chapter.
A. Every registration certificate shall be numbered in sequence and shall
set forth the name and address of the owner of the bicycle, the name of
the manufacturer of said bicycle, the color, sex and serial number
appearing on the frame of the bicycle. The tag or decal shall have upon
the same the name of the Township of Union and an identification
number, the size, color, configuration and numerical sequence which
shall be approved by the Township Committee and/or the Police
Department.
B. If for some reason a bicycle is without a serial number or is illegible for
identification purposes, a number shall be stamped into the frame of the
bicycle by the Police Department. Said number shall be determined by
the Police Department to be used in the administration of this chapter
and shall be considered the official serial number of the respective
bicycle.
§ 179-3 UNION CODE § 179-6
179:276
§ 179-6. Display of tags or decal.
The registration tag or decal shall be affixed to the frame of the bicycle on
the seat tube, in an upright position, no less than six inches nor more than
12 inches below the top of said tube at the point where the seat is attached
to said seat tube and facing to the front. Removal of any such tag or decal,
except by authority of the Police Department, shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
§ 179-7. Purchases of new or secondhand bicycles; duties and
responsibilities.
§ 179-8. Notification upon sale, transfer or dismantle of bicycles.
It shall be the responsibility and duty of every person who sells, transfers
ownership of or permanently dismantles any bicycle registered pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter to make a report thereof and surrender the
registration certificate and tag or decal to the Police Department within five
days of said sale, transfer or dismantling. If the bicycle is to be transferred
or sold to another person residing in the Township of Union, the seller
shall notify the Police Department of the same within five days of said
transfer or sale, surrender the registration certificate and forward the name
and address of the person to whom such transfer or sale was made. The
registration tag or decal, if any, shall remain on the bicycle for the purpose
of identification for the new owner. The new owner shall reregister the
bicycle pursuant to the provisions of § 179-7 of this chapter.
§ 179-9. Reports of purchases and sales.
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles or
selling new or secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make a report
to the Police Department of any purchases of secondhand bicycles or sale
of new or secondhand bicycles, giving the name and address of the person
A. It shall be the responsibility and duty of every person who purchases a
new or secondhand bicycle to register said bicycle within five days of
the date of purchase with the Police Department, pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be the responsibility and duty of every person in the Township of
Union who purchases or receives a bicycle, which is presently
registered in the Township of Union and is being transferred from the
former owner to the aforementioned purchaser, to reregister said
bicycle within five days from the date of purchase or receivership in the
manner herein provided for in this chapter. Said transfer shall be
transacted directly with the Police Department, and the new owner
shall be issued a new registration certificate bearing the registration
tag or decal number recently affixed to the bicycle. If no such Township
of Union tag or decal is present on the bicycle, a new registration tag or
decal shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4294]
§ 179-6 BICYCLES § 179-9
179:277
from or to whom each bicycle is purchased or sold, along with a description
of each bicycle to include make, color, sex and serial number of said bicycle,
as well as the number of the registration tag or decal found thereon, if any.
Said report shall be made within five days from the date of purchase and/or
sale upon an authorized form which identifies the person purchasing and/or
selling said bicycles as herein provided in this section. Said form may be the
authorized stationery of the person and/or dealer purchasing a secondhand
bicycle or selling a new or secondhand bicycle or a form constructed by the
aforementioned which identifies the name and address of said person and/
or dealer.
§ 179-10. Registration tag affixed to bicycle.
Any person engaged in the business of renting, hiring or loaning bicycles
shall first obtain a registration tag or decal for each bicycle as herein
provided in §§ 179-2 and 179-3 of this chapter and shall affix to each bicycle
a valid registration tag or decal in the manner as herein provided for in
§ 179-6 of this chapter.
§ 179-11. Records to be kept by Police Department.
The Police Department shall keep a record of the registration of all bicycles,
including the number of each registration certificate and tag or decal
issued, the date of issuance, the name and address of the person to whom
issued and the name or make and the serial number on the frame of the
bicycle for which issued. Said records shall also include the provisions of
this chapter not covered in this section.
§ 179-12. Replacements of lost or stolen certificates or tags.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4294]
Whenever an issued registration certificate and/or tag or decal is lost, stolen
or mutilated, a replacement certificate and/or tag or decal shall be required
by the Police Department as herein provided in §§ 179-2 and 179-3 of this
chapter. In the case of certificate replacement, said replacement shall be
made without charge.
§ 179-13. Altering or defacing tags or decals.
A. No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any registration tag
or decal, except as herein provided in § 179-8 of this chapter when said
tag or decal may be so removed for the purpose of surrendering the
same to the Police Department in the event of sale or transfer of
ownership or dismantling of a bicycle.
B. No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number on
the frame of any bicycle or have in his possession any bicycle on which
said serial number is removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered. If a
person should happen to have in his possession such a bicycle whose
serial number is removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered and he is the
legal owner of said bicycle, said person shall report to the Police
§ 179-9 UNION CODE § 179-13
179:278
§ 179-14. Revocation or suspensions.
§ 179-15. Rules and regulations.
No operator of a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lying or standing upon any
sidewalk in the Township of Union in such a manner as to hinder or impede
pedestrians. The operator shall so place the bicycle as to avoid annoyance
and danger to said pedestrians during the absence of said operator.
§ 179-16. Bicycle riding prohibited in certain areas. [Added
11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 422198]
No person shall use, operate or ride upon any bicycle within the Friberger
Park area nor on any public parking lot, public sidewalk, public tennis court,
public paved field hockey surface, public paved basketball court surface
or other public place within Zones BA, BB and BC within the Township of
Union. Bicycles shall be prohibited from being ridden on sidewalks of the
area popularly designated as the "center business district" which extends
from Caldwell Avenue to Warren Avenue along Morris Avenue and from
Johnson Place to Vauxhall Road along Stuyvesant Avenue for the purpose of
this legislation.
Department, within 24 hours of said removal, destruction, mutilation or
alteration, the reason for the same and produce proof of ownership of
the bicycle. The Police Department may then institute an investigation
regarding the same to determine any violation of this chapter. If no
violation is determined, the Police Department may stamp the previous
serial number, in a new location, into the frame, or issue a new serial
number, which will be stamped in a new location on the frame.
A. In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 179-20 of this chapter, any
registration certificate and tag or decal issued for a bicycle may be
revoked or suspended for cause after a hearing before the Chief of
Police or his designated representative. A written notice, setting forth
the charge(s) and the time and place of the hearing, shall be served
upon the person to whom the certificate and registration tag or decal
were issued.
B. The Chief of Police or his designated representative, pending the
hearing, may suspend the registration certificate and tag or decal if, in
his judgment, the protection of the public safety so demands. In such
event, the owner of the bicycle shall not permit the use of the bicycle
upon any street or public place within the Township of Union.
C. In the event of either revocation or suspension, the owner of the bicycle
shall forthwith surrender the registration certificate and/or remove the
tag or decal as herein provided in this chapter.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 179-13 BICYCLES § 179-17
179:279
§ 179-17. Helmet requirements. [Added 2-22-1994 by Ord. No.
4294]
§ 179-18. Police inspections; impoundment.
A. A person under 14 years of age shall not operate or ride upon a bicycle
as a passenger unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and
fastened bicycle helmet which meets the standards of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI Z90.4 bicycle helmet standard) or
the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990 Standard for Protective
Headgear for Use in Bicycling. This requirement shall also apply to a
person who rides upon a bicycle while in a restraining seat which is
attached to the bicycle or in a trailer towed by the bicycle.99
B. The requirement in Subsection A of this section shall apply at all times
while a bicycle is being operated on any property open to the public or
used by the public for pedestrian and vehicular purposes; however, the
Township may by ordinance exempt from this requirement a person
operating or riding on a bicycle as a passenger when the bicycle is
operated:
(1) On a road or highway closed to motor vehicle traffic and limited to
pedestrians or bicycles at all times or only during specified periods
of time during which bicycles may be operated; or
(2) Exclusively on a trail, route, course, boardwalk, path or other area
which is set aside for the use of bicycles or the use of pedestrians
and bicycle operation is not otherwise prohibited. However, an
exemption may not be granted under this subsection for any
portion of a trial, route, course, boardwalk, path or other area
which is immediately adjacent to a road or highway used by motor
vehicle traffic and which does not contain a barrier of sufficient
height and rigidity to prevent the inadvertent or deliberate entry of
a bicycle operator onto the road or highway.
C. An ordinance enacted pursuant to Subsection B of this section shall
specify those roads, highways, trails, routes, courses, boardwalks,
paths or areas within the Township where helmets are not required
during the operation of a bicycle.
D. When a bicycle is being operated in an area where bicycle helmets are
not required, the operator or a passenger, except a passenger in a
restraining seat or trailers, shall dismount from the bicycle and walk
whenever it is necessary to enter a crosswalk or to cross a road or
highway upon which motor vehicle traffic is permitted.
A. Any member of the Police Department of the Township of Union may
inspect any bicycle on any street or public place at any time to ascertain
whether said bicycle has been properly registered, has a registration
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 179-17 UNION CODE § 179-18
179:280
§ 179-19. Intent. [Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4294]
The intent of this chapter is in no way an effort to discourage, discriminate
against or prohibit the riding of bicycles within the Township of Union, but
rather promote and safeguard the welfare and property of the bicyclist,
regardless of age, and the community as a whole. Failure to comply with or
the violation of any provision of this chapter or with the safety regulations
promulgated by the Chief of Police may also subject the operator to the
authority having jurisdiction over juvenile offenders.
§ 179-20. Violations and penalties; warnings. [Amended 10-28-1986
by Ord. No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998; 2-22-1994 by Ord.
No. 4294]
tag or decal properly affixed thereto and is in proper mechanical
condition to be operated safely. Such maintenance of a bicycle shall be
the sole responsibility of the owner.
B. In the event that a bicycle is being used or operated without the
registration tag or decal or is in such condition as to be unfit for safe
operation or there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, the Police Department may impound the bicycle until such time
as the owner or registrant has procured the necessary registration
certificate and tag or decal or has rendered the bicycle safe for use or
has fully complied with all requirements of this chapter.
C. In the event that a bicycle is operated in violation of § 179-17, any
officer of the Union Police Department may, in conjunction with
enforcement, impound said bicycle until such times as a parent or legal
guardian may be contacted and notified of the violation. [Amended
2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4294]
D. Whenever any bicycle shall be impounded for violation of the provisions
of this chapter, it shall be surrendered at the expiration of the
impounding period to the owner or parent or guardian of the offender,
on the payment of a charge for storage, at the discretion of the Chief of
Police. Such charge shall not exceed $10 for the first impoundment nor
more than $20 for second or subsequent impoundments. In the case of
seizure of a bicycle because it has been found in the possession of a
person, firm, partnership or corporation not the legal owner thereof,
and the bicycle is not reclaimed by the legal owner thereof, it shall be
sold at public auction after the expiration of 90 days from the date of
seizure. Notice containing a description of the bicycle shall be
published in a newspaper circulating in the Township of Union in the
County of Union at least 10 days prior to the date of said sale. The
proceeds of the sale shall be remitted to the Treasurer of the Township
of Union and shall be used pursuant to the laws of the State of New
Jersey. [Added 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4294100]
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 179-18 BICYCLES § 179-20
179:281
§ 179-21. Additional definitions; word usage.
The word "person" in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to an individual,
firm, partnership or corporation, whichever application is appropriate and
conducive to the enforcement of this chapter. Pronouns may refer to the
singular or plural number or to either gender, whichever is appropriate and
conducive to the enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 185
BINGO
§ 185-1. Conduct on Sundays authorized. [Amended 9-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 4113]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-31, licenses may be issued for the
holding, operation and conducting of certain games of chance within the
Township of Union, in the County of Union, on the first day of the week,
commonly known and designated as "Sunday."
Chapter 192
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND LEAVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
Landscaping — See Ch. 339.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
A. Any person over the age of 17 years and any firm which violates any
provisions of this chapter, excluding § 179-17, shall be subject to one or
more of the following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any other
place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for any
term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective
on the effective date of this section.
B. A person who violates a requirement of § 179-17 shall be warned of the
violation by the enforcing official. The parent or legal guardian of that
person may be cited for the violation. The parent or legal guardian may
also be fined a maximum of $25 for the person's first offense and a
maximum of $100 for a subsequent offense if it can be shown that the
parent or guardian failed to exercise reasonable supervision or control
over the person's conduct. Penalties provided in this section for failure
to wear a helmet may be waived if an offender or his parent or legal
guardian presents suitable proof that an approved helmet was owned at
the time of the violation or has been purchased since the violation
occurred.
§ 179-20 UNION CODE § 185-1
185:282
§ 192-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.13 and 40:48-2.14.
§ 192-2. Notice to remove; failure to comply.
In the event that the Construction Code Official, Health Officer or
Superintendent of Public Works, or their designated agent, finds that it is
necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety
or general welfare, or to eliminate a fire hazard, to remove from any lands
situate in the Township of Union or destroy thereon any brush, weeds,
including ragweed, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash and debris, the Construction Code Official, Health
Officer or Superintendent of Public Works, or their designated agent, is
hereby authorized and directed to notify, in writing, the owner and, if
occupied by a tenant, the tenant or tenants thereof, to remove or destroy
the same. The notice shall contain a copy of this chapter. If the owner or
tenant does not remove or destroy the same within 10 days after written
notice from the Township, the Construction Code Official, Health Officer or
Superintendent of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to cause
the offending material to be removed or destroyed.
§ 192-3. Appeals.
Any owner or tenant affected by an order of the Township hereunder shall
have the right, within the ten-day notification period, to file an appeal
from the order of the Construction Code Official, Health Officer or
Superintendent of Public Works to the Township Administrator. The appeal
shall be in writing, and the Township Administrator shall set the matter
down for hearing in a summary manner. The Township Administrator shall
have the authority to affirm, deny or modify the order of the Construction
Code Official, Health Officer or Superintendent of Public Works. The
decision of the Township Administrator shall be in writing and, if action by
the owner or tenant is required thereby, the Township Administrator shall
furnish the owner or tenant an additional period of time up to a maximum
of 10 days to comply. Failure of the owner or tenant to comply within
said period shall authorize the Construction Code Official, Health Officer or
Superintendent of Public Works to move forthwith in accord with the terms
of this chapter.
§ 192-4. Removal by Township; costs to become lien.
A. In the event that any of the aforementioned are removed or destroyed
by the Township of Union, the Construction Code Official, Health
Officer or Superintendent of Public Works, or their designated agent,
shall certify the costs thereof to the governing body, which shall review
§ 185-1 BINGO § 192-4
185:283
§ 192-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or group of
persons, and the plural or singular, and the masculine, feminine or neuter
shall be inferred, whichever is appropriate for the effectuation of this
chapter.
§ 192-6. Separation of leaves required.
All persons occupying residential premises within the Township of Union in
the County of Union shall, for the period from September 1 to December
31 of each year, source separate leaves from solid waste generated at
those premises and, unless leaves are stored or recycled for composting or
mulching by the generator, place the leaves for collection in the manner
hereinafter provided.
§ 192-7. Collection of leaves at curb. [Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord.
No. 4865; 2-10-2009 by Ord. No. 5085]
§ 192-8. Use of plastic leaf bags. [Amended 2-10-2009 by Ord. No.
5085]
Use of plastic leaf bags is prohibited; only biodegradable paper bags or
an open sturdy container no larger than 32 gallons must be used for leaf
collection.
the cost and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to
be charged as a lien against said lands.
B. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands and shall bear interest at the same
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes.
A. Leaves must be placed in biodegradable paper bags or an open sturdy
container no larger than 32 gallons and no heavier than 50 pounds for
pickup.
B. Leaves must not contain plants, branches, shrub clippings or other
foreign matter.
C. Leaf bags or containers must not be placed at the curb before 5:00 p.m.
the day before a scheduled pickup.
D. No landscaper or resident shall blow, rake or place leaves curbside.
E. Landscapers shall comply with the requirements of this section.
§ 192-4 UNION CODE § 192-9
185:284
§ 192-9. Debris generated by landscapers. [Amended 2-10-2009 by
Ord. No. 5085]
§ 192-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not exceeding $1,250 or to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
Chapter 198
BUILDINGS AND FIXTURES, DAMAGING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 313.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 397.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 415.
§ 198-1. Destroying or damaging buildings, structures and
fixtures.101
No person shall destroy or aid or abet in destroying any public building
or public work, nor shall any person injure, tarnish, deface or besmirch
any house, building, wall, fence, pole, traffic post, tree, streetlight post,
telephone, telegraph or electrical power pole, fire hydrant, monument,
statue, flagpole or contents and fixtures of any public play area or park or
other place within the Township of Union in the County of Union.
A. Landscapers shall be responsible for the disposal of grass clippings,
leaves and other yard debris which they may have generated.
Landscapers may place the leaves from residential premises which they
are servicing for collection by placing said leaves in biodegradable bags
or an open sturdy container no larger than 32 gallons, no heavier than
50 pounds, and place at the curb not before 5:00 p.m. the day before a
scheduled pickup; said leaves must not contain plants, branches, shrub
clippings or other foreign matter.
B. Landscapers and residents may deposit grass clippings at the curb, not
before 5:00 p.m. the day before a scheduled pickup for collection for
recycling use as mulch or composting materials. The grass clippings
must be placed out in a biodegradable paper bag or an open sturdy
container no larger than 32 gallons, no heavier than 50 pounds. No
grass clippings will be collected in plastic bags.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 115-1, Graffiti on buildings, monuments and fixtures, which
previously preceded this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I). See now Ch. 313, Graffiti.
§ 192-9 BUILDINGS AND FIXTURES, DAMAGING OF § 198-2
198:285
§ 198-2. Baseball or football field trespassing.
No person shall trespass on the infield or playing portion of any baseball or
football field maintained by the Township of Union, other than persons so
authorized to do so as players or officials.
§ 198-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3963; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998102]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.103
Chapter 203
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
§ 203-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes public and private corporations, co-partnerships, firms
and individuals.
STREET — A highway or thoroughfare dedicated or devoted to public use
and includes avenues, roads, alleys, lanes, terraces, concourses, driveways
and sidewalks.
§ 203-2. Written permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or to demolish, or to commence
to move or demolish, or cause to be moved or demolished, any house,
dwelling, residence building or business building, as hereinafter defined
into, upon, over or through the streets, or other public ways and lands in
the Township of Union in the County of Union, without first having obtained
a written permit so to do in the manner hereinafter prescribed.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Former § 115-5, Sale of spray paint containers and indelible markers, which
previously followed this section, was moved to Ch. 313, Graffiti, at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 198-2 UNION CODE § 203-3
203:286
§ 203-3. Applications. [Amended 10-24-1978 by Ord. No. 3338A]
§ 203-4. Filing of completed applications. [Amended 10-24-1978 by
Ord. No. 3338A]
When completed, the application shall be filed in the office of the
Construction Code Official and shall have attached to it the following
addenda:
A. Application for said permit shall be made in writing to the Construction
Code Official upon forms supplied by the Township of Union in the
County of Union and obtainable at the office of the Construction Code
Official.
B. The application shall be signed by the owner of the house, dwelling,
residence building or business building to be moved or demolished and
the person to be entrusted with the moving or demolition of the same.
C. No application shall be considered unless the information requested in
the form shall have been fully answered and approved by the Township
Engineer.
A. Whether or not the application is for removal or demolition.
B. The permit fee in the sum hereinafter provided by cash or certified
check.
C. A route map indicating the specific streets and exact route suggested to
be used and followed during such moving.
D. The written consent of the proper county or state authorities in the
event such routes shall include a county or state highway.
E. The consent in writing of any public utility, as that term is defined by
N.J.S.A. 48:1-1 et seq., to make any necessary change in the facilities of
said public utility in the event the properties or facilities of said utilities
are to be disturbed or affected in any manner by the demolition or
moving of said house, dwelling, residence building or business building.
F. Certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes and municipal liens
have been paid for the full year in which the permit is issued and for all
prior years.
G. Plans and specifications of the building as it will be upon the completion
of the moving.
H. The proposed demolition or moving date and the hours during which
the same shall take place.
I. Sufficient proof of the applicant's right to move the same which may be
in the form of a permit from or contract with the owner, or the
applicant's deed and sufficient proof of the applicant's right to place the
same upon the property to which the same is to be moved.
§ 203-3 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 203-5
203:287
§ 203-5. Review of application. [Amended 10-24-1978 by Ord. No.
3338A104]
When the application shall have been filed with the addenda hereinbefore
specified, the Construction Code Official shall notify the Superintendent of
Public Works, the Health Officer, the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Township
Engineer and the Chief of the Police Department that such an application
has been filed and requesting each of the foregoing to immediately cause
an inspection to be made of such house, dwelling, residence building or
business building and the street route and proposed site, and to report in
writing within 10 days to the Construction Code Official of any objection
to demolition or moving by reason of sewer and house connection to the
water and sewer mains, interference with shade trees, streets, traffic and
any public or private property along the route, and whether it is deemed
safe to use the proposed route, and if not, to suggest a better and safer
route, and to advise the approximate work which is necessary in clearing
or otherwise preparing said route by the removal or trimming of trees, as
well as any other necessary work to permit such removal, together with
the estimated cost and charge to be made for such work and the repair of
said items upon the removal of the house, dwelling, residence building or
business building.
§ 203-6. Fees.
§ 203-7. Conditions of issuance of permit. [Amended 10-24-1978 by
Ord. No. 3338A]
If the application has been completed and filed, together with the items
specified in § 203-4 hereof, and there are no objections to the granting of
the moving or demolition permit by the Township Engineer, or any of the
municipal departments mentioned in § 203-5 hereof, the Construction Code
Official shall notify the applicant that a permit will be issued, provided that
the applicant shall file with the Construction Code Official:
A. For a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to
another, the fee shall be $150.105
B. For a permit for the removal of a building or structure to a new location
within the same lot, the fee shall be $150.106
C. For a permit for the demolition of a building, the fee shall be as set forth
in Chapter 237, Construction Codes, Uniform.107
D. The fee is imposed to defray the cost of inspections and regulations and
for no other purpose. Such fee shall be returned to the applicant in the
event that the permit is not granted.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-5 UNION CODE § 203-7
203:288
A. An agreement in writing to be signed by the owner and house mover or
demolisher whereby, in consideration of the issuance of the permit, they
will cooperate with and abide by such directives as may be issued by
the Township Engineer and all appropriate department supervisors of
the Township of Union in the County of Union with regard to such
moving or demolition operations.
B. A surety bond of a corporation authorized to do business in the State of
New Jersey in the principal sum of $10,000, the form thereof to be
approved by the Township Attorney conditioned upon notifying the
Township Engineer 48 hours in advance of the time of the
commencement of the removal or demolition of the house, dwelling,
residence building or business building and to diligently complete the
operation within seven working days thereafter and, in the meantime,
not to neglect or abandon the project; and in the event of failure to
complete such operation within such period of time, the bond shall
stipulate that the holder of the permit shall forfeit to the Township of
Union in the County of Union the sum of $100 per day for each day, or
part of any day, such period of time is exceeded, such sum is declared to
be the reasonable cost of supervision and inspection while such house,
dwelling, residence building or business building shall remain in the
public streets of the Township of Union in the County of Union; and to
reimburse the Township of Union in the County of Union for any
expense which might be incurred to repair damage suffered to public
property by reason of such moving; and specifically to indemnify and
save harmless the Township of Union and in the County of Union, its
agents, servants and employees against every loss, expense, damage
and liability by reason of granting such permit and such demolition or
moving operation. Case in lieu of said bond will be acceptable.
C. Certificates or policies of insurance for vehicles and apparatus used in
the operation in the name of the owner and house mover or demolisher
with limits of at least $50,000/$100,000 for personal injury and $50,000
for property damages, with contingent public liability coverage with the
same limits in favor of the Township of Union in the County of Union,
either by endorsement to the existing policies, or by separate policies;
which said endorsements or separate policies shall remain in full force
and effect during the demolition or moving operation.
D. A deposit by cash or certified check representing the estimated cost to
the Township of Union in the County of Union for the work referred to in
§ 203-8 hereof, which sum shall be applied on account of the actual cost
of said work and the applicant agreeing in writing that he will pay any
excess should the actual cost be more than the estimated cost, and the
Township of Union in the County of Union shall refund any difference
should the actual cost be less than the estimated cost.
§ 203-7 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 203-8
203:289
§ 203-8. Denial of permit application; appeal. [Amended 10-24-1978
by Ord. No. 3338A]
If such permit is denied by the Construction Code Official, the applicant may
file his application, with supporting addenda, with the Township Committee
for consideration by it which may, in its discretion, reverse the action of the
Construction Code Official and authorize said Clerk to issue said permit.
§ 203-9. Obstruction by moving apparatus.
Said house, dwelling, residence building or business building and the
apparatus used in moving the same shall not unreasonably obstruct or
remain stationary nearer than 50 feet to any fire hydrant within the
Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 203-10. Cutting and trimming trees. [Amended 10-28-1986 by
Ord. No. 3879]
The cutting, trimming or removal of any tree shall be done only under the
direction of the Department of Public Works, which shall determine the
extent to which cutting, trimming or removal of trees is necessary.
§ 203-11. Adequate warning devices.
During the hours between sunset and sunrise, every building and the
apparatus used to move the same shall be adequately guarded by red lights
or flares so located as to give sufficient and timely warning to persons
upon the highway of the presence of such building and apparatus. Such
protection shall be the responsibility of the house mover and owner jointly,
who shall comply with the provisions of Title 39 of N.J.S.A., so far as the
same may be applicable.
§ 203-12. Disturbing pavements, curbs or other property.
No road bed, pavement, curbing, tree or public property shall be disturbed
by or during such house moving, except by employees of the Township of
Union or of any public utility, county or state as the case may be.
§ 203-13. Relocation restrictions.
No house, dwelling, residential building or business building shall be moved
to a site where such house, dwelling, residence building or business
building, if put in place on the new site, would be in violation of Chapter
170, Land Development, or of the Uniform Construction Code.108
§ 203-14. Compliance with Township regulations.
The applicant shall comply with all pertinent municipal regulations,
including those of the Board of Health109 and of the Fire Prevention
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 237, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 203-8 UNION CODE § 203-14
203:290
Bureau110 and all county, state and federal regulations in connection with
such demolition or moving.
§ 203-15. Sewers and other utility services.
All sewers shall be completely capped and all water shut off prior to the
actual physical removal or demolition, and all gas, electric, telephone and
other utilities shall likewise be removed prior to the actual physical removal
or demolition.
§ 203-16. Excavations to be filled.
In the instance of demolition or removal, any excavation existing at the old
site shall be filled within five days from the completion of demolition or
removal from the old site, such fill shall be clean and free of wood or debris.
§ 203-17. Doors and windows to be boarded and secured.
The owner of any dwelling to be demolished or removed shall, during
the period between the actual vacating thereof by the occupants and
completion of removal and demolition, cause all windows and doors to be
boarded and otherwise secured.
§ 203-18. Condition of premises after operation.
In the event that there are any other structures left on any premises after
the main building has been demolished or removed, such other structures
shall be likewise demolished or removed within 10 days after the completion
of the demolition or removal of the main building from the old site and the
excavations, if any, filled as hereinabove set forth. All lots upon which there
has been demolition or removal shall be left in a clean and level condition.
§ 203-19. Notifying other residences in writing.
Prior to moving the building, the owner or mover must notify, in writing,
all residents along all streets on the route that said street will be used for
moving and the date thereof, such notice to be given personally or in the
event of a resident not being at home, by the leaving of an appropriate
notice.
§ 203-20. Removal of portions of structures; procedures.
Where a portion of a structure, such as an accessory building or porch or a
private garage is to be removed for the purpose of demolition, renovation,
repair or rebuilding, the following shall pertain:
A. The owner shall file an executed affidavit advising that no public
utilities are involved.
109. Editor's Note: As to legislation of the Board of Health, see Part III of this Code, Board of
Health Legislation.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Fire Prevention.
§ 203-14 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 203-20
203:291
§ 203-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998111]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction therefore, before the Judge of the Township of Union in the
County of Union, be punished by one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
Chapter 207
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 207-1. Duty of owners or occupants.
The owner or occupant of every dwelling house, store, office building or
other building or structure, which now fronts or may hereafter front upon
any public street within the Township of Union, shall cause the street
number assigned to the property upon which said dwelling house, store,
office building or other building or structure is erected to be placed in
digital figures as outlined below:
B. In the instance of demolition, the debris resulting therefrom shall not
be removed from the premises, except by being trucked away from said
premises in a covered vehicle.
C. Approval of the Board of Health, Fire Prevention Bureau and
Construction Code Official must be filed prior to the issuance of a
permit.
D. Appropriate certificates of insurance as hereinabove set forth in this
chapter shall be filed.
E. No formal application for a permit will be required under this section of
this chapter; however, a permit fee of $5 shall be paid to the Township
Clerk upon delivery of the permit.
A. Dwellings. Street numbers shall be placed in digital figures of at least
three inches in height within two feet of the main entrance of said
structure facing the street.
B. Commercial and industrial. Street numbers shall be placed in digital
figures of at least six inches in height within two feet of the main
entrance or on the door.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-20 UNION CODE § 207-1
207:292
§ 207-2. Number assignments made by Tax Assessor.112
Street number assignments shall be made by the Tax Assessor.
§ 207-3. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, the Police Department and the Construction Code Official of the
Township of Union.
§ 207-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998113]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section.
Chapter 216
CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND TRAVELING SHOWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements; adult uses — See Ch. 164. Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
§ 216-1. Conduct restricted in Township.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows shall be prohibited within the
Township of Union in the County of Union, except as otherwise provided for
in this chapter.
§ 216-2. Conduct by certain organizations at the discretion of
Township.114
A carnival, circus or traveling show shall be permitted in the discretion of
the Township Committee, if the supporting organization therefor is a local
religious, charitable, educational or fraternal organization.
C. Where there is more than one occupant in the same numbered building,
each street level occupant is to have an alphabetical designation
included in the street address.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-1 CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND TRAVELING § 216-3
216:293
§ 216-3. Application for license; review.
Before any license may be issued for a carnival, circus or traveling show,
as authorized and permitted under § 216-2 hereof, the applicant therefor
shall complete an application form and file the same with the Township
Clerk, together with the fee therefor as hereinafter set forth, and
contemporaneously therewith provide copies of said application form for
transmittal to the Police Department, the Fire Department and the Board
of Health, which said last three named Departments shall submit their
comments and recommendations in connection with said application to the
Township Committee.
§ 216-4. Application form; filing time requirements.
Such application shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the opening date of
said carnival, circus or traveling show. The application shall be on such form
as may be provided by the Township Clerk.
§ 216-5. License fee. [Amended 3-27-1984 by Ord. No. 3699;
12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
The fee for a carnival, circus or traveling show authorized by this chapter,
which said fee shall accompany the application, shall be the sum of $2,000
per day. In the event that the application is denied, 10% of the fee deposited
with said application shall be retained by the Township as a processing fee.
§ 216-6. Certain activities not condoned.
No person, firm or corporation granted a license in accordance with this
chapter shall permit, suffer, allow or condone any of the following on the
premises on which the event is being conducted:
§ 216-7. Responsibility of licensees and their agents. [Amended
6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 4823]
Each person, firm or corporation obtaining a license under the provisions
of this chapter and/or each person, firm or corporation who is taking part
A. Gambling, betting or wagering, unless the sponsoring organization
obtains the proper license from the State of New Jersey Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission. [Amended 6-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 4823]
B. Loud noise or music to the annoyance of adjoining neighbors.
C. Profane or indecent language.
D. A violation of any local, state or federal statutes, laws, ordinances, rules
or regulations.
E. Operation beyond the hours specified in an approved application.
[Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 4823]
§ 216-3 UNION CODE § 216-7
216:294
in the sponsored event who either performs a service for the sponsoring
agent or has contracted to do business with the sponsoring agent shall be
responsible for any and all actions of its agents, employees and servants on
the licensed premises.
§ 216-8. Application information.
The application to be filed as herein provided shall set forth the following:
§ 216-9. Revocation of license.
Any violation of any of the items set forth in § 216-6 above or of any other
law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be sufficient grounds for the
revocation of the license herein authorized, which revocation may be based
upon reasonable grounds of a probable violation.
§ 216-10. Bonds and deposits.116
Upon the granting of the license herein authorized, the applicant therefor
shall deposit with the Township Clerk a cash bond of $1,000 for each day
authorized under the license, not to exceed, however, the sum of $2,500,
in order to guarantee that, upon the termination of the event, the licensed
premises, the immediate vicinity thereof and adjacent public roads will
be broom-swept clean within 48 hours after the conclusion of the event.
Upon a determination that the premises have been so cleaned, which said
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The sponsoring organization, if different than the applicant.
C. The names and residences of all officers, directors and stockholders of
the applicant and sponsoring organization.
D. The financial arrangement between the applicant and sponsoring
organization, i.e., division of profits.
E. If a contract exists between the applicant and sponsor, a copy of the
contract must accompany the application.
F. The street address or other sufficient description of area upon which
event is to be conducted.
G. The dates upon which the event is to be conducted and the hours of
operation. [Amended 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 4823]
H. The name of the company and amount of liability insurance, which must
be in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$50,000 property damage, and name of the insurance company
carrying workers' compensation insurance, certificate of insurance to
be furnished as to the foregoing.115
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-7 CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND TRAVELING § 216-10
216:295
determination shall be made by the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Township Clerk, upon said Superintendent filing a favorable written report,
shall return the aforesaid cash bond to the applicant. In the event that the
area has not been broom-swept clean within the aforesaid time, then and
in that event the aforesaid cash bond shall be forfeited, and such failure
to conform to this provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation
thereof and shall subject the applicant, in addition to the above-mentioned
forfeiture, to the penalties hereinafter provided for in this chapter.
§ 216-11. Duration of performances limited.117
No license shall authorize any such carnival, circus or traveling show to be
conducted for a period in excess of three consecutive days.
§ 216-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3963; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
3998118]
Any person violating any of provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the
county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
Chapter 221
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 373.
Rent control — See Ch. 421.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-10 UNION CODE § 216-12
221:296
ARTICLE I
Rental Property
[Adopted 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4293 (Ch. 124, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 221-1. Inspection required.
All multifamily buildings, structures and units thereof that are leased or
rented, regardless of the term, in the Township of Union for living or
sleeping purposes shall be inspected by the code official on every initial
occupancy or change of occupancy after the effective date of this article,
but there shall not be more than one such inspection biannually of any
apartment or units thereof. All buildings, structures and units thereof which
are leased or rented, and not currently occupied at the time this article
takes effect, shall be considered an initial occupancy and shall be subject to
the inspection provisions hereof.
§ 221-2. Compliance with standards required.
All buildings, structures and units thereof which are inspected pursuant to
this article shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Township
ordinances and the applicable provisions of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. and
55:13B-1 et seq.
§ 221-3. Responsibility of owner, agent or manager.
The owner, rental agent or manager of all buildings and structures and
units thereof which are subject to inspection pursuant to this article shall
be responsible for notifying, in writing, the code official that such premises
are leased or rented or being offered to be leased or rented so that an
inspection or reinspection may be made.
§ 221-4. Issuance of certificate.
Upon completion of an inspection of the premises and the same being
determined by the code official to comply with § 221-1 et seq., a rental
certificate of occupancy shall be issued. A copy of the certificate shall be
posted by the owner, rental agent or manager of the inspected property in
each separate leased or rented unit. No tenant shall occupy any building,
structure or any units thereof until a rental certificate of occupancy has
been issued.
§ 221-5. Notification of violations.
In the event that the code official determines, after an inspection, that the
premises in question are in violation of § 221-1 et seq., the code official
shall notify, in writing, the owner, rental agent or manager of the violations
noted. Upon correction of the violations, the owner, rental agent or manager
shall notify, in writing, the code official that the corrections have been
§ 221-1 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY § 221-5
221:297
made so that a reinspection of the property may occur. If upon reinspection
of the property, the code official determines that previous violations were
not corrected or new violations exist, then the code official shall, again in
writing, notify the owner, rental agent or manager of the inspected property
of the violations, and this process shall continue until all violations have
been corrected.
§ 221-6. Service of notice.
Notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy
thereof is delivered to the owner, rental agent or manager personally; or by
leaving the notice at the usual place of abode in the presence of someone
in the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the
contents thereof; or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner
at the last known address with return receipt requested; or, if the certified
or registered letter is returned with receipt showing that it has not been
delivered, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice; and there shall be at least one publication
of such notice in a local newspaper of general circulation.
§ 221-7. Revocation of certificate.
If, subsequent to the issuance of a rental certificate of occupancy, the
code official learns or becomes aware of violations of § 221-1 et seq., an
inspection shall be made of the subject premises. If violations are found to
exist, then notification in writing shall be given to the owner, rental agent
or manager, and said person shall have 10 days from service of the notice
to correct all deficiencies noted therein. In the event that the same have
not been corrected within 10 days, then the rental certificate of occupancy
may be revoked by the Construction Code Official by mailing a notice of
revocation by certified mail to the owner, rental agent or manager and to
the tenant or tenants, and the premises will be vacated.
§ 221-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,250 for each violation and/or imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days and/or community service not to
exceed 90 days, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation
continues, after due notice has been served, in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.119
B. Notwithstanding any of the aforementioned and not in limitation
thereof, in case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the
code official may request the jurisdiction's legal representative to
institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or equity to exact
the penalty provided as indicated above or may ask the legal
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-5 UNION CODE § 221-8
221:298
§ 221-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE OFFICIAL — The Township Construction Code Official, his designee
or any agency authorized to perform inspections on behalf of the Township.
MULTIFAMILY — Any building or buildings or structure comprising 20 or
more separate dwelling or apartment units.
§ 221-10. Fees.
The fee for each apartment inspection shall be $75 payable at the time of
application, which shall include one reinspection required by § 221-5. Each
additional reinspection shall require an additional fee of $50.
representative to proceed at law or in equity against the persons
responsible for the violation for the following purposes:
(1) To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
(2) To restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of each
structure;
(3) To require the removal of work in violation; or
(4) To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof
which was erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of,
or not in compliance with, the provisions of this Code or in violation
of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or
certificate was issued.
§ 221-8 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY § 221-10
221:299
Chapter 228
CHRISTMAS TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers, peddlers and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 317.
Sales — See Ch. 428.
§ 228-1. Sale restricted.
Except as hereinafter authorized, the outdoor sale of Christmas trees,
greens, foliage and flowers is hereby prohibited.
§ 228-2. Regulations.
The following regulations shall pertain in connection with the sale of
Christmas trees, greens, foliage and flowers in those locations that may be
authorized by this chapter, namely:
§ 228-3. Area of sale and display to be cleared.
All areas used for the sale and display of Christmas trees, greens, foliage
and flowers are to be cleared and all unsold items removed not later than
48 hours after the termination of the sale.
§ 228-4. Liability.
Such persons or organizations as are authorized to conduct such sales
as are set forth in this chapter shall, together with the owner or tenant
of the premises on which the sale is conducted, be jointly and severally
liable for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises. No
such person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises
nor permit the display of said items mentioned in this chapter so as to
cause an impediment of the safe and reasonable passage of pedestrians
or traffic on any public highway, street or sidewalk. All persons shall obey
the reasonable orders of any member of the Police Department or Fire
Department of the Township of Union in order to maintain the public health,
safety and welfare of the Township of Union.
A. Not to be stored or displayed within 10 feet of any structure.
B. No open burning within the Township of Union of unsold items.
C. All sales are to be subject to inspection and approval of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention.
D. Sales to be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 221-10 UNION CODE § 228-5
228:300
§ 228-5. Enforcement authority.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township of
Union in the County of Union.
§ 228-6. Exempted organizations.
This chapter shall not apply to any charitable organization, religious
organization or nonprofit corporation, which has filed a certificate of
incorporation with the Secretary of State of New Jersey and which has its
principal office in Union Township, when the proceeds of any sale conducted
by any such charitable, religious or nonprofit organization are applied to
the payment of the expenses of said sale and the balance of the charitable,
religious or nonprofit cause for which the charitable, religious or nonprofit
organization exists. Said charitable, religious or nonprofit organization
conducting any such sale shall, within 30 days after the termination thereof,
file with the Township Clerk an accounting showing the receipts and
disbursements in connection with said sale and the proceeds thereof that
were retained by said charity.
§ 228-7. Flower shops and similar corporations exempted.
This chapter shall not be applicable to any sale conducted by a person or
corporation whose main activity is the sale of flowers or kindred products
from a store located within the Township of Union.
§ 228-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3963120]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
Chapter 233
CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE CONVERSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 373. Rent control — See Ch. 421.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 228-5 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 233-1
233:301
§ 233-1. Designation of administrative agency.
Pursuant to Section 5 of Chapter 226 of the Laws of 1981,121 the Rent
Leveling Board of the Township of Union be and it hereby is designated to
act as the municipal administrative agency to perform the tasks set forth in
Chapter 226 of the Laws of 1981.122
§ 233-2. Procedures for conversion; notice to tenants; protected
tenancy.
The following procedures shall apply to any building being converted to the
condominium or cooperative form of ownership:
A. The owner of the conversion of any building shall, prior to the filing of
an application for registration, notify the Secretary of the Rent Leveling
Board of the intention to file the application for registration and shall
supply the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board with a current tenant
list and stamped envelopes addressed to each tenant, each such
envelope containing copies of all required notices to be given to such
tenants and all documents required pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:24-2.9.
B. Within 10 days of the receipt of the notice of intention, the current
tenant list and the stamped, addressed envelopes and copies of all
notices, the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board shall mail to each
tenant the notice required by the Act123 and all necessary forms and,
within two business days of mailing, shall submit to the owner or
sponsor an affidavit that the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board has
notified each tenant as aforesaid.
C. A tenant seeking protected tenancy status shall file a completed
application form with the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board within
60 days of receipt of such notice and application form.
D. The Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board shall accept all applications
completed and submitted by the tenants seeking the benefits of the
protected tenancy status of the Act and shall determine eligibility in
accordance with the criteria of the Act. Such determinations of
eligibility shall be made with respect to each application within 30 days
after receipt of the completed application.
E. An application form shall be deemed to be completed when all
supplementary documentation required by the Secretary of the Rent
Leveling Board has been submitted. Upon request of the Secretary of
the Rent Leveling Board, a tenant seeking protected tenancy status
shall supplement the form with such documentation as the Secretary of
the Rent Leveling Board shall deem necessary to make determination
as to eligibility. An application shall be deemed incomplete and shall not
121. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.26.
122. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
123. Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the "Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy
Act"; see N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
§ 233-1 UNION CODE § 233-2
233:302
§ 233-3. Application fees.
Pursuant to Section 16 of Chapter 226 of the Laws of 1981,124 the Rent
Leveling Board is authorized to levy and collect the following fees which
shall be paid by the owner applying for conversion at the time the
application is filed with the Rent Leveling Board:
§ 233-4. Designation of administrative officer.
The Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board be and hereby is designated as
the administrative officer who shall assume the duties under this chapter
and shall collect the fees prescribed herein.
§ 233-5. Appeals.
The determination of the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board may be
appealed to the Rent Leveling Board by any aggrieved person through an
administrative hearing:
be accepted if supplementary documentation is not provided to the
Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board within 10 days of request therefor.
F. Any tenant qualifying for protected status shall be promptly notified of
eligibility by the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board. Any tenant who
does not qualify for protected status shall be likewise notified of the
determination, and the reasons for ineligibility shall be set forth in such
notice. Notices of determination as to eligibility and ineligibility as to
each tenant who has applied shall be provided to the owner or sponsor
of the plan or conversion.
G. The Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board shall notify in writing the
Township Administrator, Township Clerk, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector
and Construction Code Official of receipt of the application for
conversions.
A. The owner shall submit a fee of $40 per dwelling unit with his notice of
intention and submission of tenant lists under this chapter in the form
of a check or money order made payable to the Township of Union.
B. The owner shall submit a fee of $100 administrative hearing fee upon
submission of application for an appeal. In the event of an appeal by a
tenant, a hearing fee of $100 shall be submitted by the tenant.
C. The application fee set forth in Subsection A above shall be based upon
each unit listed for conversion in the application. In the event that one
building or structure as listed on the tax rolls is converted in stages, the
building shall be considered as a single building for determining the fee
without consideration of the number of units listed in the application for
conversion.
124. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.35.
§ 233-2 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 233-5
233:303
§ 233-6. Statutory authorization.
This chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226 of the Laws
of 1981,125 N.J.A.C. 5:24-2.1 et seq. and forthcoming rules and regulations
of the Department of Community Affairs promulgated to implement the
provisions of this Act are specifically incorporated by reference into this
chapter.
§ 233-7. Violations and penalties.126
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of up to $1,250, imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or community service for not more than 90 days, or any
combination thereof, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
Chapter 237
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 203.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 207.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 221.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 373.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
A. Application for an administrative hearing shall be made to the
Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board within 10 days of receipt by the
aggrieved person of the notice of determination. Said application shall
have attached thereto the administrative hearing fee of $40.
B. The administrative hearing shall be held within 10 days of application
therefor, except in extenuating circumstances, at the discretion of the
Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board.
C. Notice of hearing shall be given to all known parties in interest who
may testify, present evidence and examine adverse witnesses and
evidence.
D. The hearing shall be before the Rent Leveling Board of the Township of
Union, and a sound recording shall be made.
E. Within 10 days of the case of the hearing by the Rent Leveling Board, it
shall issue a final written decision and state the reasons therefor.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:24-2.7(g), appeal from such final decision shall be
to the courts.
125. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 233-5 UNION CODE § 233-7
233:304
§ 237-1. Establishment of enforcing agency.
§ 237-1.1. Board of Appeals.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Union in the County of
Union a State Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be
known as "Township of Union Construction Code Agency," consisting of
a Construction Code Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other
subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Construction Code Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,127 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies, and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. Such Board shall
consist of five members. At least one Board member shall be a
registered architect or licensed professional engineer of building
construction experience, and at least one Board member shall be as
qualified as a plumbing subcode official and one as qualified as an
electrical subcode official. No more than two Board members shall be
selected from the same business or profession. Each Board member
shall have had at least three years' experience in construction, design
or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered architect or, in the
alternative, five years' experience in construction, design or supervision
as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree in architecture or
engineering, respectively, from an accredited institution of higher
education or, as a further alternative, 10 years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a construction
trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or inspector.
B. The Township Committee shall appoint the Board members and any
alternate members. For the members first appointed, the Township
127. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 233-7 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 237-1.1
233:305
§ 237-2. Fees. [Amended 7-12-1977 by Ord. No. 3218; 12-27-1977
by Ord. No. 3257; 4-10-1979 by Ord. No. 3364; 6-9-1981 by Ord. No.
3519; 9-11-1984 by Ord. No. 3751; 9-25-1984 by Ord. No. 3757;
4-28-1987 by Ord. No. 3901; 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 4000;
2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 4009; 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 4010; 4-10-1990
by Ord. No. 4082; 6-26-1990 by Ord. No. 4097; 9-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 4114; 6-19-1992 by Ord. No. 4190; 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4211;
1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 4533; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 4534]
The following Uniform Construction Code fees shall be paid before the
permit is issued:
Committee shall designate the appointees' terms so that one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a
term of three years and two for a term of four years. At the expiration
of such terms and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of
four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Alternates.
(1) The Township Committee shall appoint such number of alternates
as may be appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years, or may,
in the alternative, appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis.
(2) No regular or alternate Board member may be a member of the
enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review
of the Board.
D. Members of the aforesaid Board of Appeals and alternates thereto shall
not be compensated.
A. Uniform Construction Code fees shall be as follows: [Amended
2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 4706]
(1) Uniform Construction Code municipal enforcing fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be
charged for a new construction permit.
(b) The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of volume or cost of construction,
plumbing, electrical and fire protection fees as listed herein.
The minimum fee for a basic construction fee for building,
plumbing and fire shall be $60. [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord.
No. 5375]
(2) New structure fees shall be as follows:
(a) Use Groups B, H, I-1, I-2, I-3, M, E, R-2, R-5 and U: [Amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
§ 237-1.1 UNION CODE § 237-2
233:306
Volume of Building _____ Cubic Feet X .030 = $
(Volume Fee)
(b) Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1, and S-2:
[Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
Volume of Building _____ Cubic Feet X .025 = $
(Volume Fee)
(c) Commercial farm buildings; maximum fee not to exceed
$1,000:
Volume of Building _____ Cubic Feet X .008 = $
(Volume Fee)
(3) Renovations, alterations, repair and minor work fees. The applicant
shall submit cost data by architect or engineer of record, a
recognized estimating firm or by contractor bid. The agency shall
make the final decision regarding estimated cost. [Amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) Estimated cost up to and including $50,000: $30 per $1,000.
(b) Portion of cost from $50,000 to and including $100,000: $24
per $1,000.
(c) Portion of cost above $100,000: $23 per $1,000.
(4) Pools. [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) The fee for aboveground pools shall be $150.
(b) The fee for in-ground pools shall be $250.
(5) The fee for roofing and siding for Use Groups R-5 shall be $100.
[Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(6) The fee for an open tower structure up to and including 30 feet in
height shall be $110.
(7) The fee for an open structure over 30 feet in height shall be $275.
(8) The fee for tank abatement or removal shall be as follows: $100.
[Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(9) The fee for demolition shall be as follows: [Amended 5-24-2016
by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) Residential: $150.
(b) Commercial: $250.
(10) The fee for asbestos abatement shall be $70, plus the certificate of
occupancy fee on asbestos of $14.
§ 237-2 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 237-2
233:307
(11) The fee for signs shall be $1.50 per square foot, with a minimum
fee of $50. [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(12) The fee for certificates of occupancy shall be as follows: [Amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) Residential: $50.
(b) Commercial: $100.
(13) The fee for certificates of continued occupancy shall be as follows:
[Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) Residential: $75; reinspection: $25.
(b) Commercial: $75.
(14) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $300 for Class I structures and $125 for
Class II and Class III structures. The fee for resubmission of an
application for a variation for all structures shall be $75.
(15) The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the
alternate systems and nondepletable energy source provisions of
the energy subcode shall be as follows:
(a) Use Groups R-3, R-4 and light commercial structures having an
indoor temperature controlled from a single point is $125.
(b) All other structures are $1,000.
(16) Plumbing fixtures and equipment fees shall be as follows:
[Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) Fixtures are $20 each; minimum $60.
(b) Water heaters are $75.
(c) The fee shall be $65 per special device for grease traps, oil
separators, refrigeration units, commercial back flow
preventors, steam boilers, hot-water boilers (excluding those
for domestic water heating), active solar systems, sewer
pumps, interceptors and heating and cooling units in
ductwork.
(d) Residential backflow preventor fees and vacuum breakers are
$60.
(e) Annual backflow inspection is $150.
(f) Service connections are $60.
(g) Furnaces, boilers, air conditioning: $65 each.
§ 237-2 UNION CODE § 237-2
233:308
(h) Fuel oil piping for commercial is $100 and for residential is
$25.
(i) Unit heaters are $65.
(j) Sewer connections are $150.
(k) Gas piping is $30 per fixture connected thereto.
(l) Automatic rain sensor for commercial is $125 and for
residential is $50.
(17) Fire protection fees are as follows:
(a) Sprinkler systems: [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
[1] One to 20 sprinkler heads: $100.
[2] Twenty-one to 100 heads: $200.
[3] One hundred one to 200 heads: $300.
[4] Two hundred one to 400 heads: $500.
[5] Four hundred one to 1,000 heads: $800.
[6] Over 1,000 heads: $1,050.
(b) Fire alarm devices per building, including fire alarm panels,
annunciators, heat detectors, manual pull stations, bells,
horns, strobes or any other devices of a fire alarm system:
[Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
[1] One to 20 devices: $50.
[2] Twenty-one to 100 devices: $105.
[3] One hundred one to 200 devices: $375.
[4] Two hundred one to 400 devices: $500.
[5] Four hundred one to 1,000 devices: $645.
[6] Over 1,000 devices: $965.
(c) Standpipe system riser is $150.
(d) Privately owned fire hydrants are $100.
(e) Gas or oil-fired appliances not connected to a plumbing system
are $55. [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(f) Special suppression systems are $80.
(g) Commercial kitchen exhaust systems are $150. [Amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
§ 237-2 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 237-2
233:309
(h) Incinerators and crematoriums are $365.
(i) Emergency smoke evacuation systems are $100.
(j) Fire pumps are $100.
(18) State training and certification fees (current fees pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19):
(a) New structures are the volume of the structure x $0.0016.
(b) Alterations (including asbestos abatement) are $0.80 per
$1,000.
(19) Zoning permits (fences, driveways, sheds, etc.): $30. [Added
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
B. The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one
lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $5 per
$1,000 of the sum of the estimated costs for moving, for new
foundations and for placement in a completed condition in the new
location, provided that the minimum fee shall be $25.
C. Electrical subcode fees schedule. [Amended 4-10-2001 by Ord. No.
4675; 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 4706]
(1) For the purpose of computing this fee, the term "receptacles,"
"fixtures" or "switches" shall include lighting outlets, smoke
detectors, heat detectors, fluorescent fixtures, pool bonding,
burglar alarm devices, intercom devices, thermostats, telephone
outlets, CRT outlets and light standards. [Amended 5-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 5375]
Number of Outlets and Devices Fee
1 to 50 $60
Each additional 25 $15
(2) For the purpose of computing this fee, the term "service panel"
shall include service conductors, feeders, switches, switchboards
and panel boards. The second meter is extra. [Amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
Type Fee
0 to 225 amps $65
226 to 1,000 amps $120
1,001 and up $520
(3) Construction pole service or temp pole service: $110. [Amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(4) KVA transformers or generators.
§ 237-2 UNION CODE § 237-2
233:310
Type Fee
1 KW to 10 KW $10
11 KW to 45 KW $36
46 KW to 112.5 KW $92
113 KW and up $457
(5) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors, except those in
plug-in appliances, shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
Type Fee
1 HP to 10 HP $20
11 HP to 50 HP $46
(6) Air conditioners.
Type Fee
Residential $20
Commercial: apply motor [Subsection C(5)] and feeder
[Subsection C] for pricing
(7) In-ground pools: $36.
(8) Other items.
Type Fee
Each of the following items listed below:
Electrical heater, heat pump, electric
dryer, range, surface units - cook top, hotwater
heater, oven, dishwasher, gas and
oil heaters and commercial exhaust fans
$10
(9) Air handlers. [Added 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) Residential: $20.
(10) Photovoltaic systems. [Added 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 5375]
(a) One to 50 KW: $80.
(b) Fifty-one to 100 KW: $200.
(c) Greater than 100 KW: $450.
D. The Construction Code Official shall, with the advice of the subcode
officials, prepare and submit to the Township Committee, biannually, a
report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses
of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly
§ 237-2 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 237-2
233:311
attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code
Act.128
E. Elevator installation and inspection.
(1) Plan review fees.
(a) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in Use
Groups R-3, R-4 and for elevator devices wholly within
dwelling units in R-2 structures shall be $50 for each device.
(b) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in use
groups other than R-3, R-4 and devices in R-2 structures
exempted by Subsection E(1)(a) above shall be $260 for each
device.
(2) Test and inspection fees.
(a) The Department fees for witnessing acceptance tests and
performing inspections shall be as follows:
[1] The basic fees for elevator devices in structures not in Use
Group R-3 or R-4 shall be as follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators: one to 10 floors,
$243; over 10 floors, $405.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $216.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $243.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $216.
[e] Dumbwaiters: $54.
[f] Stairways, chair lifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair
lifts and man lifts: $54.
[2] Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[a] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $43.
[b] Counterweight governor and safeties: $108.
[c] Auxiliary power generator: $81.
[3] The Department fee for elevator devices in structures in
Use Group R-3 or R-4 shall be $162. This fee shall be
waived when signed statements and supporting inspection
and acceptance test reports are filed by an approved
qualified agent or agency in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.19 and 5:23-2.20.
128. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 237-2 UNION CODE § 237-2
233:312
[4] The fee for performing inspections of minor work shall be
$54.
(b) The Department fees for routine and periodic tests and
inspections for elevator devices in structures not in Use Group
R-3 or R-4, or otherwise exempt devices in R-2 structures, shall
be as follows:
[1] The fee for the six-month routine inspection of elevator
devices shall be as follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators: one to 10 floors:
$151; over 10 floors: $194.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $108.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $151.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $151.
[2] The fee for the one-year period inspection and witnessing
of tests of elevator devices, which shall include a six-month
routine inspection, shall be as follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators: One to 10
floors: $216; over 10 floors: $259.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $162.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $216.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $346.
[e] Dumbwaiters: $86.
[f] Man lifts, stairway chair lifts, inclined and vertical
wheelchair lifts: $130.
[3] Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator
devices equipped with the following features shall be as
follows:
[a] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $43.
[b] Counterweight governor and safeties: $86.
[c] Auxiliary power generator: $54.
[4] The fee for the three-year or five-year inspection of
elevator devices shall be as follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators: one to 10 floors
(five-year inspection): $367; over 10 floors (five-year
inspection): $410.
§ 237-2 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 237-2
233:313
[b] Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators: three-year
inspection: $270; five-year inspection: $162.
(c) When the Department is the enforcing agency, the fees set
forth in Subsection E(2)(b) above shall be paid annually in
accordance with the following schedule, which is based on the
average of the fees to be collected over a five-year period:
[1] Basic annual fee shall be as follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators: one to 10 floors:
$400; over 10 floors: $486.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $292.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $324.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $497.
[e] Dumbwaiters: $86.
[f] Stairway chair lifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair
lifts, man lifts: $130.
[2] Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[a] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $43.
[b] Counterweight governor and safeties: $86.
[c] Auxiliary power generator: $54.
[3] Annual fee for inspections at seasonal facilities shall be as
follows:
[a] Traction and winding drum elevators: one to 10 floors:
$246; over 10 floors: $289.
[b] Hydraulic elevators: $184.
[c] Roped hydraulic elevators: $216.
[d] Escalators, moving walks: $346.
[e] Dumbwaiters: $86.
[f] Stairway chair lifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair
lifts, man lifts: $130.
[4] Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows:
[a] Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $43.
[b] Counterweight governor and safeties: $86.
§ 237-2 UNION CODE § 237-2
233:314
§ 237-3. Surcharge fee; report.
[c] Auxiliary power generator: $54.
(3) Licensing.
(a) All elevator subcode officials and inspectors shall be licensed
according to N.J.A.C. 5:23-5.5.
(b) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Department under
these rules shall be entitled to a hearing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-5.2.
(c) A licensed elevator subcode official or inspector shall be
responsible for completing any continuing educational
requirements imposed by the Department pursuant to this
chapter prior to license renewal pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-5.
(4) Alterations, replacements, damages, increases in size, changes in
use group and ordinary repairs.
(a) In complying with this chapter, calculations concerning
alterations, replacements, damages, increases in size and
changes in use groups, in N.J.A.C. 5:23-2, shall be performed
using data for entire structures. The alteration provisions
applicable to the whole structure and/or calculations in N.J.A.C.
5:23-2 shall not be applied to individual elevator devices.
(b) For purposes of this section, "alteration of an elevator device"
means any change to equipment other than minor work and
ordinary repair, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17A and 5:23-9.3.
When work that includes the alteration of an elevator device
has a total cost of less than 50% of the physical value of the
building, the alteration of the elevator device shall comply only
with the applicable requirements of Part XII (Alterations,
Repairs, Replacements and Maintenance) of the most recent
edition of ASME A17.1 referenced in the building subcode.
A. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,129 the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0016 per cubic foot of volume of
new construction. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of
Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly
basis for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, March
31 and June 30 and not later than one month next succeeding the end of
the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the
regulations first become effective, said fee shall be collected and
129. Editor's Note: "The regulations" refer to the regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
§ 237-2 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 237-3
233:315
§ 237-4. Fire limits. [Added 7-12-1977 by Ord. No. 3218]
Chapter 240
CRANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
§ 240-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the
Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
remitted for the third and fourth quarters only. [Amended 2-10-1998
by Ord. No. 4534]
B. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23,
namely, all areas now or hereafter zoned as Business BA, BB and BC
Zones, and all Industrial Zones located in the Township of Union in the
County of Union, and any and all property now or hereafter to be used
for an industrial or business use, whether by reason of an exception or a
variance to the local Zoning Ordinance, or an amendment of said
ordinance or otherwise.130
B. The Construction Code Official shall prepare and submit to the
Township Committee, biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation
of the fire limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
Construction Code Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire
Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be designated as
within fire limits with the reasons therefor.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Land Development, Part 3, Zoning.
§ 237-3 UNION CODE § 240-1
233:316
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — As used in this chapter, the term "crane" shall be defined in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 through 45:26-17 (Licensing of Crane
Operators Act), hereafter referred to as the "Crane Operator Licensing Act"
and the 1926 OSHA Crane and Derricks in Construction, also known as
OSHA Subpart CC.
CRANE OPERATOR — An individual engaged in the operation of a crane.
CRANE-RELATED EXPERIENCE — Operating, inspecting, training and
maintenance experience acceptable to the board.
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — An examination demonstrating the
applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of crane.
Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
categories: the lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC), lattice boom truck
cranes (LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab),
tower cranes and overhead cranes.
§ 240-2. General requirements.
A. Five days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the municipality a permit
shall be obtained. In emergent situations the Building Inspector may
waive this requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator
meets the balance of the requirements of this chapter.
B. The permit will be maintained with the municipality as well as with the
crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be produced on
the work site when requested.
C. The following documents must be provided to the municipality in order
to be granted a permit:
(1) Copy of crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO);
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP);
(c) Crane Institute of America Certification;
(2) New Jersey crane license;
(3) Current Medical Examiner's card;
(4) A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection (crane
owner);
(5) Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily injury;
§ 240-1 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 240-2
233:317
§ 240-3. Registration of cranes; crane inspection.
[1] For any one person, in the amount of $500,000;
[2] For any occurrence, in the amount of $1,000.000;
(b) Property damage;
[1] For any one accident, in the amount of $500,000;
[2] For any aggregate of occurrences, in the amount of
$2,000,000;
(6) Proof that crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program;
(7) Proof of completion of signal person qualification or certification
course;
(8) Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance
with the requirements of this section, the Building Department
shall issue or deny the requested permit within five business days.
If the application is denied, the reasons for the denial are furnished
to the application in writing.
A. Licensure of crane operators, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-7. No person
shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself for employment
as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act, present or
represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as such under the
provisions of this act.
B. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for which
the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice boom crawler
crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT), telescopic boom cranes
(TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab), tower cranes and overhead cranes.
C. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the municipality, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
(1) Be at least 18 years of age;
(2) Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program
meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies;
(3) Have at least 1,000 hours of cranerelated experience; and
(4) Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
§ 240-2 UNION CODE § 240-3
233:318
§ 240-4. Fee schedule.
The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each permit is valid for 60
days and may be extended and/or renewed provided that compliance with
the requirements of this chapter continues to be met. Fee for an extended
or renewal permit is $50.
§ 240-5. Notification of accident or safety issue required.
The owner of the building shall immediately notify the municipality of
every accident causing personal injury or damage to property involving a
construction crane covered by this chapter and shall afford the municipal
official every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident
involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the
apparatus, it shall be unlawful to use such device until after an examination
by the municipality is made and approval of the equipment for continued
use is granted. It shall be the duty of the municipality to make a prompt
examination into the cause of the accident and to enter a full and complete
report thereof in the records of the municipality. Such records shall be open
for public inspection during regular business hours.
§ 240-6. Safety equipment required.
D. The crane operator should reside in the municipality. If not, they should
reside in the same county as the municipality is located. The crane
operator shall reside in New Jersey.
A. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
B. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to property working order.
C. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Board,
Commissioner, or municipality must be adhered to at all times.
D. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee if such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month.
Such inspection shall include but not be limited to all blocks, shackles,
sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master
boom, controls and breaking mechanisms.
E. A written, dated and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
municipality. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written
§ 240-3 CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE § 240-6
233:319
§ 240-7. Administration; enforcement.
§ 240-8. Unsafe cranes.
designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such
attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of such.
F. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
G. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
A. The municipal Council may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter, shall be enforced by the Construction
Code Department.
A. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which involves inadequate
maintenance shall be deemed in unsafe condition by the municipal
Engineer. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or removed or made
safe, as the municipal Engineer deems necessary and as provided for in
this section.
B. The municipal Engineer shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
crane. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
C. If an unsafe condition is found, the municipal Engineer shall serve on
the owner, agent or person in control of the crane, a written notice that
describes the condition being unsafe and specifies the required repairs
or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition. Such notice
shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the
municipal Engineer exceptions or rejection of the terms of the order.
D. Such order shall be deemed properly served if a copy is delivered to the
owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail addressed to
the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested.
If a certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter has
not been delivered, a copy shall be posed in a conspicuous place in or on
the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the
foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the crane shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
E. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the municipal Engineer may
be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or
additions are made during restoration of such equipment, such repairs,
alterations or additions shall comply with all applicable codes.
§ 240-6 UNION CODE § 240-8
233:320
§ 240-9. Violations; penalties.
Chapter 242
CURFEW
§ 242-1. Findings and purpose.
F. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
an order to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with § 240-9.
A. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding
90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date
of this section.
B. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: imprisonment in the County Jail or in any other place
provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term
not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the
effective date of this section.
A. Findings of Township Committee.
(1) The Township Committee of the Township of Union hereby finds
that there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision
normally provided by certain parents and guidance for juveniles
under 18 years of age resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide
range of unacceptable behavior, including vandalism, noisy and
rowdy behavior, breaking and entering, public drinking and
littering and harassment of residents.
(2) The Township Committee further finds that the offensive activities
of the juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws and
ordinances because the activities are easily concealed whenever
police officers are present and that the establishment of reasonable
curfew regulations will enable the community to better control the
free and unobstructed access to the streets and public places by
the majority of residents and will enable the police to act
reasonably and fairly to prevent the violation of laws and
ordinances by juveniles.
(3) The Township Committee further finds and has determined that a
curfew meets a very real local need and that curfew ordinances in
§ 240-8 CURFEW § 242-1
242:321
other communities have been a significant factor in minimizing
juvenile delinquency. A curfew in the Township of Union is
particularly appropriate in view of the basic residential nature of
the community in the sense of the community that there is a proper
time for the cessation of outdoor activities of juveniles. That sense
of community is reflected by the curfew hours declared by this
chapter which take into consideration also the danger hours for
nocturnal crime and for accumulations of juveniles with potential
risk incident to immaturity.
B. Purpose.
(1) In enacting this chapter, the Township Committee adopts the
findings of the legislature expressed in P.L. 1992, c. 132 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.52), and has taken note of the peculiar vulnerability of
children, both as victims of crime and as perpetrators of offenses
because of peer pressure. This chapter is intended not only to
prevent children from causing harm, but also is intended to protect
children themselves from being harmed as victims of nocturnal
crime.
(2) The Township of Union is basically a family community. Parental
responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm
by a substantial majority of the community. Legal sanctions to
enforce such responsibility have had a demonstrated effectiveness
in many communities over the years. The Township Committee has
determined that as parental control increases there is a likelihood
that juvenile delinquency decreases and that there is a need for a
nocturnal curfew for juveniles in the Township of Union and that
the establishment of a curfew applicable to juveniles will reinforce
the primary authority and responsibility of parents and guardians
over juveniles in their care and custody.
(3) It is not the intent of this chapter to supplant parental supervision.
The Township Committee recognizes the right of parents to direct
their children's upbringing and family autonomy against
unreasonable interference. The Township Committee is also aware
that, in cases in which harm to the physical or mental health of a
child or to the public safety, peace, order or welfare is threatened,
the legitimate interests of the community as a whole may override
the parents' qualified right to control the upbringing of their
children.
(4) The Township Committee also recognizes that juveniles are
protected with certain constitutional rights and guaranties that are
enjoyed by all citizens of this community. It is not the intention of
this chapter to deprive juveniles of the ability to exercise valid
rights secured to them under the Constitution of the United States
or the State of New Jersey. The function of this chapter is, instead,
to protect juveniles and to balance the right of all citizens of the
Township of Union so that all may enjoy the rights and privileges of
§ 242-1 UNION CODE § 242-1
242:322
§ 242-2. Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
§ 242-3. Curfew hours for juveniles established.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be or remain on or upon any public
place within the Township of Union between the following hours:
citizens as guaranteed to them by the Constitution and laws of this
country and this state.
A. Beginning at 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights and extending
until 5:00 a.m. on the following day.
B. Beginning at 10:00 p.m. on all other nights and extending until 5:00
a.m. the following day.
C. When accompanied by a parent or guardian of such juvenile.
D. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such juvenile
to take said parent's place in accompanying said juvenile for a
designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.
E. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of such exercise, provided that the juvenile has in
his or her possession a written communication, signed by the juvenile
and countersigned by a parent or guardian of the juvenile, with their
home address and telephone number, specifying when, where and in
what manner the juvenile will be on the streets at night during hours
when this chapter is otherwise applicable to said juvenile in the
exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such communication.
F. In case of reasonable necessity for the juvenile remaining on the
streets, provided that the juvenile has in his or her possession a written
communication, signed by the juvenile and countersigned by a parent
or guardian of the juvenile, with their home address and telephone
number, setting forth the facts establishing the reasonable necessity
relating to remaining on specified streets at a designated time for a
described purpose, including points or origin and destination.
§ 242-1 CURFEW § 242-3
242:323
§ 242-4. Parental responsibility.
Upon charging a juvenile with violation of this chapter, notice of the same
shall be given, in writing, by the Police Department to the juvenile's parent
or guardian, which notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail. If at any time within 30 days following
the giving of notice as provided herein the juvenile to whom such notice
related or applied is again charged, and upon such charge is subsequently
convicted of a violation of the curfew provisions of this chapter, it shall be
rebuttably presumed that the juvenile committed such subsequent violation
with the knowledge, allowance, permission or sufferance of the parent or
guardian of such juvenile, and the parent or guardian shall thereupon be
charged with a violation of this chapter.
§ 242-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof. If both a juvenile and the juvenile's parent or guardian violate such
chapter, they shall be required to perform community service together.
§ 242-6. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose and
intent of P.L. 1992, c. 132 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52).
Chapter 250
G. When the juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile
resides or on either side of or across the street from the place where the
juvenile resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has
given permission for the juvenile to be there.
H. When returning home from and within one hour after the termination of
a school- or Township-sponsored activity or an activity of a religious or
other voluntary association, provided that the juvenile has in his or her
possession a written communication, signed by the juvenile and
countersigned by a parent or guardian of the juvenile with their home
address and telephone number, indicating the place and probable time
of termination of the activity.
I. When the juvenile is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. It is the intention of this provision to
clearly exempt bona fide interstate movements along major routes
through the Township of Union and interstate travel beginning or
ending in the Township of Union.
J. When engaged in or traveling to or from a place of employment.
K. When engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency.
§ 242-3 UNION CODE § 242-6
250:324
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 250-1. Disorderly conduct acts.
A person is guilty of an offense if, with purpose to cause public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he:
§ 250-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the
county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
Chapter 252
DONATION CLOTHING BINS
§ 252-1. Incorporation of provisions by reference.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. shall hereby be incorporated by
reference.
§ 252-2. Initial permit application fee; expiration.
The initial application fee for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be $25
and shall be valid from the date of issuance until December 31 of the same
year the initial permit was issued.
A. Fights in a public place or challenges another person in a public place
to a fight.
B. Creates a hazardous or physically dangerous condition by an act which
serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
C. Maliciously and willfully disturbs another person by loud and
unreasonable noise.
D. Uses offensive words in a public place which are inherently likely to
provoke an immediate violent reaction.
E. Disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful
authority.
F. Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic without lawful authority.
§ 242-6 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 252-3
250:325
§ 252-3. Renewal of permit; term; fee.
The permit for a clothing donation bin shall be renewed on the first of
January and shall be valid for a period of one year. The application fee for a
renewal permit shall be $25.
§ 252-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, individual, corporation or entity violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not
exceeding $1,250 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
Chapter 254
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 252-3 UNION CODE § 252-4
254:326
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 3985 (Ch. 28 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 254-1. Approval and adoption of map. [Amended 1-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 4927]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about November
3, 2005, by Robert W. Bucco, Jr., P.E., C.M.E., Township Engineer of The
Township of Union, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and areas within the municipality of property
which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or School Board and of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 254-2. Official finding and record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 254-1
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 254-3. Notification by schools of property.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Engineer and the Attorney of any changes
or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board
and which are used for school purposes.
§ 254-4. Map on file; copies.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 254-1 of
this article, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the County Clerk of Union County and to the office of the Union County
Prosecutor.
§ 254-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 254-5
254:327
§ 254-5. Map as evidence; additional provisions.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 254-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that
pursuant to state law such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a School Board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property is owned by a school or School Board and being used
for school purposes as of the date of enactment for this article.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 254-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or School Board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
§ 254-5 UNION CODE § 254-5
254:328
Chapter 260
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
§ 254-5 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 254-5
260:329

ARTICLE I
Third-Party Payment Plan
[Adopted 7-27-2004 by Ord. No. 4828]
§ 260-1. Establishment.
§ 260-2. Responsibility.
The Chief of the Department of Fire (the "Chief") and the Business
Administrator or his/her designee of the municipality (the "B/A") in
consultation with the municipality's EMS Program Consultant will be
responsible for the plan's billing.
§ 260-3. Fees.
The fee service is initially set as $500 base rate, plus $7.50 per mile trip;
nontransports where aid is provided: $250.
§ 260-4. Annual review of accounting records.
The CFO and the B/A shall annually review the plan's cost accounting
records. The B/A shall obtain an industry average.
§ 260-5. Contracts with hospitals.
The Township of Union is authorized to enter into contracts with various
hospitals that provide (ALS) services to the patients that are transported
A. The New Jersey State Department of Health has issued licensure for the
Union Township Fire Department's Emergency Medical Services (the
"program") administered by the Township of Union.
B. The program has been in operation providing experience and statistics
regarding the service and the patients served.
C. The Department is applying for a provider number for the Federal and
State Medicare/Medicaid Programs, enabling the municipality to
institute third-party payment plan (the "payment plan").
D. Most residents have health insurance plan or Medicare/Medicaid,
which provides payments to relieve their payment obligations.
E. The Township shall not balance bill the deductibles and co-pays for the
Union Township residents, including those covered by Medicaid/
Medicare, nor bill those Union residents for payment obligations
without insurance coverage. Mutual aid partners residents will be
treated in accordance with established policy of reciprocal agreement.
F. It is in the best interest of the taxpayers of the municipality to establish
the third-party payment plan in accordance with the Health Care
Finance Administration guidelines ("HCFA") so that taxpayers will not
be responsible for any out-of-pocket expenses.
§ 260-1 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 260-5
260:331
by Union Township Fire Department Emergency Medical Services allowing
the hospitals to bundle bill Medicare for services rendered. The hospital
will reimburse the municipality for its transportation costs within 30 days of
receiving payment.
§ 260-6. Contracts with volunteer first aid squads.
The Township may contract with the volunteer first aid squads to provide
third-party billing as established in this article should that be necessary.
§ 260-7. Fee adjustment.
The B/A shall annually, no later than March 1, adjust the fee for services as
set forth in § 260-3 herein pursuant to the recommendation of the Chief of
the EMS Program Consultants.
§ 260-8. Filing of copy.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the applicable federal and/
or state agencies.
§ 260-5 UNION CODE § 260-8
260:332
Chapter 266
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development parking
requirements — See Ch. 170.
Bicycles — See Ch. 179.
Fines for traffic violations — See Ch. 271.
Gasoline and automobile service
stations — See Ch. 298.
Limousines — See Ch. 354.
Human-powered locomotion devices — See
Ch. 362.
Motorcycles and similar vehicles — See Ch.
369.
Shopping carts in parking lots — See Ch. 439.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 490.
Towing — See Ch. 505.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 523.
§ 260-8 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 260-8
260:333

Part 1
[Adopted 7-28-1992GBeynOerradl. TNroa.ffi 4c2 0R9eg(uClha.t i2o6n6s, Part 1 Of The 1986
Code)131]
ARTICLE I
Definitions; Repealer; Penalty
§ 266-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Part 1, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 266-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Union are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this Part 1.
§ 266-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
elsewhere in this Part 1, every person convicted of a violation of a
provision of this Part 1 or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or both. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any parking meter provision of
this Part 1 shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $30. [Amended
8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 5210]
C. Any vehicle parked in violation of this Part 1 shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall
bear the reasonable cost of removal and storage which may result from
such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle. [Added
1-26-1993 by Ord. No. 4226]
131. Editor's Note: This Ordinance Received Final Approval From The New Jersey Department
Of Transportation.
§ 266-1 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-3
260:335

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 266-4. Traffic control signals.
§ 266-5. Speed limits.
§ 266-6. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 266-44), attached
to and made a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 266-7. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IV (§ 266-45), attached to and made a part of this Part
1.
§ 266-8. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any
of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 266-46), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1.
§ 266-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 266-47),
attached to and made a part of this Part 1.
§ 266-10. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 266-48),
attached to and made a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as through
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets described in Schedule I (§ 266-42), attached to and
made a part of this Part 1.
B. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to
the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 266-43), attached to and made a part
of this Part 1, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits.
§ 266-4 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-10
260:337
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designations.
§ 266-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 266-49), attached to and
made a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 266-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 266-50), attached to and made
a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs
shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 266-13. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule X (§ 266-51), attached to and made
a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 266-14. Cruising unlawful; violations and penalties.
A. The purpose of this section is to protect the public welfare, safety and
convenience and to reduce the congestion and eliminate the gridlock
effect which frequently occurs on the streets mentioned in Schedule XI
(§ 266-52) hereof as a result of cruising and to ensure access for the
general public and, in particular, for emergency and safety vehicles to
and into such streets.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — Driving a motor vehicle, on streets hereinafter
designated, three or more times within any one-hour period from 9:00
p.m. to 4:00 a.m., or six or more times within any three-hour period
from 9:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. Driving upon any of the streets mentioned a
third time or a sixth time, as hereinabove stated, constitutes "cruising."
C. The streets or parts of streets to be affected by this section shall be as
designated in Schedule XI (§ 266-52), attached to and made a part of
this Part 1.
D. Cruising, as hereinabove defined, shall constitute a violation of this
section.
E. This section shall not apply to any vehicle licensed to or operated by a
federal, state or municipal official while on official business, any public
safety or emergency vehicle or any vehicle utilized for public
transportation, whether the same be a bus, taxicab or limousine.
§ 266-10 UNION CODE § 266-14
260:338
§ 266-15. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XII (§ 266-53),
attached to and made a part of this Part 1, as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and
numbered as indicated.
§ 266-16. Truck routes.
The streets or parts of streets designated in Schedule XIII (§ 266-54),
attached to and made a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as routes
for vehicles weighing over four tons. All trucks having a total combined
registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of four tons shall be
excluded from all streets, except those streets which form a part of the
system of truck routes. Vehicles will be permitted on all streets for the
purpose of pickup and delivery of materials. In addition, all state and county
roads are considered truck routes.
§ 266-16.1. Midblock crosswalks. [Added 4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4437]
§ 266-16.2. Crosswalks that cross county roads. [Added 4-12-2005
by Ord. No. 4864]
The below information is all the crosswalks that cross county roads. This
list only represents crosswalks that cross a county road, not the crosswalks
that run parallel with the county roadway. The location of each crosswalk
is listed by the location it is at and is broken down to whether it is at a
traffic-controlled intersection, at an intersection without a light or a midblock
crosswalk. If there is only one crosswalk at an intersection, it will
state which side of the intersection the crosswalk is on.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to a community service for
not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of
the Judge of the Municipal Court.132
A. Midblock crosswalks designated.
(1) There shall be a midblock crossing on Union Avenue from a point
extending along the easterly curbline 320 feet north of the
northerly bridge abutment at Route I-78 and then to a point 10 feet
in a northerly direction across Union Avenue.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated midblock crossing authorized by the Department
of Transportation.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 266-14 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-16.2
260:339
LOCATION
AT
TRAFFIC
LIGHT
(side)
AT
INTERSECTION
(side)
MIDBLOCK
Burnet Avenue (Route 633)
Morris Avenue North
Allen Avenue South
Doris Avenue South
Vauxhall Road Both
Edward Terrace South
Laurel Avenue South
Chestnut Street (Route 638), Five Points to Roselle Park line
Freeman Circle West
Galloping Hill Road East
Chestnut Street (Route 619), Five Points to Stuyvesant Avenue
Galloping Hill Road West
Newark Avenue East
Washington Avenue Both
Vassar Avenue West
Renner Avenue East
Colonial Avenue Both
Crawford Terrace Both
Fairway Drive (Route 656), Chestnut Street to Route 22 east
None
Galloping Hill Road (Route 616), Five Points to the Elizabeth line
Salem Road East
Forest Drive East
Lehigh Avenue Both
Magie Avenue West
Galloping Hill Road (Route 509), Five Points to Kenilworth line
Chestnut Street West
Galloping Hill
Mall entrance East
Washington Avenue East
Magie Avenue (Route 618)
Galloping Hill Road Both
§ 266-16.2 UNION CODE § 266-16.2
260:340
LOCATION
AT
TRAFFIC
LIGHT
(side)
AT
INTERSECTION
(side)
MIDBLOCK
Summit Road Both
Milltown Road (Route 636)
Springfield Road West
Salem Road (Route 509), Five Points to Hillside line
Galloping Hill Road North
Huntington Road south
side to Whitewood
Road north side
X
Hugenot Avenue South
Morris Avenue Both
Vauxhall Road South
Springfield Road/Liberty Avenue (Route 637), to Morris Avenue
Rahway Avenue North
Killian Place South
Spruce Street North
Morris Avenue Both
Spruce Street (Route 633), from Liberty Avenue east to Morris Avenue
Morris Avenue South
Ramos Avenue east
side to Wendy Court
east side
X
Liberty Avenue East
Stuyvesant Avenue (Route 619)
Wewanna Avenue North
Rosemont Avenue North
Morris Avenue Both
Axton Avenue to
Emerson Avenue
Both
Vauxhall Road Both
Tyler Street north side
to Long Terrace south
side
X
Oakland Avenue Both
§ 266-16.2 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-16.2
260:341
LOCATION
AT
TRAFFIC
LIGHT
(side)
AT
INTERSECTION
(side)
MIDBLOCK
Everett Circle to
Hollywood Cemetery
North
Stanley Terrace Both
Tucker Avenue (Route 619)
Galloping Hill Road East
Putnam House (255
Tucker Avenue) to
Municipal Lot
XX
Francis Court East
Valley Street (Route 638)
Vauxhall Road Both
West Line Avenue North
Vauxhall Road (Route 630)
Salem Road West
Oakland Avenue East
Stuyvesant Avenue Both
Barbara Avenue to
Pine Avenue
Both
Caldwell Avenue East
Winslow Avenue east
side to Commerece
Avenue west side
XX
Hendricks Drive West
Burnet Avenue Both
Liberty Avenue East
Hilton Avenue East
Springfield Avenue Both
Valley Street Both
Patton Road [Added
9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 5157]
Both
West Chestnut Street (Route 626)
Hobson Street to Main
Post Office
West
§ 266-16.2 UNION CODE § 266-16.2
260:342
LOCATION
AT
TRAFFIC
LIGHT
(side)
AT
INTERSECTION
(side)
MIDBLOCK
Caldwell Avenue Both
North Fairway Drive East
Stuyvesant Avenue West
§ 266-16.3. Trucks prohibited. [Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No.
5332133]
The streets or parts of streets designed in Schedule XXVIII (§ 266-66.3),
attached to and made a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as streets
that prohibit all truck traffic, except trucks that are making a pickup or a
delivery to a residential home.
133. Editor's Note: This section was adopted as § 266-16.1 but renumbered to avoid duplicate
section numbers.
§ 266-16.2 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-16.3
260:343

ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping134
§ 266-17. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 266-18. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIV (§ 266-55), attached to and made a part
of this Part 1.
§ 266-19. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XV (§ 266-56), attached to and made a part of
this Part 1.
§ 266-20. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 266-57) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XVI, attached to and made a part
of this Part 1.
§ 266-21. No stopping or standing certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule XVII (§ 266-58) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVII, attached
to and made a part of this Part 1.
§ 266-22. Parking of trailers, tractors, omnibuses, commercial and
noncommercial vehicles.135 [Amended 12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 4366;
8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 4552]
No person or corporation shall park a trailer, tractor, omnibus, commercial
or noncommercial vehicle exceeding seven feet by seven feet by 20 feet and
8,600 pounds gross vehicle weight on any street between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
134. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 3767, adopted 12-27-1984, provided for the following:
"Notwithstanding any other ordinance to the contrary and in residential areas only, any
ordinance presently regulating parking shall be suspended on Rosh Hashanah and Yom
Kippur, Jewish High Holy Days."
135. Editor's Note: See also § 170-128, Parking of trucks and other vehicles.
§ 266-17 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-23
260:345
§ 266-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 266-59) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XVIII of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVIII, attached to and
made a part of this Part 1.
§ 266-23.1. Seventy-two-hour parking limit. [Added 1-26-1993 by
Ord. No. 4226]
Except where otherwise prohibited and/or regulated in the Township Code,
no person shall cause a motor vehicle to be parked longer than 72 hours in
the same spot on any public roadway in the Township of Union.
§ 266-24. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIX (§ 266-60) except at the angle designated and
only within the painted white stall lines.
§ 266-25. Loading zones. [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4563]
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 266-61), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as loading zones. Parking shall be
allowed only when the actual loading or unloading is in progress.
§ 266-26. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 266-62), attached to and made a
part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 266-27. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 266-63), attached to and made
a part of this Part 1, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 266-23 UNION CODE § 266-27
260:346
ARTICLE IV
Emergency No Parking
§ 266-28. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 266-28.1. Designation of emergency no-parking areas. [Added
9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 4514]
When weather conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or
require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with
the free flow of traffic, the Chief of Police, or in his absence, the ranking
police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and direct posting of
"Emergency No-Parking" signs.
§ 266-29. Posting of signs.
§ 266-30. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 266-31. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XXIII (§ 266-64),
attached to and made a part of this Part 1.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or parts of streets, or municipal parking lots, where temporary
emergency no-parking signs are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his
absence the ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of said emergency no-parking
signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations
dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. [Amended 9-24-2002 by Ord.
No. 4747]
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 266-28 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-31
260:347

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)136
§ 266-32. (Reserved)
§ 266-33. (Reserved)
§ 266-34. (Reserved)
§ 266-35. (Reserved)
§ 266-36. (Reserved)
§ 266-37. (Reserved)
§ 266-38. (Reserved)
§ 266-39. (Reserved)
§ 266-40. (Reserved)
§ 266-41. (Reserved)
136. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Metered Parking, was repealed 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4567.
§ 266-32 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41
260:349

ARTICLE VA
Permit Parking in Residential Areas
[Added 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4337]
§ 266-41.1. Parking by permit only.
No vehicle shall be parked on the streets or parts of streets designated
in Schedule XXV (§ 266-66), attached hereto and made part of this Part 1,
during the hours designated in said schedule XXV, Monday through Sunday,
unless:
§ 266-41.2. Exceptions.
The following vehicles shall be exempt from this parking permit article:
§ 266-41.3. Administration. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4432]
Application for parking permits under this article shall be made in writing
on forms provided to the Township Business Administrator, or his designee.
Permits shall be granted only under the following terms and conditions:
A. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident of that
street.
B. The vehicle has displayed on its left rear window in such a manner as to
be closely examined by an officer a current residential parking permit.
C. The vehicle falls under one of the exceptions to the parking ban.
A. Visitors. A vehicle displaying a current visitor parking permit may park
a maximum of two days, provided that the operator of the vehicle is a
bona fide guest of a residence within the permit parking area. The
visitor's permit shall be displayed on the dashboard of the vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible by an officer enforcing parking
regulations.
B. Contractors, service and delivery vehicles. Contractors, service and
delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial
business may park without a permit during the time they are rendering
service to a residence within the permit parking area.
C. Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles and public service, telephone
and other public utility vehicles may park within the permit parking
area during the time they are rendering service or repairs within the
area.
A. To persons who are residents on said street or portion thereof upon
which parking is restricted by this article, a permanent permit, valid
during the residency of the person or persons at a particular address,
shall be issued for every vehicle owned or principally operated by such
person or persons.
§ 266-41.1 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.3
260:351
B. Two visitor permits shall be issued to each residential unit on any street
or portion thereof upon which parking is restricted by this article, for
use only by visitors to that residential unit. In lieu of the visitor's
parking sticker, a resident may telephone the Township of Union Police
Department at least eight hours in advance to notify it of visitors at his
or her location.
§ 266-41.3 UNION CODE § 266-41.3
260:352
ARTICLE VB
Public Handicapped Parking
[Added 6-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4403]
§ 266-41.4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish parking prohibitions in certain
areas that are on private property which is open to the public or to which
the public is invited as set forth below.
§ 266-41.5. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-197 et seq., which confers upon the Township of Union the right to
establish certain regulations in order to preserve and safeguard the public
health, safety, morals and welfare.
§ 266-41.6. Handicapped parking areas designated. [Amended
10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 4418]
The following areas shall be designated as handicapped parking and shall
be so marked by signs in conformance with the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways:
Area* Location
Boston Chicken 523 Chestnut Street
Cumberland Farms [Added
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 4427]
Chestnut Street
CVS Pharmacy [Added 1-23-1996
by Ord. No. 4427]
Morris Avenue
Dunkin Donuts [Added 1-23-1996
by Ord. No. 4427]
Morris Avenue
Five Points Shopping Center
[Added 1-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4427]
Chestnut Street
Foodtown 1201 Stuyvesant Avenue
Galloping Hill Shopping Center
[Added 1-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4427]
Galloping Hill Road
Huck Finn Diner [Added
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 4427]
Morris Avenue
Ideal Professional Park 2333 Morris Avenue
Ionics 51 Progress Street
Lehigh Savings Bonnel Court
Mark Twain Diner [Added
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 4427]
Morris Avenue
§ 266-41.4 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.6
260:353
Area* Location
McDonalds Route 22 and Michigan Avenue
Medical Building [Added
1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 4427]
440 Chestnut Avenue
Millburn Mall Vauxhall Road
Office Building [Added 1-23-1996
by Ord. No. 4427]
1308 Morris Avenue
Pizza Hut 1434-1438 Morris Avenue
Pop Realty - RKO Video Center Island, Route 22
Quick Check [Added 1-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 4427]
Morris Avenue
Red Lobster 2520 US Highway 22
RH Associates 1371 Morris Avenue and 1000
Sterling Road
St. Barnabus\Union Hospital
[Added 1-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4427]
Galloping Hill Road
Shop-Rite 2661 Morris Avenue
Suburban Cable 800 Rahway Avenue
Taco Bell and Kentucky Fried
Chicken
Route 22 Center
Union Equity Realty 1235 West Chestnut Street
Union Market Place 2445 Springfield Avenue
Union Plaza Diner US Highway 22
Union Plaza Shopping Plaza
(Rickels, etc.)
US Highway 22
Vornado (Bradlee's) US Highway 22 and Morris Avenue
* Note: As shown on the current site plans which are made part of this
article and are on file with the Township Clerk.
§ 266-41.7. Violations and penalties.
For violation of any provision of this article, the maximum penalty shall be
a fine of $100 for a first offense and not less than $100 nor more than $250
for a subsequent offense, or 90 days of community service, or both.
§ 266-41.6 UNION CODE § 266-41.7
260:354
ARTICLE VC
Vehicle Regulations for Park Lane Mobile Home Park
[Added 4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 4383]
§ 266-41.8. Applicability.
The Park Lane Mobile Home Park has filed written consent with the
Township of Union that the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at the Park Lane Mobile Home Park located in
the Township of Union, County of Union, and the following regulations shall
be enforced.
§ 266-41.9. Handicapped parking.
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the site plan on file with the
Township Clerk and signed with R7-8 and R7-8(p) (reserved parking sign
and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
§ 266-41.10. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein:
Stop Intersection Stop Sign on
Riverside Drive and Lee StreeTt
(both intersections)
Riverside Drive (both intersections)
Riverside Drive and Selover Road
(both intersections)
Riverside Drive (both intersections)
§ 266-41.11. Restricted parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Lee Street Both All Entire length
Riverside Drive Both All Entire length
Selover Road Both All Entire length
§ 266-41.12. Towing of vehicles in violation.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic; block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area
or pedestrian walkway; or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 266-41.8 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.13
260:355
§ 266-41.13. Signs.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 266-41.14. (Reserved)137
137. Editor's Note: Former § 266-41.14, Violations and penalties, was repealed 10-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 4842. See now § 266-3, Violations and penalties.
§ 266-41.13 UNION CODE § 266-41.14
260:356
ARTICLE VD
Street Closures
[Added 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 4435]
§ 266-41.15. Closures on school days. [Amended 9-9-1997 by Ord.
No. 4518; 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 5420]
(Reserved)
§ 266-41.16. Exemptions.
Residents of Seymour Avenue shall be exempt from this article.
§ 266-41.17. Signage.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated street closing authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 266-41.15 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.17
260:357

ARTICLE VE
Target Stores Retail Complex
[Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 4526]
§ 266-41.18. Applicability of statutory regulations.
The Dayton Hudson Corporation has filed a written consent with the
Township of Union that the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at the Target Stores Retail Complex located in
the Township of Union, County of Union, and the following regulations shall
be enforceable.
§ 266-41.19. Parking.
§ 266-41.20. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Roads A through F Entire length
Road B Entire length
Road C Entire length
Road D Entire length
Road G Entire length
Road H Entire length
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
D. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan.
§ 266-41.18 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.20
260:359
Name of Street Limits
Road J Entire length
Road K Entire length
§ 266-41.21. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road I and Road J Road J
§ 266-41.22. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limit
Road E North Entire length
§ 266-41.23. Speed limits.
§ 266-41.24. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 266-41.25. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 miles per hour (mph).
B. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
All roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 266-41.20 UNION CODE § 266-41.25
260:360
Name of Street Times Sides Location
Road E All East As per site plan
Road G All North As per site plan
§ 266-41.26. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 266-41.27. (Reserved)138
138. Editor's Note: Former § 266-41.27, Violations and penalties, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Penalties, Art. I). See now § 266-3, Violations and
penalties.
§ 266-41.25 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.27
260:361

ARTICLE VF
Union High School
[Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 4528]
§ 266-41.28. Applicability of statutory regulations.
The Union Township Board of Education has filed a written consent with
the Township of Union that various traffic regulations be made applicable to
the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Union High
School located in the Township of Union, County of Union, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 266-41.29. Parking.
§ 266-41.30. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Roads A, B, D and F Both All Entire length
Road G South All Entire length
Road C North All Entire length
C. No person shall park a vehicle during certain hours on certain days
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Road G North 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
As indicated on site
plan
Road C South 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
As indicated on site
plan
D. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
E. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan (Lot A, Lot F and Lot E).
§ 266-41.28 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.30
260:363
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road B and Road G Road B
§ 266-41.31. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Aisle A East
(counterclockwise)
Entire length
Road B North Entire length
Road C East Entire length
Road D Southeast Entire length
Road G South Entire length
§ 266-41.32. Speed limits.
§ 266-41.33. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 266-41.34. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 266-41.35. (Reserved)139
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 miles per hour (mph).
B. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 266-41.30 UNION CODE § 266-41.35
260:364
139. Editor's Note: Former § 266-41.35, Violations and penalties, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Penalties, Art. I). See now § 266-3, Violations and
penalties.
§ 266-41.35 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.35
260:365

ARTICLE VG
Vauxhall Branch Public Library
[Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4559]
§ 266-41.36. Parking.
§ 266-41.37. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Montclair Avenue and Road A Road A
§ 266-41.38. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road A North Entire length
§ 266-41.39. Speed limits.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas between the lines provided.
B. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
D. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc. must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
§ 266-41.36 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.39
260:367
§ 266-41.40. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 266-41.41. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials be installed and paid for by
the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 266-41.42. (Reserved)140
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
140. Editor's Note: Former § 266-41.42, Violations and penalties, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Penalties, Art. I). See now § 266-3, Violations and
penalties.
§ 266-41.39 UNION CODE § 266-41.42
260:368
ARTICLE VH
Hickory Manor
[Added 4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 4769]
§ 266-41.43. Parking.
§ 266-41.44. Through streets; stop intersections.
§ 266-41.45. Speed limits.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved
Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permit by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Firethorn Drive Between Hendricks Drive and its most northerly
terminus
Hendricks Drive Between Vauxhall Road (CR 630) and a point 50
feet west of the prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Redspire Drive
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Lilac Drive and Swanstrom Place
East
Swanstrom Place East
Redspire Drive and Cypress Drive Cypress Drive (both approaches)
Rosawood Drive and Lilac Drive Lilac Drive
§ 266-41.43 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.45
260:369
§ 266-41.46. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 266-41.47. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 266-41.48. (Reserved)141
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Hendricks Drive 25 Between Vauxhall Road (CR
630) and 50 feet west of
Redspire Drive
Swanstrom Place East 15 Entire length
All other drives 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
141. Editor's Note: Former § 266-41.48, Violations and penalties, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Penalties, Art. I). See now § 266-3, Violations and
penalties.
§ 266-41.45 UNION CODE § 266-41.48
260:370
ARTICLE V-I
Union Market
[Added 4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 4770]
§ 266-41.49. Parking.
§ 266-41.50. Through streets; stop intersections.
§ 266-41.51. Speed limits.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permit by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Road B Entire length
Road C Entire length
Road D Entire length
Road E Entire length
Road F Entire length
Road G Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road A and Road C Road C
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 mph.
§ 266-41.49 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.51
260:371
§ 266-41.52. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 266-41.53. Midblock crosswalks.
The following locations are hereby designated as midblock crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Road B As indicated on site plan
§ 266-41.54. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials:
Name of Street Time Location
Road E All hours As indicated on site plan
§ 266-41.55. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
Road A and Road B a) Southbound left lane of Road A reserved for
left turn only
b) Southbound right lane of Road A reserved for
right turn only
§ 266-41.56. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the currant Manual on
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall he erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 266-41.51 UNION CODE § 266-41.56
260:372
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4.183.27.
§ 266-41.57. (Reserved)142
142. Editor's Note: Former § 266-41.57, Violations and penalties, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Penalties, Art. I). See now § 266-3, Violations and
penalties.
§ 266-41.56 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.57
260:373

ARTICLE VJ
Nora Gardens Senior Housing
[Added 4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 4771]
§ 266-41.58. Parking.
§ 266-41.59. Reserved parking.
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section, such as police
vehicles, ambulances, teachers etc., must be properly identified and the
reserved parking spaces must be shown on the attached site plan.
§ 266-41.60. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road A and Road B Road B
§ 266-41.61. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road B East Entire length
§ 266-41.62. Speed limits.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by, other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads Both All As indicated on site plan
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permit by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
§ 266-41.58 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.62
260:375
§ 266-41.63. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 266-41.64. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials:
Name of Street Time Location
Road A All hours As indicated on site plan
§ 266-41.65. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to, N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 266-41.66. (Reserved)143
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 10 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
143. Editor's Note: Former § 266-41.66, Violations and penalties, was repealed 10-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 4842. See now § 266-3, Violations and penalties.
§ 266-41.62 UNION CODE § 266-41.66
260:376
ARTICLE VK
Union Train Station
[Adopted 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 4840]
§ 266-41.67. Parking.
§ 266-41.68. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Main Drive From Green Lane to Track Lane
Station Line From the easterly intersection of
Track Lane to its westerly
intersection with Track Lane
"A" Lane From Station Lane to Main Drive
Track Lane From Green Lane to Main Drive
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided and that any parking or regulations set forth herein which
refer to a "site plan" shall be the site plan submitted by the Clerk for
this approval.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions. (As indicated on site plan.)
C. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described below. (Locations depicted on
site plan.)
D. Permit parking. No persons shall park a vehicle at the below described
location unless said vehicle shall have a valid permit displayed.
E. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who been issued the handicapped parking permit by the
Division of Motor Vehicles. (As show on site plan.)
F. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted speciality parking in
this section such as police vehicles, ambulances, employees, etc., must
be properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown
on the site plan.
§ 266-41.67 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.69
260:377
§ 266-41.69. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on:
Main Drive and Track Lane Main Drive
"B" Lane and "C" Lane "B" Lane
§ 266-41.70. Speed limits.
§ 266-41.71. Parking of certain trucks, vehicles and trailers
prohibited.
No person shall park any truck or vehicle over three tons vehicle weight
(GVW), a school bus, any other type of bus, recreational vehicle, camper,
boat or trailer upon any of the streets or parts of streets described. (Entire
complex.)
§ 266-41.72. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the (GVW) gross vehicle weight of four tons are hereby
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 266-41.73. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 266-41.74. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said locations indicated other than for the loading or
unloading of goods and materials, pickup and discharge of passengers. (As
show on site plan.)
§ 266-41.75. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials be installed and paid for by
the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lots and
roads shall be 15 miles per hour.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 266-41.69 UNION CODE § 266-41.75
260:378
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.SA. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 266-41.76. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 266-41.75 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.76
260:379

ARTICLE VL
Traffic Control Signal Monitoring System
[Added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 5201]
§ 266-41.77. Installation; signs; inspection and certification.
§ 266-41.78. Issuance of summons.
The Police Department of the Township of Union shall review the recorded
images produced by the system to determine whether sufficient evidence
exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has occurred and
shall issue a summons when appropriate in accordance with the rules of the
Court.
§ 266-41.79. Use of recorded images.
A. The Township of Union hereby determines to install and utilize a traffic
control signal monitoring system ("system") at various intersections
within the Township of Union as approved by the Commissioner of
Transportation pursuant to the Act.144
B. The system to be installed shall be approved by the governing body by
resolution.
C. The Township of Union shall have the authority to enter into a contract,
following a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the
system. Any contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the Act
shall not be deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to the Act.
D. The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be
approved by the municipal engineer, and shall be placed on each street
converging into the affected intersection as required by the Act.
E. The Municipal Engineer shall inspect and certify the system at least
once every six months from the date of its installation.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the system shall be available for the exclusive use of the
Police Department for the purpose of discharging its duties under P.L.
2007, c. 348.
B. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the
system shall not be deemed a public record under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq. or common law. The recorded images shall not be:
(1) Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter; or
144. Editor's Note: The "Act" is P.L. 2007, c. 348, according to the preamble of Ord. No. 5201.
§ 266-41.77 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-41.79
260:381
§ 266-41.80. Owner's liability.
The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic control
signal violation summons pursuant to the system shall be joint subject to
provisions of the Act.
§ 266-41.81. Violations and penalties.
Any person liable for a traffic control signal violation, pursuant to the article
and the Act, utilizing the system shall be subject to the following fines:
(2) Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not
directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
C. Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a traffic
control signal violation shall not be retained after 60 days following the
collection of any fine or penalty.
D. If a summons is not issued within 90 business days following the traffic
control signal violation, all recorded images and any information
collected with respect to the traffic control signal violation shall be
removed by the Police Department within two business days.
E. The Township of Union shall certify compliance of this section by filing a
report with the Commissioner of Transportation in accordance with the
Act.
A. Violation: $85.
§ 266-41.79 UNION CODE § 266-41.81
260:382
ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 266-42. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Chestnut Street and Colonial Avenue
Galloping Hill Road and Lehigh Avenue
Galloping Hill Road and Washington Avenue
Liberty Avenue and Beyond Way [Added 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 5393]
Rahway Avenue and Liberty Avenue [Added 3-27-2012 by Ord. No.
5237]
Springfield Road and Milltown Road [Added 9-27-2016 by Ord. No.
5394]
Stuyvesant Avenue and Stanley Terrace
Stuyvesant Avenue and Wewanna Avenue
Vauxhall Road and Oakland Avenue
Vauxhall Road and Salem Road
Vauxhall Road and Stahuber Avenue [Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
5392]
Vauxhall Road and Stuyvesant Avenue
Vauxhall Road and Valley Street
West Chestnut Street and Caldwell Avenue
§ 266-43. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-5, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Bayberry Drive [Added
4-8-2003 by Ord. No.
4773]
15 Entire length
Court Drive (No. 1085) 15 Entire length
Court Drive (No. 1095) 15 Entire length
Elizabethtown Plaza 15 Entire length
Elizabethtown Plaza north 15 Entire length
Elizabethtown Plaza west 15 Entire length
§ 266-42 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-43
260:383
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Kean Drive 15 Entire length
Liberty Hall Corporate
Center
15 Both directions in the
parking lot
Winslow Avenue [Added
4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4440]
25 Entire length
§ 266-44. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-6, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Adams Avenue
[Repealed 9-9-2008
by Ord. No. 5063]
Adams Avenue [Added
9-9-2008 by Ord. No.
5063]
South From Morris Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Amboy Street North From Springfield Avenue to
Tuxedo Place
Astoria Place Northwest From Burnet Avenue to Elm
Street
Atlanta Avenue Southeast From Augustine Place to Burnet
Avenue
Augustine Place Northeast From Tebe Place to Burkley
Place
Axton Avenue East From Grandview Avenue to
Adams Avenue
Axton Avenue East From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Grandview Avenue
Bertha Avenue North From Springfield Avenue to
Westside Avenue
Bertram Terrace Northeast From Morris Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Biscayne Boulevard
(circle)
Northeast/
Southwest
From Vauxhall Road to Vauxhall
Road
§ 266-43 UNION CODE § 266-44
260:384
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Brunswick Avenue Southeast From Valley Street to East Side
Avenue
Byron Avenue North From Magie Avenue to
Roseland Place
Carnegie Place Northeast From Burkley Place to the
Township line
Carnegie Place Southwest From Burkley Place to Tebe
Place
Catherine Street South From Astoria Place to Burkley
Place
Cedar Avenue North From Emerson Avenue to
Vauxhall Road
Center Street North From Doris Avenue to Jackson
Avenue
Clermont Terrace
[Added 11-22-1994
by Ord. No. 4363;
amended 4-25-1995
by Ord. No. 4386]
South From a point 122 feet in a
southwesterly direction from
the southwest curbline of
Edgewood Parkway to its
terminus at Magie Avenue;
parking permitted both sides
Conant Avenue Southwest From Campus Drive to
Woodland Avenue
Cooke Drive Northeast From Morris Avenue to its
terminus
Coolidge Avenue South From Vauxhall Road to Morris
Avenue
Court Drive (No. 1095) South —
Court Drive (No. 1085) West —
Crowell Place [Added
3-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 4673; repealed
11-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 4697]
Delaware Avenue
[Added 8-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 4610]
East From Galloping Hill Road to
Marshall Avenue
Durling Road South From Cabot Avenue to Magie
Avenue
Eastern A&P Shopping
Center Driveway
East Entire length for exit only
§ 266-44 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-44
260:385
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Elks Lane North Entire length
Elmwood Avenue West From the west curbline of
Johnson Place to the
southeastern point of the
monument located at the
intersection of Stuyvesant
Avenue, Johnson Place and
Elmwood Avenue
Emerson Avenue Northwest From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Stowe Street
Emily Avenue South From Valley Street to
Springfield Avenue
Falls Terrace Northeast From Berwyn Street to Vauxhall
Road
Farrington Street North From Vauxhall Road to
Springfield Avenue
Freeman Circle [Added
8-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 4610]
Northeast From Tucker Avenue to
Chestnut Street
Glenn Avenue [Added
4-8-2003 by Ord. No.
4772]
North From Vauxhall Road to Kay
Avenue
Grandview Avenue
[Added 9-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 5063
North From Morris Avenue to Haines
Avenue
Grandview Avenue
[Repealed 9-9-2008
by Ord. No. 5063
Grandview Avenue
[Repealed 9-9-2008
by Ord. No. 5063
Greeley Avenue North From Route 22 to Progress
Avenue
Grove Road Northwest Entire length
Hadfield Avenue Southwest From Girard Place to Morris
Avenue
Harding Avenue Northeast From Morris Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Hendricks Drive
[Added 7-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 5385]
Northeast From dead end to Swing Gate
§ 266-44 UNION CODE § 266-44
260:386
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Higa Terrace Southeast From Salem Road to Potter
Avenue
Hilton Avenue North From Burkley Place to Laurel
Avenue
Hobart Street — From Commerce Avenue to
Vauxhall Road
Howard Street Northeast From Berwyn Street to Vauxhall
Road
Hudson Street [Added
10-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 4562; repealed
9-11-2007 by Ord.
No. 5019]
Hunt Avenue — From Burnet Avenue to
Augustine Avenue
Indiana Street Southwest From Laurel Avenue to Astoria
Place
Julian Terrace West From Mulford Avenue to
Bradford Terrace
Kawameeh Drive Northeast From Chestnut Street to
Selfmaster Parkway - Burke
Parkway
Kelly Street Southwest From High Street to Vauxhall
Street
Killian Place Southeast From Liberty Avenue to
Remmos Avenue
Lindy Terrace East From Bradford Terrace to
Mulford Avenue
Long Terrace East From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Oakland Avenue
Lynmar Way Northwest From Bishop Street to
Monmouth Road
Madison Avenue Northeast From West Chestnut Street to
Elmwood Avenue
Marion Street Northwest From Brown Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Martha Avenue
[Repealed
10-28-1997 by Ord.
No. 4525]
§ 266-44 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-44
260:387
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Mary Avenue
[Amended 7-12-1994
by Ord. No. 4336;
9-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 4521]
North From Springfield Avenue to
Valley Street
Mathews Way (formerly
known as Crowell
Place) [Added
11-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 4697]
West From Oswald Place to Hilton
Avenue
Memorial General
Hospital Driveway
South Entire length
Monmouth Road Southwest From Lynmar Way to Vivian
Terrace
Mulford Avenue South From Lindy Terrace to Julian
Terrace
Municipal Parking Lot
No. 33 [Added
9-9-1997 by Ord. No.
4517; repealed
10-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 4560]
Nicholas Avenue Southwest From Carol Road to Morris
Avenue
Nicholas Place Southeast From Nicholas Avenue to
Liberty Avenue
Ohio Street Northeast From Astoria Place to Laurel
Avenue
Old Vauxhall Road North From the Rahway Valley
Railroad north for 500 feet
Orange Avenue
[Repealed 9-24-2002
by Ord. No. 4748]
Orleans Place Northwest From Burnet Avenue to
Augustine Place
Ostwood Terrace West From Walker Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Oswald Place Southwest From Burkley Place to Tebe
Place
Oswald Place Southwest From the Township line to
Burkley Place
§ 266-44 UNION CODE § 266-44
260:388
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Overlook Terrace Southwest From Vauxhall Road to Berwyn
Street, 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.
Sundays
Plane Street Northeast From Vauxhall Road to High
Street
Potter Avenue North From High Terrace to Salem
Road
Potter Avenue South From High Terrace south for
170 feet
Ridgeway Street West From Copper Hill Drive to
Vauxhall Road
Roselyn Place South Entire length
Schmidt Avenue South From Earl Street to Vauxhall
Road
Schneider Avenue
[Added 4-23-1996 by
Ord No. 4438]
Southwest From Hawthorne Avenue to
Morris Avenue
Seymour Avenue
[Repealed 8-27-1999
by Ord. No. 4614]
Seymour Avenue
[Added 8-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 4614]
West From Gruber Avenue to Burnet
Avenue
Sophia Avenue [Added
10-28-1997 by Ord.
No. 4525]
South From West Side Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Spruce Street Northwest From Liberty Avenue to
Moessner Avenue
Tebe Place Southeast From Oswald Place to Burnet
Avenue
Tucker Avenue [Added
8-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 4610]
South From Galloping Hill Road to
Freeman Circle
Waldorf Place Northeast From Tebe Place to Burkley
Place
Walker Avenue East From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Oakland Avenue
Walton Avenue Southwest From Galloping Hill Road to
Mercer Avenue
§ 266-44 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-44
260:389
Name of Street Direction
of Travel
Limits
Western A&P Shopping
Center driveways
East Entire length for entrance only
West Side Avenue
[Added 10-28-1997
by Ord. No. 4525]
Southeast From Bertha Avenue to Sophia
Avenue
West Stuyvesant
Avenue
South From Elmwood Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Willard Place Southeast
and west
From Liberty Avenue to Rahway
Avenue
William Street East From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Walker Avenue
§ 266-45. Schedule IV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-7, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Burnet Avenue From Laurel Avenue to Stanley Terrace
Morris Avenue [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
5343]
Both directions of traffic between
Grandview Avenue and Warren Avenue.
Morris Avenue From Johnson Place to Grandview Avenue
N. Third Street [Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 5116]
Between Gruber Avenue and Stahuber
Avenue between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Stuyvesant Avenue From Johnson Place to Emerson Avenue
§ 266-46. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-8, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
§ 266-44 UNION CODE § 266-46
260:390
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Bonnell Court
[Repealed
9-23-1997 by
Ord. No. 4520]
Brookside Drive
[Added
8-28-2018 by
Ord. No. 5598]
North Left onto
Vauxhall
Road
All Vauxhall Road
Chestnut Street
[Added
2-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 5124]
West Left onto
Chestnut
Street
All Chestnut Street
Edward Terrace Northeast Left All Burnet Avenue
Fairway Drive South Left All Fairway Drive
extension
Galloping Hill
[Added
2-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 5124]
East Left onto
Chestnut
Street
All Chestnut Street
Lincoln Technical
Institute entrance
Both Left All Vauxhall Road
Magnolia Place South Left All Salem Road
Marion Street
[Added
11-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 4978]
North Left All Springfield
Avenue
Morris Avenue Both Left All Stuyvesant
Avenue
Morris Avenue
(State Highway
Route 82)
East Left All Spruce Street
Morris Avenue West All Driveways for
2801 Morris
Avenue
2264 Morris
Avenue (front)
[Added
11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 5170]
North Left All Onto Morris
Avenue W/b
§ 266-46 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-46
260:391
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
2264 Morris
Avenue (rear)
[Added
11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 5170]
South Left 7:00
a.m. to
9:00
p.m.
Onto Elmwood
Avenue E/b
2264 Morris
Avenue
(rear)/Elmwood
Avenue East
[Added
11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 5170]
East Left All Into 7-Eleven
Driveway
Morris Avenue
[Repealed
9-23-1997 by
Ord. No. 4520]
Oakland Avenue North Left All Cidermill Road
Private driveway
at 2440 Morris
Avenue
Northwest Left All Morris Avenue
Private driveway
at 2801 Morris
Avenue
North Left All Morris Avenue
Sayre Road North Left All Vauxhall Road
Schmidt Avenue South Left All Vauxhall Road
Springfield Road
[Added
9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 4751]
North Left into
shopping
center
All Access driveways
to Walmart/Home
Depot Shopping
Center: driveway
farthest north on
Springfield Road
Springfield Road
[Added
9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 4751]
North Left into
shopping
center
All Access driveways
to Walmart/Home
Depot Shopping
Center: driveway
farthest south on
Springfield Road
§ 266-46 UNION CODE § 266-46
260:392
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Springfield Road
[Added
9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 4751]
South Right out of
shopping
center
All Access driveways
to Walmart/Home
Depot Shopping
Center: driveway
farthest north on
Springfield Road
Springfield Road
[Added
9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 4751]
South Right out of
shopping
center
All Access driveways
to Walmart/Home
Depot Shopping
Center: driveway
farthest south on
Springfield Road
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both Left All Morris Avenue
Vauxhall Road Both Left All Lincoln Technical
Institute entrance
Vauxhall Road East Left All Schmidt Avenue
West Chestnut
Street
East Left All Stuyvesant
Avenue
§ 266-47. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-9, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours/Days
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red
Signal onto
Burnet Avenue Both All Vauxhall Road
Caldwell Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Elmwood Avenue
Caldwell Avenue Northeast 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Vauxhall Road
Chestnut Street Both All Galloping Hill Road
Chestnut Street
[Amended
2-9-1993 by
Ord. No. 4230]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Washington Avenue
Delaware
Avenue
West All Chestnut Street
§ 266-46 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-47
260:393
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours/Days
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red
Signal onto
Elmwood Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Caldwell Avenue
Galloping Hill
Road [Added
4-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 4596]
West All/All Delaware Street or
Chestnut Street
Glen Avenue Southwest 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Vauxhall Road
Liberty Avenue East All Vauxhall Road
Oakland Avenue Northwest 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Stuyvesant Avenue
Salem Avenue West All Vauxhall Road
Stuyvesant
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Wewanna Avenue
Tucker Avenue Northeast All Chestnut Street
Vauxhall Road East 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Burnet Avenue
Vauxhall Road East 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Caldwell Avenue and
Glenn Avenue
Washington
Avenue [Added
12-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 4285]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Chestnut Street
Washington
Avenue
[Repealed
2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 5621]
Washington
Avenue
[Amended
2-9-1993 by
Ord. No. 4230;
7-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 4265]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Chestnut Street
§ 266-47 UNION CODE § 266-47
260:394
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours/Days
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red
Signal onto
Wewanna
Avenue
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Stuyvesant Avenue
§ 266-48. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-10, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
Name of Street Limits
Allen Avenue Between Audrey Terrace and Liberty
Avenue
Allen Avenue Between Liberty Avenue and Burnet
Avenue
Andrew Street - Halsey Street Between Stanley Terrace and Ridgeway
Street
Audrey Terrace Between Liberty Avenue and Hamilton
Terrace
Bailey Avenue [Added
3-13-2001 by Ord. No. 4673]
Between Parkview Drive and Winthrop
Road
Barbara Avenue Between Vauxhall Road and Tyler
Street
Berwyn Street Between Jeanette Avenue and Caldwell
Avenue
Berwyn Street Between Falls Terrace and Pine Avenue
Beverly Road Between Lorraine Avenue and Salem
Road
Brighton Street [Amended
5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 4597]
Between Dewey Street and Savitt Place
Brookside Drive
[Added 3-13-2001 by Ord. No.
4673]
Between Sayre Road and Vauxhall Road
Burke Parkway - Selfmaster
Parkway
Between Morris Avenue and Colonial
Avenue
Burnet Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Burnet Avenue Between Vauxhall Road and the
Maplewood Township line
§ 266-47 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-48
260:395
Name of Street Limits
Broadwell Avenue Between Colonial Avenue and Salem
Road
Burroughs Terrace Between Chestnut Street and
Selfmaster Parkway
Burroughs Terrace Between Selfmaster Parkway and Golf
Terrace
Caldwell Avenue Between West Chestnut Street and
Caldwell Avenue
Caldwell Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Carol Road [Amended
10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 4274]
From Mount Vernon Road to its
terminus at Liberty Avenue
Chestnut Street - Stuyvesant
Avenue
Between Galloping Hill Road and the
Roselle Park Borough line
Chestnut Street - Stuyvesant
Avenue
Between Galloping Hill Road and
Morris Avenue
Chestnut Street - Stuyvesant
Avenue
Between Morris Avenue and the
Irvington Township line
Colonial Avenue Between Chestnut Street and Morris
Avenue
Commerce Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Concord Avenue Between Laurel Avenue and the
Maplewood Township line
Crawford Terrace Between Chestnut Street and
Selfmaster Parkway
Crawford Terrace Between Selfmaster Parkway and Golf
Terrace
Crestview Avenue Between Valley Street and Springfield
Avenue
Dayton Avenue Between Burnet Avenue and the
terminus of Dayton Avenue
Delaware Avenue Between Chestnut Street and
Livingston Avenue
Elizabethtown Plaza Entire length from a point 15 feet east
of Kean Drive (west intersect) to a
point 15 feet west of Kean Drive (east
intersect)
Elker Road - Regina Street Between Burnet Avenue and the
terminus of Elker Road
§ 266-48 UNION CODE § 266-48
260:396
Name of Street Limits
Ellen Street Between Bailey Avenue and Renner
Avenue
Elmwood Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Euclid Avenue Between Suburban Road and Midland
Avenue
Falls Terrace Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Forest Drive Between Galloping Hill Road and Salem
Road
Galloping Hill Road Between the Kenilworth Borough line
and the Elizabeth City line
Garden Street Between MacArthur Drive and Steuben
Street
Golf Terrace Between Colonial Avenue and David
Terrace
Grandview Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Grandview Avenue Between Vauxhall Road and
Mountainview Avenue
Hamilton Terrace Between Liberty Avenue and Allen
Avenue
Hillcrest Terrace Between Stanley Terrace and Melrose
Parkway
Hilton Avenue Between Vauxhall Road and the
Maplewood Township line at Laurel
Avenue
Hobart Street Between Jeanette Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Hudson Street [Added
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 4584]
From Brighton Street to Route 22 West
Huguenot Avenue Between Colonial Avenue and Salem
Road
Huguenot Avenue - Colonial Arms
Road
Between Salem Road and Cranbury
Road
Huntington Road Between Galloping Hill Road and Salem
Road
Jeanette Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Johnson Place [Added
3-13-2001 by Ord. No. 4673]
Between Morris Avenue and Elmwood
Avenue
§ 266-48 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-48
260:397
Name of Street Limits
Kean Drive Entire length from a point 15 feet north
of Morris Avenue (east intersect) to a
point 15 feet north of Morris Avenue
(west intersect)
Killian Place Between Pinewood Road and Liberty
Avenue
Killian Place Between Liberty Avenue and Mitchell
Avenue
Lafayette Avenue Between Elmwood Avenue and West
Chestnut Street
Larchmont Road
[Added 10-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 4274]
Commencing from its easterly terminus
with Morris Avenue and continuing to
its westerly terminus with Morris
Avenue
Larchmont Road Between Morris Avenue and
Kensington Terrace
Laurel Avenue Between Maplewood Township line and
Burnet Avenue
Lehigh Avenue - Springfield Road Between Highway Route 22 and Morris
Avenue
Lehigh Avenue - Springfield Road Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Livingston Avenue Between Whitewood Road and Salem
Road
Lorraine Avenue Between Huguenot Avenue and Morris
Avenue
Louisa Street - Trebing Place Between West Chestnut Street and
Elmwood Avenue
Magie Avenue Between Galloping Hill Road and the
Elizabeth City line
Mitchell Avenue - Stillwell Road Between MacArthur Drive and Inwood
Road
Monticello Avenue Between Chestnut Street and Spring
Street
Mountainview Avenue/Quaker
Way
Between Stuyvesant Avenue and
Oakland Avenue
Newark Avenue Between Chestnut Street and
Livingston Avenue
New Jersey Avenue Between Chestnut Street and
Livingston Avenue
§ 266-48 UNION CODE § 266-48
260:398
Name of Street Limits
North Third Street Between Burnet Avenue and the
terminus of Burnet Avenue
Oakland Avenue Between Vauxhall Road and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Oakview Place Between Whitewood Road and Willow
Drive
Orange Avenue Between Vauxhall Road and Morrison
Avenue
Ostwood Terrace Between Stuyvesant Avenue and the
Maplewood Township line
Oxford Lane Between Mountainview Avenue and
Long Terrace
Pine Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Pleasant Parkway Between Hillcrest Terrace and
Stuyvesant Avenue
Potter Avenue Between Morris Avenue and Salem
Road
Rahway Avenue Between Liberty Avenue and Morris
Avenue
Remos Avenue Between Killian Place and Spruce
Street
Ridgeway Street Between Vauxhall Road and the
terminus of Ridgeway Street
Roosevelt Avenue Between Stuyvesant Avenue and
Wewanna Avenue
Roseland Place Between Edgewood Parkway and the
terminus of Roseland Place
Rosemont Avenue Between Stuyvesant Avenue and Route
22
Russell Street Between Springfield Avenue and Hilton
Avenue
Salem Road Between Galloping Hill Road and
Morris Avenue
Salem Road Between Morris Avenue and the
Hillside Township line
Savitt Place Between Elmwood Avenue and West
Chestnut Street
Sayre Road Between Morris Avenue and the
terminus of Sayre Road
§ 266-48 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-48
260:399
Name of Street Limits
Schneider Avenue Between Morris Avenue and
Hawthorne Avenue
Schneider Avenue - Standish
Avenue
Between Hawthorne Avenue and
Burnet Avenue
Sheridan Street Between Woodside Road and Spruce
Street
South Park Terrace [Added
12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 4530]
Between Elmwood Avenue and West
Chestnut Street
Spring Street Between Washington Avenue and
Newark Avenue
Spruce Street Between Morris Avenue and Liberty
Avenue
Spruce Street Between Liberty Avenue and Morris
Avenue
Stanley Terrace Between Burnet Avenue and
Stuyvesant Avenue
Stowe Street Between Pine Avenue and Vauxhall
Road
Suburban Road Between Morris Avenue and Twin Oaks
Road
Tucker Avenue Between Galloping Hill Road and the
Roselle Park Township line
Twin Oaks Road Between Colonial Avenue and the
terminus of Twin Oaks Road
Tyler Street Between Winslow Avenue and Orange
Avenue
Tyler Street Between Orange Avenue and
Stuyvesant Avenue
Union Avenue Between Oakland Avenue and the
Hillside Township line
Valley Street Between Springfield Avenue and
Vauxhall Road
Valley Street Between Vauxhall Road and the
Maplewood Township line
Vauxhall Road Between the Millburn Township line
and Springfield Avenue
Vauxhall Road Between Springfield Avenue and
Stuyvesant Avenue
Vauxhall Road Between Stuyvesant Avenue and Salem
Road
§ 266-48 UNION CODE § 266-48
260:400
Name of Street Limits
Vivian Terrace Between Monmouth Road and North
Avenue
Walker Avenue Between Oakland Avenue and the
Irvington Town line
Washington Avenue Between Galloping Hill Road and
Chestnut Street
Washington Avenue Between Chestnut Street and Colonial
Avenue
West Chestnut Street Between Stuyvesant Avenue and Route
22W
Wewanna Avenue Between Stuyvesant Avenue and Route
22
Whitewood Road Between Colonial Avenue and
Washington Avenue
Whitewood Road Between Washington Avenue and
Salem Road
Willow Drive Between Washington Avenue and the
terminus of Willow Drive
Winchester Avenue - Randolph
Place - Martin Road
Between Galloping Hill Road and Salem
Road
Winthrop Road Between Parkview Drive and
Washington Avenue
Winslow Avenue Between Vauxhall Road and Morrison
Avenue
Woodside Road Between Garden Street and Mitchell
Avenue
§ 266-49. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Amherst Avenue [Added
9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
5355]
North Union Avenue
Astoria Place Both Oregon Street
Brighton Street [Added
5-25-1999 by Ord. No.
4601]
West Hobson Street
§ 266-48 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-49
260:401
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Carlsen Drive [Added
9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
5355]
South Union Avenue
Cross Street [Added
12-27-1994 by Ord. No.
4366]
Both Maple Avenue
Day Terrace [Added
10-9-2007 by Ord. No.
5030]
South Lindy Terrace
Elaine Terrace [Added
9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
5355]
South Union Avenue
Elizabethtown Plaza
parking deck
— West end entrance to parking
deck, main level
Floral Avenue South
[Added 11-10-2014]
Both Summit Road
Garden State Road
[Added 5-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 5429]
South Progress Street
Gray Avenue Both Cornell Place
Greenwood Road — Twin Oaks Road
Hemlock Road Both Killian Place
Hendricks Drive [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
5203]
North Midblock roundabout
Irvine Avenue [Added
9-13-2005 by Ord. No.
4896]
North Seymour Avenue
Isabella Avenue [Added
2-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2-11-2008]
Both Morrison Avenue
Lansdowne Avenue
[Added 12-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 4983]
West Wewanna Avenue
Lorraine Avenue [Added
3-13-2018 by Ord. No.
5576]
Both Beverly Road
Marcella Drive Both Cornell Place
Mitchell Avenue Both Killian Place
§ 266-49 UNION CODE § 266-49
260:402
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Municipal Parking Lot No.
33 [Added 9-9-1997 by
Ord. No. 4517; repealed
10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
4560]
North Second Street
[Added 1-27-2009 by
Ord. No. 5083]
Both Gruber Avenue
Orange Avenue [Added
7-9-2013 by Ord. No.
5269]
Both Tyler Street
Palisades Road [Added
10-26-1993 by Ord. No.
4276]
Both Summit Road
Parkside Drive [Added
9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
5355]
North Union Avenue
Prospect Street South Concord Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue [Added
12-12-2006 by Ord. No.
4983]
South Wewanna Avenue
Schneider Avenue [Added
6-9-2010 by Ord. No.
5137]
Both Burns Place
Service Drive [Added
9-22-2015 by Ord. No.
5355]
North Union Avenue
Townley Avenue Both Sherwood Road
Tuxedo Place [Added
9-9-2008 by Ord. No.
5062]
West Arcadia Place
Vassar Avenue Both Ellen Street
West Chestnut Street
[Added 1-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 4369]
— Chestnut Street
§ 266-50. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
§ 266-49 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-50
260:403
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 266-51. Schedule X: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-13, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection (Location)
Lane
Reserved Purpose
Apgar Court onto Morris
Avenue (State Highway
Route 82)
All Right turn only onto Morris
Avenue
Edgewood Circle All Counterclockwise travel only
Pine Avenue southbound
at Morris Avenue (Route
82) [Added 9-24-2002
by Ord. No. 4746]
Left lane Left turns only
Pine Avenue southbound
at Morris Avenue (Route
82) [Added 9-24-2002
by Ord. No. 4746]
Right lane Right turns only
Stuyvesant Avenue
northerly approach
Left Turns onto Johnson Place and
Elmwood Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue
northerly approach
Right Stuyvesant Avenue
§ 266-52. Schedule XI: Cruising Unlawful.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-14, the streets or parts of streets
upon which cruising shall be unlawful shall be as follows:
Name of Street Limits
Chestnut Street From Washington Avenue to the Roselle Park
Township line
Galloping Hill Road From Lehigh Avenue to Washington Avenue
Morris Avenue From Johnson Place to Burke Parkway
Stuyvesant Avenue From Elmwood Avenue to High Street
Tucker Avenue From the beginning of Tucker Avenue at Five
Points to the Union Township - Roselle Park
Borough line
§ 266-50 UNION CODE § 266-53
260:404
§ 266-53. Schedule XII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-15, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
(Reserved)
§ 266-54. Schedule XIII: Truck Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-16, the routes for trucks
weighing over four tons shall be as follows:
Name of Street Limits
Commerce Avenue Entire length
Clermont Terrace Entire length
Green Lane Entire length
Lehigh Avenue Entire length
Lousons Road Entire length
Milltown Road From Springfield Road to the
Springfield boundary line
Rahway Avenue Entire length
Springfield Road North/Liberty
Avenue
From Rahway Avenue to Route 22
West
Stanley Terrace Entire length
Utilities Road Entire length
Valley Street From Springfield Avenue to the
Millburn line
§ 266-55. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-18, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Alden Terrace [Added
10-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 4564]
Cul-de-sac From the westerly cul-de-sac
between the westerly lateral
lines of the driveways of 1324
and 1323 Alden Terrace
Allen Avenue South From Carlton Terrace northwest
for 290 feet
Alpine Avenue South From Kenneth Avenue
northwest for 395 feet
Amboy Street West Entire length
§ 266-53 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:405
Name of Street Side Location
Apgar Court South Entire length
Arnet Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue southwest
for 85 feet
Arnet Avenue Southeast From a point 100 feet northeast
to a point 100 feet southwest of
the Townley Fire House
driveway
Arsdale Terrace East From the Township line south
for 60 feet
Arsdale Terrace West From the Township line south
for 30 feet
Ashwood Terrace
[Added 12-11-2001 by
Ord. No. 4701]
West From Stanley Terrace to Halsey
Street
Atlanta Avenue Northeast From Augustine Place to Burnet
Avenue
Augustine Place Northwest From Tebe Place to Burkley
Place
Ball Avenue [Added
12-28-2004 by Ord.
No. 4854]
West For a distance of 10 feet in each
direction from the apron of the
driveway to the Pointe
Condominium
Beechwood Avenue North From Roosevelt Avenue east for
100 feet
Beechwood Avenue South From Roosevelt Avenue east for
50 feet
Bertha Avenue East Entire length
Berwyn Street Both From Caldwell Avenue to Falls
Terrace
Bond Drive Both From Burke Parkway to
Rosemont Avenue
Bonnel Court North From a point 250 feet east of
Johnson Place to the projection
of the southern line of the
Bonnel Court municipal parking
lot
Bonnel Court [Added
7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4465; repealed
9-9-1997 by Ord. No.
4513]
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:406
Name of Street Side Location
Boston Street Both From Springfield Avenue north
for 100 feet
Brighton Street [Added
3-9-1999 by Ord. No.
4587]
Both Entire cul-de-sac curb curvature
for 202 feet
Brunswick Avenue
[Added 12-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 4758]
East Entire length, Valley Street to
Tuxedo Place
Burke Parkway East From Morris Avenue south for
200 feet
Burke Parkway East From Morris Avenue (State
Highway Route No. 82) to the
northerly side of the eastern
entrance ramp to State
Highway Route No. 22
Burke Parkway West From Morris Avenue to Bond
Drive
Burkley Place South From Hilton Avenue southeast
for 109 feet
Burnet Avenue Both From Morris Avenue northeast
for 150 feet
Burnet Avenue [Added
4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
4712]
East From Alpine Avenue south for
87 feet
Burnet Avenue [Added
4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
4712]
East From Alpine Avenue north for
50 feet
Burnet Avenue East From Chilton Place northeast
for 125 feet
Burnet Avenue [Added
12-28-1999 by Ord.
No. 4624]
East Commencing at a point 80 feet
north of Stanley Terrace and
continuing for a distance of 290
feet
Burnet Avenue
[Amended 7-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 4465;
repealed 9-9-1997 by
Ord. No. 4515]
Burnet Avenue [Added
9-9-1997 by Ord. No.
4515]
North From a point 365 feet south of
Vauxhall Road to the
prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Doris Avenue
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:407
Name of Street Side Location
Burnet Avenue North From Laurel Avenue south for
142 feet
Burnet Avenue [Added
9-8-1992 by Ord. No.
4213]
Northwest From the northeast curbline of
Branford Avenue to a point 78
feet therefrom in a
northeasterly direction
Burnet Avenue Southeast From Regina Street south for
50 feet
Burnet Avenue South From Dorchester Road
northeast for 200 feet
Burroughs Terrace North From Chestnut Street east for
116 feet
Burroughs Terrace North Between Chestnut Street and
Hubbard Avenue, for all trucks
(1/4 ton or larger), commercial
(vans and trailers)
Bushnell Street Both From Hobart Street to Vauxhall
Extension Road
Byron Terrace [Added
10-22-1996 by Ord.
No. 4478]
East From Springfield Avenue (NJ
State Highway No. 124) to the
Maplewood boundary line
Caldwell Avenue [Added
8-28-2018 by Ord. No.
5599]
Both From Route 22 westbound
easterly side 110 feet and from
Route 22 westbound westerly
side 170 feet
Caldwell Avenue Both From Vauxhall Road southwest
for 50 feet
Caldwell Avenue East From a point 100 feet north to a
point 120 feet south of
Elmwood Avenue
Caldwell Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue northeast
for 70 feet
Caldwell Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue southwest
for 75 feet
Caldwell Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue northeast
for 110 feet
Caldwell Avenue
[Amended 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 4570]
Southeast From Morris Avenue southwest
for 290 feet
Caldwell Avenue West From a point 150 feet north to a
point 100 feet south of
Elmwood Avenue
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:408
Name of Street Side Location
Caldwell Avenue West From Morris Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
Carnegie Place
[Amended 9-23-1997
by Ord. No. 4523]
East From Burkley Place to the
Township line
Carnegie Place South From Burkley Place to Tebe
Place
Carnegie Place [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 4981]
West On Carnegie Place commencing
at a point 160 feet from Burkley
Place and ending at a point 185
feet from Burkley Place
Catherine Street Southeast From Astoria Place and Burkley
Place
Cedar Avenue South From Vauxhall Road southwest
for 175 feet
Cedar Avenue West From a point 110 feet from
Emerson Avenue to its southerly
terminus
Chestnut Street East From a point 100 feet north to a
point 150 feet south of Colonial
Avenue
Chestnut Street East From Delaware Avenue to New
Jersey Avenue
Chestnut Street
[Added 12-23-2003 by
Ord. No. 4808]
East 10 feet to the north and 10 feet
to the south of the Union
Hospital Emergency Room
driveway apron
Chestnut Street North From Stuyvesant Avenue west
for 136 feet
Chestnut Street West From Carolyn Road north for 85
feet
Chestnut Street West From a point 150 feet north to a
point 100 feet south of Colonial
Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
7-26-2005 by Ord. No.
4890]
West From the intersection of
Sumner Avenue for a distance
of 140 feet in a northerly
direction
Clermont Terrace North From Airco Drive east for 120
feet
Clermont Terrace North From Utilities Road west for
1,026 feet
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:409
Name of Street Side Location
Clermont Terrace South From Utilities Road to a point
202 feet northeast of Edgewood
Parkway
Colonial Avenue [Added
7-26-1994 by Ord. No.
4345]
North From the easterly curbline of
Chestnut Street to a point 245
feet east
Colonial Avenue [Added
10-28-2014 by Ord.
No. 5321]
Northeast From Selfmaster Parkway for
100 feet
Colonial Avenue
[Added 7-26-1994 by
Ord. No. 4345]
South From the easterly curbline of
Chestnut Street to a point 142
feet east
Colonial Avenue South From a point 75 feet east to a
point 120 feet west of Prescott
Road
Commerce Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue northeast
for 250 feet
Commerce Avenue
[Added 3-23-1993 by
Ord. No. 4234]
Northwest From Vauxhall Road southwest
for 105 feet
Commerce Avenue Southeast From Kent Place southwest for
75 feet
Commerce Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue east for
150 feet
Commerce Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue northeast
for 200 feet
Commerce Avenue
[Added 11-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 4981]
West 10 feet north and 10 feet south
of the driveway edges between
1036 and 1050 Commerce
Avenue
Commerce Avenue
[Added 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 4566]
West From the school driveway north
for 250 feet
Conant Avenue East From Green Lane extension
south for 250 feet
Conant Avenue Northwest From Cabot Avenue to its
terminus
Conant Avenue South From Woodland Avenue north to
its terminus
Conant Avenue West From Green Lane extension to
Lowden Avenue
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:410
Name of Street Side Location
Crawford Terrace North From Chestnut Street for 100
feet
Creger Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue northwest
for 175 feet
Crestview Avenue Both From Springfield Avenue north
for 100 feet
Crowell Place [Added
3-13-2001 by Ord. No.
4671]
Both Entire length
Delaware Avenue
[Added 7-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 5273]
Both From Chestnut Street west for
75 feet
Dengler Court Both Entire length
Donald Place Southeast From Vivian Terrace southwest
for a distance of 92 feet
Doris Avenue [Added
12-14-1993 by Ord.
No. 4284]
Southwest From a point 70 feet from the
northwest curbline of Burnet
Avenue to a point 22 feet in a
northwesterly direction
Earl Street South From a point 150 feet southeast
of Schmidt Avenue southeast
for 245 feet
Edgewood Circle Both From Edgewood Parkway and
Magie Avenue
Edward Terrace South North From a point 296 feet from
Halsey Street east to its
terminus
Elker Road Southeast From Regina Street to North
First Street
Elmwood Avenue North From a point 150 feet east to a
point 110 feet west of Caldwell
Avenue
Elmwood Avenue North From a point 240 feet east of
Caldwell Avenue east for 90 feet
Elmwood Avenue South From Morris Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Emerson Avenue South From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Stowe Street
Emily Avenue West Entire length
Euclid Avenue Both From Midland Boulevard to
Suburban Road
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:411
Name of Street Side Location
Everett Circle Both From Stuyvesant Avenue east
for 200 feet
Everett Circle Both From the Township line to
Warwick Court
Evergreen Parkway Northwest From a point 145 feet
northwest of South Fairway
Drive west for 200 feet
Fairway Drive South From Tinkettle Turn to Malcolm
Road
Floyd Terrace Both From Morris Avenue south for
100 feet
Floyd Terrace West From Morris Avenue south for
125 feet
Frances Court North From a point 273 feet west of
Tucker Avenue west for 294
feet
Frances Court South From a point 346 feet west of
Tucker Avenue west for 356
feet
Galloping Hill Road
[Added 8-25-1992 by
Ord. No. 4212]
Northeast From the southeast curbline of
Lehigh Avenue to a point 295
feet in a southeasterly direction
Galloping Hill Road South From Chestnut Street to Forest
Drive
Galloping Hill Road South From Forest Drive for 165 feet
north
Galloping Hill Road Southeast From Salem Road southeast for
125 feet
Galloping Hill Road Southwest From Chestnut Street to Forest
Drive
Gelb Avenue West Entire length
Girard Avenue East From Springfield Avenue north
for 251 feet
Girard Avenue East From Springfield Avenue to
Tuxedo Place
Girard Place Southwest From Burnet Avenue to
Hadfield Avenue
Glen Avenue Northwest From Vauxhall Road northeast
for 78 feet
Glen Avenue Southeast From Vauxhall Road northeast
for 25 feet
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:412
Name of Street Side Location
Grandview Avenue
[Added 8-23-1994 by
Ord. No. 4347;
repealed 10-24-2000
by Ord. No. 4660]
Grandview Avenue
[Added 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 5108]
Cul-de-sac From the southernmost end of
Grandview Avenue extending 50
feet on the west side and 85
feet on the east side of the
roadway
Grandview Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue south for
150 feet
Green Lane Both From Morris Avenue southwest
for 840 feet
Green Lane Both From Woodland Avenue to
Magie Avenue
Green Lane [Added
3-14-2006 by Ord. No.
4935]
Northerly From the main train station
drive to the second train station
driveway closer to Woodland
Avenue for a distance of 1,341
feet
Green Lane [Added
3-14-2006 by Ord. No.
4935]
Southerly From Woodland Avenue to the
Kean University driveway for a
distance of 1,892 feet
Green Lane [Repealed
3-14-2006 by Ord. No.
4935]
Greenwood Road West From Morris Avenue south for
40 feet
Gruber Avenue East From North First Street to
North Third Street
Gruber Avenue Southeast From North First Street to
North Third Street
Hadfield Avenue East From Girard Place south for 50
feet
Halstead Road Southeast From Magie Avenue north for
100 feet
Hart Place [Added
12-26-2017 by Ord.
No. 5445]
Cul-de-sac Grassy island northern and
southern ends at a width of 22
feet end to end
Hazel Place North Entire length
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:413
Name of Street Side Location
Hillcrest Terrace East From Melrose Avenue south for
85 feet
Hillside Avenue South From Walker Avenue west for
145 feet
Hilton Avenue South From a point 316 feet north of
Burkley Place northeast for 103
feet
Hilton Avenue South From Stiles Street to Burkley
Place
Hobson Street [Added
9-9-2008 by Ord. No.
5064]
West From the driveway at 816
Hobson Street 15 feet
northward
Hudson Street West From Gelb Avenue north for 110
feet
Hunt Avenue [Added
1-27-2009 by Ord. No.
5084]
North From Elm Street andAugustine
Place
Hunt Avenue [Added
11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 5118]
Southeast From Elm Street for 63 feet
Hunt Avenue [Repealed
1-27-2009 by Ord. No.
5084]
Indiana Street Northwest From Laurel Avenue to Astoria
Place
Indian Run Parkway Both From Chestnut Street west for
100 feet
Ingersoll Terrace West From Morris Avenue to Route
29
Iorio Court [Repealed
8-11-1998 by Ord. No.
4555]
Iorio Court [Added
12-17-2013 by Ord.
No. 5286]
South From a point 656 feet east of
Springfield Road east for 80
feet
Jeanette Avenue
[Repealed 10-14-2003
by Ord. No. 4805]
Jeanette Avenue
[Repealed 10-14-2003
by Ord. No. 4805]
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:414
Name of Street Side Location
Jeanette Avenue [Added
10-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 4805]
East From Morris Avenue for a
distance of 112 feet
Jeanette Avenue [Added
10-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 4805]
West From Morris Avenue for a
distance of 684 feet
Jefferson Avenue West From Morris Avenue south to its
terminus
Johnson Place East From Morris Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
Kay Avenue Northeast From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Camden Court
Kay Avenue Southwest From Stuyvesant Avenue
northwest for 150 feet
Kay Avenue [Added
9-11-2018 by Ord. No.
5607]
West From Stuyvesant Avenue south
for 60 feet
Kelly Street North From Vauxhall Road northeast
for 103 feet
Kenneth Avenue East From Alpine Avenue north for
105 feet
Larchmont Road Southeast From Morris Avenue northeast
for 150 feet
Larchmont Road [Added
2-9-2010 by Ord. No.
5125; repealed
4-13-2010 by Ord. No.
5131]
Laurel Avenue South From Burnet Avenue to a point
351.21 feet south of Concord
Avenue
Lehigh Avenue Both From Galloping Hill Road east
for 200 feet
Lehigh Avenue Both From Morris Avenue southwest
for 100 feet
Lehigh Avenue Northwest From Galloping Hill Road east
for 75 feet
Lehigh Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue south for
275 feet
Lehigh Avenue [Added
1-27-2009 by Ord. No.
5084]
Southeast From Greenwich Lane south for
165 feet
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:415
Name of Street Side Location
Lehigh Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue west for
350 feet
Lehigh Avenue [Added
10-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 4274]
Southeast From 690 feet southwesterly of
the southwesterly curbline of
Morris Avenue southwesterly
for 30 feet
Lehigh Avenue [Added
7-22-2014 by Ord. No.
5314]
West From Greenwich Lane for 100
feet northward
Liberty Avenue Both From Rahway Avenue to the
Rahway Valley Railroad
crossing
Liberty Avenue Both From the Rahway Valley
Railroad south for 575 feet
Liberty Avenue
[Added 8-11-1998 by
Ord. No. 4553]
East From Morris Avenue south for
200 feet
Liberty Avenue Northwest From Carol Road to Audrey
Terrace
Liberty Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue northeast
for 300 feet
Liberty Avenue
[Repealed 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 5105]
Liberty Avenue [Added
9-8-1992 by Ord. No.
4213]
Southeast From the intersection with the
northeasterly side of Morris
Avenue for a distance of 500
feet
Liberty Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue to a point
320 feet north thereof
Liberty Avenue Southeast From a point 100 feet northeast
to a point 50 feet southwest of
Rahway Avenue
Liberty Avenue Southeast From Rahway Avenue
southwest for 110 feet
Liberty Avenue [Added
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
5105]
Southwest From Morris Avenue south for
210 feet
Liberty Avenue [Added
6-27-2006 by Ord. No.
4959]
West From Nicholas Place south
toward Morris Avenue for a
distance of 100 feet
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:416
Name of Street Side Location
Long Terrace Both From Stuyvesant Avenue east
for 150 feet
Longview Road North From Woodmont Road to
Chestnut Street
Longview Road Southeast From Chestnut Street east for
50 feet
Lousons Road Northwest From Morris Avenue northeast
for 210 feet
Lousons Road Northwest From Morris Avenue northeast
for 120 feet
Lousons Road Southeast From Morris Avenue northeast
for 70 feet
Lousons Road South From Morris Avenue east to its
terminus
Lowden Avenue Both From Woodland Avenue west
for 270 feet
Lynmar Way [Amended
8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
4612]
Southeast From Travers Place to
Monmouth Road
Lynmar Way Southwest From North Avenue to its
terminus
Magie Avenue North From Green Lane west for 75
feet
Magie Avenue [Added
2-26-2013 by Ord. No.
5258]
South From Green Lane for 110 feet in
a southerly direction
Magnolia Place West From Salem Road north for 100
feet
Manor Drive North From Walker Avenue east for 50
feet
Manor Drive South From Walker Avenue to
Westminster Road
Marshall Avenue [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
5147]
South From New Jersey Avenue to
Salem Road
Martha Avenue West Entire length
Mary Avenue East Entire length
Melrose Parkway Both From Andrew Street to Hillcrest
Terrace
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:417
Name of Street Side Location
Miller Street [Added
8-23-1994 by Ord. No.
4347]
East 1 restricted parking space in
front of 90 Miller Street,
beginning at a point 65 feet
south of the southerly curbline
of Springfield Avenue and
extending to a point 22 feet in a
southerly direction
Milltown Court [Added
11-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 4569]
Cul-de-sac From the northeast corner of
the cul-de-sac 109 feet in a
southerly direction and from the
northeast corner of the cul-desac
165 feet around the curved
curb initially in a westerly
direction
Milltown Road Both From Springfield Road to the
Township line
Monmouth Road
[Repealed 11-28-2006
by Ord. No. 4981]
Monmouth Road [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 4981]
East For 50 feet from the
intersection of Lynmar Way
Monmouth Road [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 4981]
East For 50 feet from the
intersection of Vivian Terrace
Monmouth Road [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 4981]
West From Lynmar Way to Township
Line (college side)
Montclair Avenue South From Burkley Place to the
Township line
Monticello Street Both From Chestnut Street to Ingall
Street
Morris Avenue [Added
9-28-2004 by Ord. No.
4829]
North From Grandview Avenue east
for 40 feet
Morris Avenue [Added
6-27-2006 by Ord. No.
4959]
North On Morris Avenue westbound
for a distance of 105 feet east of
Stuyvesant Avenue
Morrison Avenue North From Orange Avenue to
Winslow Avenue
Morrison Avenue North From Stuyvesant Avenue
northwest for 125 feet
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:418
Name of Street Side Location
Newark Avenue North From Wood Street west for 60
feet
Newark Avenue South From Chestnut Street east for
60 feet
New Jersey Avenue Both From Chestnut Street east for
125 feet
Nicholas Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue northeast
for 50 feet
North First Street Both Entire length
North Third Street South From Gruber Avenue to
Stahuber Avenue
Norton Road East From Brookside Drive east for
50 feet
Oakland Avenue Both From Vauxhall Road north for
100 feet
Oakland Avenue Both From Vauxhall Road north for
75 feet
Oakland Avenue Both From Walker Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Oakland Avenue Southeast From Vauxhall Road north for
140 feet
Oakland Avenue West From Vauxhall Road to Cider
Mill Road
Oakview Place Northeast From a point 190 feet northeast
of Whitewood Road to a point
271 feet northeast of
Whitewood Road
Oakview Place Southeast From Whitewood Road to
Willow Drive
Ohio Street Both From Laurel Avenue south for
100 feet
Old Vauxhall Road Both From the Rahway Valley
Railroad to Vauxhall Road
Orchard Meadows Drive
[Added 1-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 5331]
North From Village Road to its
terminus
Orchard Meadows Drive
[Added 1-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 5331]
South From a point 75 feet south of
Village Road to its terminus
Orleans Place Southwest From Burnet Avenue to
Augustine Place
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:419
Name of Street Side Location
Oswald Place East From Burkley Place to the
Township line
Oswald Place
[Added 12-23-2003 by
Ord. No. 4808]
East From Burkley Place to a point
396 feet in a southerly direction
Overlook Terrace East From Berwyn Street north for
50 feet
Overlook Terrace West From Vauxhall Road south for
75 feet
Parkview Drive Both From Chestnut Street to Jean
Terrace
Parkview Drive Both From Chestnut Street west for
100 feet
Parkview Drive Both From Stratford Road west to its
terminus
Parkview Terrace South From a point 100 feet west of
Chestnut Street west for 425
feet
Patricia Court North From the cul-de-sac northwest
for 115 feet
Patricia Court South From a point 380 feet southeast
of Trotting Road to the cul-desac
Pine Avenue Both From Stowe Street to Emerson
Avenue
Pine Avenue [Amended
5-25-1999 by Ord. No.
4599]
East From Morris Avenue north for
66 feet
Pine Avenue Northwest From Morris Avenue northwest
for 144 feet
Pine Avenue West From Dengler Court south for
100 feet
Pleasant Parkway Both From Andrew Street to Hillcrest
Terrace
Potter Avenue
[Amended 9-25-2018
by Ord. No. 5613]
Both From Morris Avenue north for
70 feet
Potter Avenue East From Salem Road south for 145
feet
Potter Avenue Southeast From Morris Avenue northeast
for 90 feet
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:420
Name of Street Side Location
Progress Street North From Springfield Road west to
its terminus
Progress Street [Added
5-23-2017 by Ord. No.
5428]
South 239.5 feet from west of Monroe
Street to 326 feet from west of
Monroe Street (driveway to
driveway)
Rahway Avenue Both From Morris Avenue southwest
for 170 feet
Rahway Avenue [Added
12-27-1994 by Ord.
No. 4366]
North From 432 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Arnold
Place to a point 215 feet in an
easterly direction
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
North 15 feet in each direction from
the parking lot driveway at
American Products, 610
Rahway
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
North 15 feet in each direction from
the driveways at Comcast, 800
Rahway, Building A-2 driveways
and Building D-1 driveway
Rahway Avenue [Added
7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4465]
Northern curb From 800 Rahway Avenue along
the northern curb 185 feet in
from Building A and 120 feet in
from Building C
Rahway Avenue Northeast From Willard Place southeast
for 100 feet
Rahway Avenue Northeast From Willard Place to a point
200 feet east of Arnold Place
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
South 15 feet in each direction from
the driveway at Fowler
Corporation, 565 Rahway
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
South 15 feet in each direction from
the driveway at Downey
Corporation, 581 Rahway
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
South 15 feet in each direction from
the parking lot driveway at
Emiliani, 735 Rahway
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
South 15 feet in each direction from
the parking lot driveway at
Gavan-Graham, 751 Rahway
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
South 15 feet in each direction from
the exit driveway at Eagle Work
Clothes, 785 Rahway
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:421
Name of Street Side Location
Rahway Avenue [Added
3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
4994]
South 15 feet in each direction from
the exit driveway at Verizon,
825 Rahway
Rahway Avenue Southeast From Liberty Avenue southeast
for 400 feet
Rahway Avenue Southwest From Liberty Avenue southeast
for 90 feet
Rahway Avenue [Added
9-9-2008 by Ord. No.
5064]
West From the driveway at 714
Rahway Avenue 15 feet in each
direction
Ramsey Circle Both From a point 150 feet south of
Cabot Avenue south to its
terminus
Ramsey Circle Southeast From Cabot Avenue south to its
terminus
Regina Street South Entire length
Regina Street South From Burnet Avenue to Elker
Road
Remmos Avenue Southeast From Killian Place northeast for
50 feet
Rideway Street Cul-de-sac From a point 425 feet northeast
of Vauxhall Road, along the
curbline of the cul-de-sac to a
point 430 feet northeast of
Vauxhall Road
Ridgeway Street [Added
8-26-2014 by Ord. No.
5318]
Northeast From Vauxhall Road northeast
for 70 feet
Ridgeway Street Northwest From Pershing Road southwest
for 107 feet
Ridgeway Street
[Repealed 8-26-2014
by Ord. No. 5318]
Ridgeway Street Southeast From Vauxhall Road northeast
for 750 feet
Robert Street [Added
5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
5308]
West From Vauxhall Road for 100
feet
Robinson Terrace
[Added 12-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 5074]
Southeast From Burroughs Terrace for
100 feet
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:422
Name of Street Side Location
Roosevelt Avenue East From Beechwood Avenue south
for 50 feet
Roosevelt Avenue West From Wewanna Avenue north
250 feet
Roseland Place North From a point 972 feet east of
Edgewood Parkway east and
south for 120 feet
Rosemont Avenue
[Amended 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 5442]
South From 210 feet east of
Stuyvesant Avenue to Hazel
Place
Rosemont Avenue West From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Landsdowne Avenue
Roselyn Place [Repealed
4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4442]
Rutgers Lane [Added
7-11-1995 by Ord. No.
4410]
Both At the eastern terminus from
the north to the south side
Salem Road North From Marshall Avenue to
Galloping Hill Road
Salem Road Northwest From Alden Terrace to Morris
Avenue
Salem Road Northwest From Vauxhall Road to the
Township line
Salem Road South From Beverly Road to Potter
Avenue
Salem Road South From Galloping Hill Road east
for 150 feet
Salem Road Southeast From Morris Avenue to the
Township line
Sayre Road Both From Vauxhall Road to Route 22
Sayre Road East From Morris Avenue north for
65 feet
Sayre Road West From Morris Avenue north for
100 feet
Schneider Avenue East From Morris Avenue to Whittier
Place
Schneider Avenue
[Added 4-25-1994 by
Ord. No. 4311]
Northwest From the southwesterly
curbline of Whittier Place to the
northeasterly curbline of Morris
Avenue
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:423
Name of Street Side Location
Service Drive Both Between Oakhill Drive and
Union Avenue
Springfield Avenue
[Added 10-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 4358]
2 restricted parking spaces in
the municipal parking lot
located between Martha Avenue
and Mary Avenue; parking by
special identification card only
Springfield Road Both From Liberty Avenue to Route
29
Springfield Road Both From Route 22 to the Rahway
Valley Railroad crossing
Springfield Road Both From the Rahway Valley
Railroad south for 575 feet
Spruce Street Both From Morris Avenue southeast
for 150 feet
Spruce Street North From Morris Avenue to Jesse
Place
Spruce Street South From a point 300 feet east to a
point 300 feet west of Morris
Avenue
Spruce Street West From Morris Avenue to Spruce
Court
Stahuber Avenue Both Entire length
Stanley Terrace Northeast From Andrew Street north to
Burnet Avenue
Stanley Terrace Northeast From Stuyvesant Avenue to May
Street
Stanley Terrace South From Andrew Street west for 50
feet
Stanley Terrace South From Stuyvesant Avenue west
for 175 feet
Stanley Terrace Southwest From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Myrtle Street
Steuben Street Both From Ray Avenue to Garden
Street
Steuben Street Southwest From Garden Street northwest
for 150 feet
Steuben Street [Added
6-28-2005 by Ord. No.
4882]
West From the 90° curb apex leading
to the cul-de-sac on the west
side for a distance of 53 feet
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:424
Name of Street Side Location
St. Johns Place North From a point 450 feet east of
Spring Street east to its
terminus
Stone Street [Added
2-23-1999 by Ord. No.
4582]
West From Berwyn Street to a point
112 feet north of Morris Avenue
Stone Street [Repealed
2-23-1999 by Ord. No.
4582]
Stowe Street North From Pine Avenue to Emerson
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue East From a point 860 feet north to a
point 150 feet south of Morris
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue East From a point 50 feet north to a
point 70 feet south of Everett
Circle
Stuyvesant Avenue East From Everett Circle north for
60 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue East From Oakland Avenue north for
165 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue East From Oakland Avenue to the
southern intersection of Everett
Circle
Stuyvesant Avenue West From a point 100 feet north to a
point 100 feet south of the
Union Fire House driveway
Stuyvesant Avenue West From Oakland Avenue to
Stanley Terrace
Suburban Road Northwest From Morris Avenue to Euclid
Avenue
Summit Road [Repealed
9-9-1997 by Ord. No.
4512]
Sumner Avenue North From Chestnut Street to Tucker
Avenue
Swanstrom Place North From Vauxhall Road southwest
to its terminus
Swanstrom Place South From Vauxhall Road southwest
for 1,081 feet
Tebe Place Northeast From Oswald Place to Burnet
Avenue
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:425
Name of Street Side Location
Tucker Avenue East From Chestnut Street south for
450 feet
Tucker Avenue [Added
6-22-1993 by Ord. No.
4256]
East From a point 362 feet from the
north curbline of Sumner
Avenue northerly for 450 feet
Tucker Avenue [Added
3-13-2018 by Ord. No.
5575]
West From Mercer Avenue north for
58 feet
Tucker Avenue West From Sumner Avenue north for
520 feet
Tucker Avenue West From Walton Avenue south for
350 feet
Tyler Street North From Stuyvesant Avenue west
for 100 feet
Tyler Street South From Stuyvesant Avenue west
for 175 feet
Union Avenue North From the Township line
southwest for 430 feet
Union Avenue South From Amherst Avenue to
Gregory Avenue
Union Avenue [Added
6-13-2000 by Ord. No.
4636; amended
10-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 4660]
South From Elaine Terrace south to
the southerly bridge abutment
of Route 78
Union Avenue South From the Township line
southwest for 530 feet
Utilities Road Northeast From Green Lane northwest for
400 feet
Utilities Road Northeast From Clermont Terrace
southeast for 90 feet
Utilities Road Northeast From a point 200 feet southeast
of Clermont Terrace to Green
Lane
Valley Street Both From Arcadia Place to a point
300 feet northeast of Vauxhall
Road
Valley Street [Added
3-13-2001 by Ord. No.
4671]
Both For 125 feet north of Vauxhall
Road
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:426
Name of Street Side Location
Vauxhall Road Both From a point 300 feet
northwest to a point 300 feet
southeast of Valley Street
Vauxhall Road Both From a point 225 feet north to a
point 260 feet south of
Springfield Avenue
Vauxhall Road Both From Burnet Avenue northeast
for 100 feet
Vauxhall Road Both From Burnet Avenue south for
500 feet
Vauxhall Road [Added
9-28-2004 by Ord. No.
4829; amended
12-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 4852]
Both From Grandview Avenue to
Kirkman Place/Stowe Street
Vauxhall Road East From Burnet Avenue southeast
for 150 feet
Vauxhall Road Northeast From a point 110 feet
northwest to a point 75 feet
southeast of Glen Avenue
Vauxhall Road Northeast From Howard Street to
Aberdeen Road
Vauxhall Road Northeast From Plane Street northwest
for 50 feet
Vauxhall Road Northeast From Salem Road to Oak Place
Vauxhall Road Northeast From Winslow Avenue to
Swanstrom Place
Vauxhall Road North From a point 100 feet east to a
point 100 feet west of Oakland
Avenue
Vauxhall Road North From Kirkman Place to
Grandview Avenue
Vauxhall Road North From Schmidt Avenue to a point
100 feet west of Oakland
Avenue
Vauxhall Road North From Victor Avenue west for 50
feet
Vauxhall Road South From a point 125 feet east to a
point 125 feet west of Oakland
Avenue
Vauxhall Road South From Overlook Terrace east for
50 feet
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:427
Name of Street Side Location
Vauxhall Road South From Salem Road to Bertram
Terrace
Vauxhall Road South From Schmidt Avenue west for
335 feet
Vauxhall Road South From Stowe Street to
Grandview Avenue
Vauxhall Road Southwest From a point 100 feet
northwest to a point 100 feet
southwest of the Vauxhall Fire
House driveway
Vauxhall Road Southwest From Caldwell Avenue
southeast for 94 feet
Vauxhall Road Southwest From Cedar Avenue southeast
for 125 feet
Vauxhall Road Southwest From Commerce Avenue to
Swanstrom Place
Vauxhall Road West From Burnet Avenue southeast
for 180 feet
Victor Avenue East From Vauxhall Road north for
100 feet
Victor Avenue West From Vauxhall Road north for
100 feet
Waldorf Place
[Added 8-23-1994 by
Ord. No. 4347]
East 1 restricted parking space in
front of 155 Waldorf Place,
beginning at a point 240 feet
south of the southerly curbline
of Burkley Place and extending
to a point 22 feet in a southerly
direction
Waldorf Place Northwest From Tebe Place to Burkley
Place
Walker Avenue East From a point 538 feet north of
Manor Drive north for 40 feet
Walker Avenue East From a point 167 feet south of
Manor Drive south for 40 feet
Walker Avenue East From a point 1,081 feet north of
Manor Drive north for 40 feet
Walker Avenue East From a point 775 feet north of
Manor Drive north for 40 feet
Walker Avenue East From a point 25 feet north to a
point 25 feet south of Manor
Drive
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-55
260:428
Name of Street Side Location
Walker Avenue East From a point 280 feet north of
Manor Drive north for 40 feet
Walker Avenue Northeast From Cherry Street to a point
100 feet west of Stuyvesant
Avenue
Walker Avenue Southeast From a point 75 feet north to a
point 165 feet south of Manor
Drive
Walker Avenue Southwest From Elaine Terrace northeast
for 74 feet
Walker Avenue West From a point 505 feet south of
William Street south for 40 feet
Walker Avenue West From a point 272 feet south of
William Street south for 40 feet
Walker Avenue West From a point 223 feet north of
Hillside Avenue north for 40
feet
Walton Avenue North From Galloping Hill Road west
for 94 feet
Washington Avenue North From Brookdale Road east for
50 feet
Washington Avenue Northwest From Galloping Hill Road east
for 75 feet
Washington Avenue
[Added 4-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 4442]
Southeast From Galloping Hill Road to a
point 100 feet north thereof
West Chestnut Street
[Added 9-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 5018]
Both From Route 22 west to Hobson
Street
West Chestnut Street North From Donna Road west for 225
feet
West Chestnut Street
[Added 9-28-2004 by
Ord. No. 4829]
North From Hobson Street north for
40 feet
West Side Avenue Both From Bertha Avenue to Sophia
Avenue
Whitewood Road [Added
2-14-2006 by Ord. No.
4933]
North For a distance of 67 feet from
the intersection of Yorktown
Road from the northwest corner
apex
Windsor Avenue West From Springfield Avenue north
for 352 feet
§ 266-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-55
260:429
Name of Street Side Location
Winslow Avenue East From Vauxhall Road north for
825 feet
Winslow Avenue North From Vauxhall Road east for
1,350 feet
Winslow Avenue South From Vauxhall Road to Tyler
Street
Woodland Avenue Northeast From Conant Avenue to Green
Lane
Woodland Avenue North From Summit Road northwest
for 100 feet
Woodmont Road East From Longview Road north for
211 feet
§ 266-56. Schedule XV: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-19, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Burkley Place [Added
11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
5119]
North From Hilton Avenue southeast for
165 feet
Court Drive (No. 1085) Both Entire length
Court Drive (No. 1095) Both Entire length
David Terrace [Added
4-22-2014 by Ord. No.
5298]
South From a point 170 feet west of Golf
Terrace extending 170 feet
westward
Dogwood Drive [Added
1-24-2006 by Ord. No.
4930]
SouthwestFrom Oakview Place for a
distance of 40 feet
Elizabethtown Plaza Both Entire length
Elizabethtown Plaza north Both Entire length
Elizabethtown Plaza west Both Entire length
Elmwood Avenue [Added
5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
5306]
Both From Morris Avenue to Savitt
Place
Hendricks Drive [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
5203]
Both Entire roundabout
Hilton Avenue Both From Vauxhall Road east for 105
feet
§ 266-55 UNION CODE § 266-56
260:430
Name of Street Side Location
Hudson Street East From a point 188 feet north of
Route 22 west for 196 feet
Iorio Court [Added
8-11-1998 by Ord. No.
4555]
North Entire length
Iorio Court [Added
8-11-1998 by Ord. No.
4555]
South From a point 736 feet east of
Springfield Road east therefrom
to the end
Iorio Court [Added
4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4442; repealed 8-11-1998
by Ord. No. 4555]
Kean Drive Both Entire length
Midland Boulevard North
west
From Euclid Avenue northeast for
421.54 feet
Morris Avenue Both From Route 439 to the Township
line
Morris Avenue [Added
2-8-2011 by Ord. No.
5179]
North From Burke Parkway to
Grandview Avenue
Morris Avenue [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
5343]
North Between a point 570 feet west of
the prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Burke Parkway and the
easterly curbline of Stuyvesant
Avenue
Morris Avenue [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
5343]
North Between a point 90 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Harding
Avenue and the easterly curbline
of Adams Avenue
Morris Avenue (Route 82)
[Added 1-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 4930]
South From Stuyvesant Avenue in an
easterly direction for a distance of
90 feet
Morris Avenue [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
5343]
South Between a point 490 feet east of
the easterly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue and the
westerly curbline of Grandview
Avenue
North Drive Both From Midland Boulevard to
Colonial Avenue
Rahway Avenue [Added
4-8-2003 by Ord. No.
4768]
South Beginning at a point 298 feet east
of Arnold Place and continuing for
35 feet east
§ 266-56 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-56
260:431
Name of Street Side Location
Roselyn Place [Added
4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4442]
East From Springfield Avenue to a
point 140 feet northeast
Roselyn Place [Added
4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
4442]
West From Springfield Avenue to a
point 79 feet northeast
Savitt Place North
west
From a point 569 feet south of
Elmwood Avenue south for 250
feet
Savitt Place South
east
From a point 567 feet south of
Elmwood Avenue south for 225
feet
Stowe Street North From Emerson Avenue to Pine
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue [Added
4-13-1999 by Ord. No.
4594]
East Starting at a point 144 feet from
Roosevelt Avenue northbound and
starting at a point 49 feet from
Rosemont Avenue
Vauxhall Road Both From Hilton Avenue north for 200
feet
West Chestnut Street North From Route 22 west for 1,063 feet
West Chestnut Street South From Route 22 west for 926 feet
Wewanna Avenue [Added
2-11-2008 by Ord. No.
5041]
South From Stuyvesant Avenue for 100
feet
§ 266-57. Schedule XVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-20, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Allen Avenue South All/Monday
through Saturday
From Burnet Avenue
northwest for 150 feet
All streets
[Amended
8-11-1998 by
Ord. No. 4552]
Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
Entire length, applies to
commercial or
noncommercial vehicles
exceeding seven feet by
seven feet by 20 feet
and 8,600 pounds' gross
vehicle weight
§ 266-56 UNION CODE § 266-57
260:432
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
All streets Both 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
In front of any
residential property,
applying to trucks over
2 tons only
Axton Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue southeast for
130 feet
Bashford Avenue [Repealed 7-8-2003 by Ord. No. 4797]
Bonnel Court North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Johnson Place to
Morris Avenue
Bradford Terrace Northeast
8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Julian Terrace to
Lindy Terrace
Brighton Street Southeast
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 340 feet
east of Hudson Street to
a point 130 feet east
Brookdale Road
[Added
3-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 4672]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m./All
From Washington
Avenue north for 75 feet
Burnet Avenue
[Added 7-9-1996
by Ord. No. 4465]
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Vauxhall Road to a
point 365 feet south
Burnet Avenue West All/Monday
through Saturday
From a point 150 feet
north of Chilton Place to
a point 50 feet south of
Chilton Place
Caldwell Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./All
From a point 50 feet
north of Morris Avenue
to the projection of the
southern line of the
Caldwell Avenue
municipal parking lot
Caldwell Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./All
From Morris Avenue
northeast for 519 feet
Carolyn Road [Added 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 4516; repealed 3-10-1998
by Ord. No. 4537]
Clermont Terrace South 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Utilities Road west
for 1,030 feet
§ 266-57 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-57
260:433
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Dogwood Drive
[Added
8-25-1992 by
Ord. No. 4212]
Southwest
8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m. when
school is in
session
Entire length
Ellen Street
[Added
10-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 4417]
West 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From the northwest
corner of Vassar Avenue
and Ellen Street 181
feet south on Ellen
Street
Emerson Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Stowe Street
Euclid Avenue [Repealed 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 4753]
Galloping Hill Road Northeast
4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Forest Drive to the
Kenilworth Township
line
Galloping Hill Road Northeast
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Forest Drive to the
Kenilworth Township
line
Garden Street
[Added
9-22-1992 by
Ord. No. 4215]
Southeast
6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
Between the curblines
of the Wickford Road
extension
Grandview Avenue Both 3:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris Avenue
southwest for 145 feet
Hendricks Drive
[Added
7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 5203]
North 7:30 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
except school
buses
Between Hanna
Caldwell Driveway and
roundabout
Hendricks Drive
[Added
7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 5203]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days,
except school
buses
Beginning at
roundabout and
proceeding north for
200 feet
Hendricks Drive
[Added
7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 5203]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Between roundabout
and Hanna Caldwell
Driveway
§ 266-57 UNION CODE § 266-57
260:434
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Hillside Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Tuesday,
Thursday and
Saturday
From Walker Avenue to
the Township line
Hillside Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday,
Wednesday and
Friday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Walker
Avenue
Hilton Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Vauxhall Road to
the Township line
Hilton Avenue Both 2:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Vauxhall Road to
the Township line
Hilton Avenue Northwest
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Vauxhall Road to
Burkley Street
Hilton Avenue Northwest
2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Vauxhall Road to
Burkley Street
Hilton Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./All
From a point 479 feet
from Burkley Place to a
point 133 feet north
Jeanette Avenue [Repealed 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 4805]
Kelly Street Southeast
6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Sunday
Entire length
Killian Place Southwest
All/Monday
through Friday
From Mitchell Avenue
northwest for 625 feet
Lehigh Avenue
[Added
8-23-1994 by
Ord. No. 4346]
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Beginning at the
northeast curbline of
Cranbury Road to a
point 512 feet in a
northeasterly direction
Lehigh Avenue Both 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Galloping Hill
Road east for 325 feet
Lehigh Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
a.m./All
From Galloping Hill
Road east for 325 feet
Lehigh Avenue Northwest
4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 200 feet
northeast of Galloping
Hill Road southwest to
Jensen Lane
§ 266-57 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-57
260:435
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Lehigh Avenue Northwest
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 200 feet
northeast of Galloping
Hill Road southwest to
Jensen Lane
Lehigh Avenue
[Added
4-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 4442]
Northwest
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the northeast
curbline of Richmond
Place in a northeasterly
direction to the
southeast curbline of
Hampton Street
Lehigh Avenue
[Added
10-27-1992 by
Ord. No. 4218]
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
(excluding
holidays)
From the southerly
curbline of Morris
Avenue to a point 1,180
feet in a southerly
direction
Lindy Terrace South 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Bradford Terrace
to Mulford Avenue
Louisa Terrace South All/Monday
through Saturday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Grandview
Avenue
Midland Boulevard [Repealed 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 4753]
Mitchell Avenue
[Amended
9-23-1997 by
Ord. No. 4522]
Northwest
7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
when school is in
session
From Killian Place west
for 192 feet
Oakview Place Northwest
8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m./School days
From Whitewood Road
northeast for 190 feet
Oakview Place Northwest
8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m./School days
From Whitewood Road
to Willow Drive
Oregon Street Southeast
8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All
From Astoria Place
northeast for 750 feet
Oregon Street Southeast
8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All
From Laurel Avenue
southwest for 265 feet
Parkview Drive North 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 100 feet
west of Chestnut Street
west for 425 feet
§ 266-57 UNION CODE § 266-57
260:436
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Pine Avenue East 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris Avenue to
Stowe Street
Remnos Avenue Northwest
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Killian Place to
Bancroft Avenue
Remnos Avenue Northwest
2:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Killian Place to
Bancroft Avenue
Ridgeway Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Pershing Road to
its terminus
Roosevelt Avenue Both All/Monday
through Saturday
From the business/
residential zone
boundary line north to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Rosemont Avenue North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue southeast for
250 feet
Rosemont Avenue [Repealed 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 4556]
Rutgers Lane [Added 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 4410; amended
9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 4516; repealed 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 4537]
Salem Road North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Magnolia Place to
a point 100 feet
southwest of Vauxhall
Road
Salem Road North 4:30 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Morris Avenue to
the Township line
Salem Road North 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From Magnolia Place to
a point 100 feet
southwest of Vauxhall
Road
Salem Road North 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From Morris Avenue to
the Township line
Savitt Place
[Added
4-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 4595]
West 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
For 22 feet north of the
driveway at 934 Savitt
Place and 22 feet south
of the driveway at 934
Savitt Place
Schneider Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Whittier Place to
Browning Place
§ 266-57 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-57
260:437
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Seymour Avenue
]Repealed
2-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 5420]
Seymour Avenue
[Added
11-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 4619;
repealed
2-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 5420]
Shetland Drive
[Added
9-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 5212]
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
In front of 1302
Shetland Drive
Stone Street
[Repealed
2-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 4582]
Stowe Street North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Monday
through Saturday
In front of Municipal
Parking Lot Nos. 8 and 9
Stowe Street South 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the Acme Food
Market driveway to the
Union Center National
Bank Drive-in window
driveway
Stowe Street South 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 220 feet
southeast of Pine
Avenue east for 436 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From Vauxhall Road to
Elmwood Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Johnson Place to
Vauxhall Road
Stuyvesant Avenue East 4:30 p.m. to 6:30
p.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25 feet
south of the northern
intersection of Everett
Circle south for 310 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue East 4:30 p.m. to 6:30
p.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25 feet
south of the southern
intersection of Everett
Circle south for 132 feet
§ 266-57 UNION CODE § 266-57
260:438
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Stuyvesant Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25 feet
south of the northern
intersection of Everett
Circle south for 310 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25 feet
south of the southern
intersection of Everett
Circle south for 132 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue West 11:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Morris Avenue
south for 150 feet
Suburban Road Southeast
7:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Sunday
From Morris Avenue to
Euclid Avenue
Utilities Road Northeast
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 90 feet
southeast of Clermont
Terrace to a point 110
feet southeast
Vauxhall Road Northeast
4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Salem Road
northwest for 100 feet
Vauxhall Road Northeast
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From Salem Road
northwest for 100 feet
Vauxhall Road Southwest
4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Salem Road
northwest for 75 feet
Vauxhall Road Southwest
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From Salem Road
northwest for 75 feet
Washington
Avenue
South 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Whitewood Road
to Willow Drive
Wewanna Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Roosevelt
Avenue
Whitewood Road Northeast
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Oakview Place
southeast for 325 feet
Whitewood Road
[Added
12-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 5446]
Northeast
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Oakview Place
extending northwest for
190 feet
Whitewood Road Northeast
7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Oakview Place to
Washington Avenue
§ 266-57 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-57
260:439
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Whitewood Road West 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 4:00
p.m./School days
From Colonial Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Willow Drive Northeast
8:30 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m./School days
From Washington
Avenue southeast for
316 feet
Woolley Avenue
[Amended
11-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 4571]
East 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning at a point 256
feet north of Morris
Avenue north for 144
feet
§ 266-58. Schedule XVII: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-21, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Euclid Avenue
[Added 6-27-2001
by Ord. No. 4678]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 4:00
p.m./School days
From Midland
Boulevard to
Colonial Avenue
Euclid Avenue Northeast 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Midland
Boulevard
northwest for
616.40 feet
Green Lane [Added
3-14-2006 by Ord.
No. 4936]
Northerly 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Woodland
Avenue to the train
station driveway, a
distance of 551 feet
Laurel Avenue Northeast 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Burnet
Avenue to Concord
Avenue
Laurel Avenue Northeast 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Burnet
Avenue to Concord
Avenue
Magie Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Shearer
Avenue to Galloping
Hill Road
Schaefer Lane Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:30
a.m./All
Entire length
§ 266-57 UNION CODE § 266-58
260:440
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 9:30 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All, from May
1 to November 1
From Vauxhall Road
to Morris Road
§ 266-59. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-23, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Academy Road
[Repealed
9-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 5354]
Adams Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Alden Terrace
[Added 10-13-1998
by Ord. No. 4564]
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the easterly
lateral lines of the
driveways of 1324
and 1323 Alden
Terrace therefrom
Alfieri Court [Added
2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 5233]
Both 2 hrs.; All/All Entire length
All streets Both 1 hr.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
In front of any
residential property,
applying to trucks
over 2 tons only
Apgar Court [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 5202]
Both 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Axton Avenue
[Added 10-24-2000
by Ord. No. 4661;
amended
11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 5171]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Adams Avenue and
a point 200 feet
east of Stuyvesant
Avenue
Axton Avenue
[Added 10-26-2010
by Ord. No. 5166]
Both 30 mins,; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m.
From Stuyvesant
Avenue proceeding
east for 200 feet
§ 266-58 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:441
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Axton Avenue
[Repealed
10-24-2000 by
Ord. No. 4661]
Balsam Way Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue southwest
for 389.5 feet
Bashford Avenue
[Added 7-8-2003
by Ord. No. 4797]
Both 2 hrs.; All/Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue north for
158 feet
Beechwood Avenue
[Added 10-23-2018
by Ord. No. 5615]
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Rosemont
Avenue to Roosevelt
Avenue
Berwyn Street
[Repealed
2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 5233]
Berwyn Street North 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Caldwell
Avenue to Weber
Street
Bishop Street
[Repealed
12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. 4924]
Bonnel Court Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Johnson
Place
Braun Terrace Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Layton
Drive
Browing Place
[Added 2-11-2019
by Ord. No. 5623]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Burnet Avenue Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./All
From Morris
Avenue north for
150 feet
Burroughs Terrace Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Chestnut
Street to Hubbard
Avenue
Byron Avenue East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Magie Avenue
to Roseland Place
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:442
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Caldwell Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Berwyn
Street to Vauxhall
Road
Caldwell Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Elmwood
Avenue to West
Chestnut Street
Caldwell Avenue East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
In front of the
Caldwell Avenue
parking lot
Caldwell Avenue Northwest
30 mins.; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Elmwood
Avenue north for
550 feet
Caldwell Avenue Southeast
30 mins.; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Elmwood
Avenue north for
380 feet
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
West 2 hrs.; All/All From Stuyvesant
Avenue southerly to
the northerly
curbline of Indian
Run Parkway North
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
West 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From the southerly
curbline of Indian
Run Parkway North
to the southerly
curbline of Colonial
Avenue West
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
West 2 hrs.; All/All From the southerly
curbline of Colonian
Avenue West to a
point 150 feet north
of the northerly
curbline of
Galloping Hill Road
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
West 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All
From the southerly
curbline of Tucker
Avenue to a point
150 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:443
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
West 2 hrs.; All/All From a point 150
feet south of Tucker
Avenue to a point
200 feet south of
Carolyn Road
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 2 hrs.; All/All From the Roselle
Park Town line to a
point 190 feet north
of the northerly
curbline of Rutgers
Lane
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./All
From a point 150
feet south of
Galloping Hill Road
to a point 150 feet
north of Galloping
Hill Road
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 30 mins.; All/All From the northerly
curbline of New
Jersey Avenue to a
point 75 feet north
therefrom
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 2 hrs.; All/All From a point 75
feet north of New
Jersey Avenue to
the southerly
curbline of
Washington Avenue
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 1 hr.; All/All From the northerly
curbline of
Washington Avenue
to a point 100 feet
north therefrom
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 2 hrs.; All/All From a point 100
feet north of
Washington Avenue
to the southerly
curbline of Colonial
Avenue
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:444
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From the northerly
curbline of Colonial
Avenue to the
southerly curbline
of Burroughs
Terrace
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 4516]
East 2 hrs.; All/All From the northerly
curbline of
Burroughs Terrace
to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Chestnut Street [Repealed 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 4516]
Colonial Avenue Northwest
2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Summit
Place
Colonial Avenue South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Summit
Place
Commerce Avenue
[Repealed
10-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 4805]
Commerce Avenue
[Added 11-23-2010
by Ord. No. 5171]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Between Kent Place
and Vauxhall Road
Commerce Avenue
[Added 4-22-2014
by Ord. No. 5299]
Southeast 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 250
feet north of Morris
Avenue to a point
75 feet south of
Kent Place
Coolidge Avenue
[Added 4-23-2013
by Ord. No. 5263]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Commerce Avenue
[Added 9-8-2015
by Ord. No. 5352]
Southeast 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 250
feet north of Morris
Avenue to a point
75 feet south of
Kent Place,
excluding 90 feet
south of Kent Place
to 224 feet south of
Kent Place
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:445
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Crawford Terrace North 15 mins.; All/All From a point 50
feet east of
Chestnut Street
east for 26 feet
Creger Avenue
[Added 12-26-2017
by Ord. No. 5444]
Both 2 hrs; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Crestview Avenue
[Added 12-26-2017
by Ord. No. 5444]
Both 2 hrs; All/All Entire length
Dayton Avenue Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
David Terrace
[Added 4-22-2014
by Ord. No. 5298]
South 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Starting at Golf
Terrace for 110 feet
Dorchester Road Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Elmwood Avenue Northeast
1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue to Johnson
Place
Emerson Avenue Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Stowe Street
to Pine Avenue
Emerson Avenue
[Added 10-26-2010
by Ord. No. 5166]
Both 30 mins.; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m.
From Stuyvesant
Avenue proceeding
west for 125 feet
Falls Terrace Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Francyne Way
[Added 6-9-2010
by Ord. No. 5138]
Both 1 hr.; 6:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Gelb Avenue East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Grandview Avenue
[Added 12-18-2012
by Ord. No. 5252]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue to Route 22
terminus
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:446
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Grandview Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Greenwood Road Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue to the
property line of the
Board of Education
Gruber Avenue Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From North Third
Street to Seymour
Road
Gruber Avenue Northwest
1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From North First
Street to Dayton
Avenue
Gruber Avenue Southeast
1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From North Third
Street to Dayton
Avenue
Gruber Avenue West 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From North Third
Street to North
First Street
Harding Avenue
[Amended
8-26-2014 by Ord.
No. 5316]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Hazel Place South 1 hr.; 10:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Headley Terrace Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Caldwell
Avenue to South
Park Terrace
Hickory Road
[Repealed
9-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 5354]
Hillside Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Walker
Avenue to the
county line
Hobart Street Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Commerce
Avenue to Jeanette
Avenue
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:447
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Hobson Street
[Added 1-27-2015
by Ord. No. 5330 ]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Beginning at West
Chestnut Street
proceeding north
for 400 feet
Hollywood Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Hillside
Avenue to the
county line
Howard Street Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Berwyn
Street to Vauxhall
Road
Iorio Court [Added
8-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 4555;
amended
12-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 5286]
South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From 350 feet east
of Springfield Road
east for 306 feet
Irvin Avenue Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Jackson Avenue North 30 mins.; All/All From Burnet
Avenue to a point
100 feet west
thereof
Jeanette Avenue
[Repealed
10-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 4805]
Jensen Lane [Added
9-26-2017 by Ord.
No. 5438]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Entire length
Johnson Place
[Amended
8-26-2014 by Ord.
No. 5316]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Kent Place
[Repealed
12-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 5444]
Kings Court Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:448
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Liberty Avenue North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From the Rahway
Valley Railroad
crossing east for
570 feet
Longview Road
[Repealed
4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 4863]
Louisa Terrace North 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Grandview
Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Magic Avenue North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Halstead
Road to the
Union - Elizabeth
boundary line
Marion Street Northeast
15 mins.; 8:30 a.m.
to 5:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 50
feet south of
Springfield Avenue
south for 100 feet
Marion Street Northeast
15 mins.; 8:30 a.m.
to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 50
feet south of
Springfield Avenue
south for 100 feet
Midland Boulevard
[Added 2-14-2012
by Ord. No. 5233]
East 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 120
feet south of Morris
Avenue southeast to
Euclid Avenue
Midland Boulevard
[Added 2-14-2012
by Ord. No. 5233]
West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 120
feet south of Morris
Avenue southeast to
a point 422 feet
north of Euclid
Avenue
Midland Boulevard
[Added 10-8-2002
by Ord. No. 4753;
repealed
2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 5233]
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:449
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Midland Boulevard
[Added 10-8-2002
by Ord. No. 4753;
repealed
2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 5233]
Midland Boulevard
[Repealed
10-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 4753]
Moessner Avenue
[Amended
1-27-2004 by Ord.
No. 4811]
Both 30 mins.; All/
Monday through
Friday
From Morris
Avenue south for
212 feet
Morris Avenue
[Added 2-14-2012
by Ord. No. 5233]
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday;
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Saturday
From Grandview
Avenue to Route 22
bridge
Morris Avenue
[Added 4-25-1994
by Ord. No. 4317]
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday;
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. Saturday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Grandview Avenue
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 5343]
North 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning the
westerly curbline of
Adams Avenue and
the easterly
curbline of
Grandview Avenue
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 5343]
North 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning a point
100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
Grandview Avenue
and a point 435 feet
west of
prolongation of the
westerly curbline of
Burke Parkway
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:450
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 5343]
North 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning a point
100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
Warren Avenue and
a point 90 feet west
of the westerly
curbline of Harding
Avenue
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 5343]
South 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning the
prolongation of the
westerly curbline of
Adams Avenue and
the easterly
curbline of Warren
Avenue
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 5343]
South 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning at the
easterly curbline of
Grandview avenue
and extending for a
distance of 180 feet
easterly therefrom
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-27-2006
by Ord. No. 4958]
South 15 mins./All On Morris Avenue
eastbound
commencing 90 feet
east from
Stuyvesant Avenue
and continuing for a
distance of 72 feet
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 5343]
South 15 mins./All/All Beginning at the
easterly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue
and extending for a
distance of 145 feet
easterly therefrom
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 5343]
South 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning at a point
280 feet from the
easterly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue
and extending for a
distance of 210 feet
easterly therefrom
North Second Street Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:451
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
North Third Street Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Burnet
Avenue to Gruber
Avenue
North Third Street North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Stahuber
Avenue to Gruber
Avenue
Norton Road Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue to
Brookside Drive
Norton Road
[Added 2-14-1995
by Ord No. 4374;
amended 10-22-
1996 by Ord. No.
4478]
Northwest
2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From the northeast
curbline of Morris
Avenue to a point
185 feet in a
northeasterly
direction
Norton Road
[Added 2-14-1995
by Ord No. 4374;
amended
10-22-1996 by
Ord. No. 4478]
Southeast
2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From the northeast
curbline of Morris
Avenue to a point
190 feet in a
northeasterly
direction
Norton Road West 1 hr.; 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Entire length
Oswald Place Southeast
1 hr.; All/All From Laurel
Avenue to Burkley
Place
Overlook Terrace East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Vauxhall Road
to a point 50 feet
north of Berwyn
Street
Overlook Terrace West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Berwyn
Street to Vauxhall
Road
Palisade Road
[Repealed
3-11-1997 by Ord.
No. 4494]
Park Terrace
[Amended
8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. 5148]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:452
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Parkview Drive North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All
From Chestnut
Street west for 100
feet
Pine Avenue Both 1 hr.; 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Stowe Street
to Emerson Avenue
Potter Avenue
[Added 9-11-2018
by Ord. No. 5608]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Rahway Avenue
[Amended
7-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 4465]
Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./All
Entire length,
except that portion
at 800 Rahway
Avenue along the
northern curb 185
feet in from
Building A and 120
feet in from
Building C where
parking is
prohibited
Richmond Place Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Roosevelt Avenue East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Landsdowne
Avenue north to the
business zone/
residential zone
boundary line
Roosevelt Avenue West 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Wewanna
Avenue north to the
business zone/
residential zone
boundary line
Roseland Avenue North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Green Lane to
Edgewood Parkway
Rosemont Avenue
[Added 4-10-2018
by Ord. No. 5579]
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Hazel Place to
Route 22
Rosemont Avenue East 15 mins.; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Bond Drive
north to the
business zone/
residential zone
boundary line
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:453
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Rosemont Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 5442]
South 2 hrs; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 180
feet east of
Stuyvesant Avenue
Rosemont Avenue West 15 mins.; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Beechwood
Avenue north to the
business zone/
residential zone
boundary line
Salem Road North 2 hrs.; All/All From Beverly Road
to Potter Avenue
Schneider Avenue West 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Whittier
Place
Seymour Road
[Repealed
11-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 4619]
South Park Terrace Southeast
2 hrs.; All/All From Elmwood
Avenue south for
115 feet
Spruce Street Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./All
From Morris
Avenue south for
150 feet
Stone Street
[Amended
2-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 4582]
East 30 mins.; All/All From a point 25
feet north of Morris
Avenue north for
200 feet
Stone Street [Added
2-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 4582]
East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Beginning at a point
225 feet from
Morris Avenue and
continuing 132 feet
Stone Street
[Repealed
2-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 4582]
Stowe Street Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Emerson
Avenue to Vauxhall
Road
Stowe Street Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Pine Avenue
west to its terminus
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:454
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Stowe Street South 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Pine Avenue
to Emerson Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m./All
From Morris
Avenue to
Rosemont Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 1 hr.; 9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to
Rosemont Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./All
From a point 150
feet north to a point
150 feet south of
Morris Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Vauxhall Road
to Oakland Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Added 4-25-1994
by Ord. No. 4317]
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Vauxhall Road
to Elmwood Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue East 1 hr.; 9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Axton
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue East 30 mins.; 9:00 a.m.
to 4:30
p.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25
feet south of the
northern
intersection of
Everett Circle south
for 310 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue East 30 mins.; 9:00 a.m.
to 4:30
p.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25
feet south of the
southern
intersection of
Everett Circle south
for 132 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue East 30 mins.; 6:30 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25
feet south of the
northern
intersection of
Everett Circle south
for 310 feet
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:455
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Stuyvesant Avenue East 30 mins.; 6:30 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m./Sunday
through Friday
From a point 25
feet south of the
southern
intersection of
Everett Circle south
for 132 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./All
From the northern
intersection of
Everett Circle to
Stanley Terrace
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Added 7-9-1996
by Ord. No. 4464]
East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 174
feet north of the
intersection of the
Marianne Way
south to Marianne
Way
Stuyvesant Avenue West 1 hr.; 9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Morris
Avenue to Emerson
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue West 30 mins.; 6:00 p.m.
to 11:00 p.m./All
From Morris
Avenue south for
150 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 120
feet south of
Elmwood Avenue
south for 160 feet
Swanstrom Place Northwest
2 hrs.; All/All Entire length
Townley Avenue Northwest
2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 35
feet south of Morris
Avenue south for
335 feet
Townley Avenue
[Amended
2-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 4582]
Southeast
2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 128
feet south of Morris
Avenue south for
300 feet
Travers Street
[Repealed
12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. 4924]
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-59
260:456
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Union Terrace
[Repealed
10-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 4753]
Union Terrace
[Added 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. 5148]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Entire length
Van Buren Place Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Falls Terrace
to Caldwell Avenue
Vivian Terrace
[Repealed
10-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 5029]
Warren Avenue Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue north for
200 feet
Washington Avenue Southeast
2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Chestnut
Street to Winthrop
Road
Weber Street Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From Berwyn
Street to Vauxhall
Road
West Chestnut
Street
South 15 mins.; 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Henry Street
southeast for 330
feet
Whittier Place
[Added 8-28-2018
by Ord. No. 5600]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Willard Place Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Winfield Place
[Added 8-28-2018
by Ord. No. 5600]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Woodland Avenue
[Repealed
12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 5252]
§ 266-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-59
260:457
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Woodland Avenue
[Repealed12-18-2012
by Ord. No. 5252]
Woodland Avenue
[Added 12-18-2012
by Ord. No. 5252]
South 2 hrs; All/All Between Green
Lane and Summit
Road
Woolley Avenue
[Repealed
2-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 4582]
Woolley Avenue
[Added 11-24-1998
by Ord. No. 4571]
East 30 mins.; 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue north for
256 feet
Woolley Avenue
[Added 11-24-1998
by Ord. No. 4571]
West 30 min.; 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morris
Avenue north for
190 feet
Woolley Avenue
[Added 11-24-1998
by Ord. No. 4571]
West 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
Beginning at a point
190 feet north of
Morris Avenue
north for 210 feet
§ 266-60. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-24, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 266-61. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street East In front of the Branch United
States Post Office for 40 feet
Creger Avenue East From a point 25 feet north of
Morris Avenue north for 115 feet
§ 266-59 UNION CODE § 266-61
260:458
Name of Street Side Location
Delaware Avenue
[Added 7-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 5272]
East Beginning from a point 125 feet
south of Marshall Street
proceeding south for 100 feet
Emerson Avenue [Added
6-27-2001 by Ord. No.
4681; repealed
1-24-2006 by Ord. No.
4931]
Grandview Avenue
[Added 8-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 4611]
West Beginning at a point 60 feet north
from Morris Avenue and
continuing for 35 feet
Pine Avenue Southeast From a point 100 feet northeast of
Morris Avenue northeast for 78
feet
Stone Street Northwest From a point 64 feet north of
Morris Avenue north for 48 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue Northwest From a point 84 feet southeast of
Morris Avenue southwest for 43
feet
Stuyvesant Avenue Northwest From a point 25 feet northeast of
Emerson Avenue northeast for 55
feet
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 9-9-1997 by
Ord. No. 4519]
Northwest From the intersection of Emerson
Avenue northwest for 20 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue Southeast From a point 60 feet southeast of
Morris Avenue southeast for 42
feet
Stuyvesant Avenue Southeast From a point 62 feet northeast of
Morris Avenue northeast for 22
feet
Stuyvesant Avenue Southeast From Rosemont Avenue northeast
for 62 feet
§ 266-62. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 266-61 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:459
§ 266-63. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops. [Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord.
No. 4338; 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 4463; 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4483;
12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 4529]
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Burnet Avenue,
northbound
East Morris Avenue (far side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Morris
Avenue and extending 135 feet
northerly therefrom
Alfieri Court (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Alfieri Court
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Linn Avenue [Repealed 7-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 5270]
North Third Street (far side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
North Third Street and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom
Seymour Avenue (far side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Seymour
Avenue and extending 100 feet
northerly therefrom
Vauxhall Road (near side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Vauxhall
Road and extending 125 feet southerly
therefrom
Copper Hill Drive (far side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Copper
Hill Drive and continuing 100 feet
northerly therefrom
Astoria Place (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Astoria Place and
extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Edward Terrace, North (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Edward Terrace, North and continuing
105 feet southerly therefrom
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-63
260:460
Name of Street Side Location
Burnet Avenue,
southbound
West Edward Terrace, North (far side),
beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Edward Terrace,
North and continuing 100 feet
southerly therefrom
Astoria Place (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Astoria Place
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Copper Hill Drive (near side),
beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Copper Hill Drive
and continuing 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Jackson Avenue (near side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Jackson
Avenue and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom
Allen Avenue (near side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Allen Avenue
and extending 125 feet northerly
therefrom
Clover Terrace (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Clover
Terrace and extending 100 feet
southerly therefrom
Linn Avenue [Repealed 7-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 5270]
Leslie Street (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Leslie Street
and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Girard Place (near side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Leslie Street
and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
Chestnut Street,
northbound
East Rutgers Lane (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Rutgers Lane
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 266-63 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:461
Name of Street Side Location
Carolyn Road (midblock), beginning
250 feet south of the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of Carolyn Road
and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
Galloping Hill Road (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Galloping Hill Road and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
New Jersey Avenue (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
New Jersey Avenue and extending 105
feet and southerly therefrom
Washington Avenue (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Washington Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
Longview Road (near side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Longview
Road and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Burroughs Terrace (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Burroughs Terrace and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
Phillips Terrace (near side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Phillips
Terrace and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Chestnut Street,
southbound
West Parkview Drive (far side), beginning at
the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Crawford Terrace and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Leo Place (far side), beginning at the
southerly curbline of Leo Place and
extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Washington Avenue (far side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Washington Avenue and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-63
260:462
Name of Street Side Location
Galloping Hill Road (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Galloping Hill Road and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
Carolyn Road (midblock), beginning
250 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Carolyn Road and
extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
Rutgers Lane (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Rutgers Lane and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
Greeley Avenue
[Repealed 2-23-1999
by Ord. No. 4583]
Green Lane, northbound East Floral Avenue, North (far side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Floral Avenue, North and extending
100 feet northerly therefrom
Woodland Avenue (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Woodland Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
Green Lane, southbound West Woodland Avenue (far side), beginning
at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Woodland Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Floral Avenue, North (near side),
beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Floral Avenue,
North, and continuing 105 feet
northerly therefrom
Morris Avenue,
westbound [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
5343]
North Warren Avenue (far side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Warren
Avenue and extending 100 feet
westerly therefrom
Grandview Avenue (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Grandview Avenue and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom
§ 266-63 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:463
Name of Street Side Location
Between Burke Parkway and
Stuyvesant Avenue (mid-block),
beginning at a point 435 feet west of
the prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Burke Parkway and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
Morris Avenue,
eastbound [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
5343]
South Adams Avenue (near side), beginning
at the prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Adams Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
Adams Avenue (near side), between
Stuvesant Avenue and Burke Parkway
(mid-block), beginning at a point 145
feet east of the easterly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 135
feet easterly therefrom
Rahway Avenue,
northbound
East Willard Place (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Willard Place and
extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Between Liberty Avenue and Wickford
Road (midblock), beginning at a point
2,810 feet south of Wickford Road and
extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
Between Liberty Avenue and Wickford
Road (midblock), beginning at a point
1,770 feet south of Wickford Road and
extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
Wickford Road (near side), beginning
at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Wickford Road and
extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Kline Court (far side), beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly curbline
of Kline Court and extending 100 feet
southerly therefrom
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-63
260:464
Name of Street Side Location
Rahway Avenue,
southbound
West Between Morris Avenue and Kline
Court (midblock), beginning at a point
191 feet southwest of Morris Avenue
and extending 135 feet southwest
therefrom [Amended 2-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 4583]
Between Wickford Road and Arnold
Place (midblock), beginning 282 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Wickford Road and extending 135 feet
southerly therefrom [Amended
9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 4839]
Between Wickford Road and Liberty
Avenue (midblock), beginning at a
point 1,820 feet south of Wickford
Road and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
Between Wickford Road and Liberty
Avenue (midblock), beginning at a
point 3,380 feet south of Wickford
Road and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
Arnold Place (far side), starting at the
southerly curbline of Arnold Place and
continuing 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Salem Road, northbound East Galloping Hill Road (far side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Galloping Hill Road and extending 145
feet northerly therefrom
Fulton Street North (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Fulton Street and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Livingston Avenue North (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Livingston Avenue North and
extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Forest Drive (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Forest Drive
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 266-63 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:465
Name of Street Side Location
Gloucester Road (near side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Gloucester
Road and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Dover Lane (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Dover Lane
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Trinity Place (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Trinity Place
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Winchester Avenue (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Winchester Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
Minute Arms Road (far side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Minute Arms Road and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
Huguenot Avenue (near side), starting
at the southerly curbline of Huguenot
Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Morris Avenue (near side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Morris
Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Magnolia Place (far side), beginning at
the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Magnolia Place and
extending 100 feet therefrom
Salem Road, southbound West Clifton Terrace (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Clifton
Terrace and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Morris Avenue (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Morris
Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Huguenot Avenue (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Huguenot Avenue and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-63
260:466
Name of Street Side Location
Minute Arms Road (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Minute Arms Road and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
Wayne Terrace (near side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Wayne
Terrace and extending 115 feet
northerly therefrom
Trinity Place (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Trinity Place and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom
Plymouth Road (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Plymouth
Road and extending 130 feet southerly
therefrom
Cambridge Drive (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Cambridge Drive and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
Whitewood Road (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Whitewood Terrace and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
Livingston Avenue North (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Livingston Avenue and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
Fulton Street North (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Fulton Street and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom
Marshall Avenue (far side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Marshall
Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Springfield Road, North
northbound
East Milltown Road (far side), beginning at
the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Milltown Road and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 266-63 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:467
Name of Street Side Location
Progress Street (far side), beginning at
the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Progress Street and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Springfield Road, North
southbound
West Milltown Road (near side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Milltown
Road and extending 105 feet north
therefrom
Stanley Terrace,
westbound
North May Street (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of May Street
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Edmund Terrace (near side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Edmund
Terrace and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
Andrew Street (far side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Andrew Street
and extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
Ashwood Terrace (midblock),
beginning 155 feet west of the
prolongation of the westerly curbline
of Ashwood Terrace and extending 135
feet westerly therefrom
Kenneth Avenue (midblock), beginning
75 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Kenneth Avenue and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom
Stanley Terrace,
eastbound
South Kenneth Avenue (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Kenneth
Avenue and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
Wolbert Terrace (midblock), beginning
155 feet from the easterly curbline of
Wolbert Terrace and extending 135
feet easterly therefrom
Hillcrest Terrace (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Hillcrest Terrace and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-63
260:468
Name of Street Side Location
Porter Road (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Porter Road
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Van Ness Terrace (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Van Ness Terrace and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue,
northbound
East Johnson Place (far side), beginning at
the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Johnson Place and
extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Rosemont Avenue (far side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Rosemont
Avenue and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom
Axton Avenue (far side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Axton Avenue
and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
Vauxhall Road (far side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Vauxhall
Road and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
Mountainview Avenue (far side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Mountainview Avenue and extending
100 feet northerly therefrom
Long Terrace (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Long Terrace
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Morrison Avenue (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Morrison Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
Oakland Avenue (near side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Oakland
Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
§ 266-63 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:469
Name of Street Side Location
Everett Circle (far side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Everett Circle
and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Stanley Terrace (near side), beginning
at the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Stanley Terrace and
extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Pleasant Parkway (near side),
beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Pleasant Parkway
and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
Ostwood Terrace (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Ostwood Terrace and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue,
southbound
West Ostwood Terrace (far side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Ostwood
Terrace and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Pleasant Parkway [Repealed
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 5156]
Stanley Terrace (near side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Stanley
Terrace and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom
Everett Circle (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Everett Circle and
extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Oakland Avenue (near side), beginning
at the prolongation at the northerly
curbline of Oakland Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Morrison Avenue (near side),
beginning at the northerly curbline of
Morrison Avenue and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-63
260:470
Name of Street Side Location
Tyler Avenue (near side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Tyler Avenue
and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Gless Avenue (near side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Gless Avenue
and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Vauxhall Road (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Vauxhall
Road and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Emerson Avenue (far side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Emerson
Avenue and extending 100 feet
southerly therefrom
Morris Avenue (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Morris
Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Rosemont Avenue (far side), beginning
at the prolongation at the southerly
curbline of Rosemont Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
Johnson Place (near side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Johnson Place
and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
Vauxhall Road,
westbound
North Salem Road (far side), beginning at the
westerly curbline of Salem Road and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
Wildwood Terrace (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Wildwood
Terrace and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
Roger Avenue (far side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Roger Avenue
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 266-63 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:471
Name of Street Side Location
Route 22 westbound exit and entrance
ramp (near side), beginning at the
easterly curbline of the Route 22
westbound exit and entrance ramp and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom
Oakland Avenue (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Oakland
Avenue and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
Coolidge Avenue (near side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of
Coolidge Avenue and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom
Barbara Avenue (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Barbara
Avenue and extending 100 feet
westerly therefrom
Glenn Avenue (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Glenn Avenue
and extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
Winslow Avenue (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Winslow
Avenue and, extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
Ridgeway Street (near side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Ridgeway
Street and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Vauxhall Road,
eastbound
South Burnet Avenue (far side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Burnet Avenue
and extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
Ridgeway Street (near side), beginning
at the prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Ridgeway Street and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-63
260:472
Name of Street Side Location
Commerce Avenue (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of
Commerce Avenue and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom
Woolley Avenue (far side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Woolley
Avenue and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
Caldwell Avenue (near side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Caldwell
Avenue and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
Overlook Terrace (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Overlook
Terrace and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue (far side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom
Warren Avenue (near side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Warren
Avenue and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
Oakland Avenue (far side), beginning
at the prolongation of the easterly
curbline of Oakland Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
Highland Avenue (near side),
beginning 186 feet west of the
prolongation of the westerly curbline
of Highland Avenue and extending 110
feet westerly therefrom
Thelma Drive (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Thelma Drive
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Brookside Drive (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Brookside
Drive and extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 266-63 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-63
260:473
Name of Street Side Location
West Chestnut Street,
eastbound [Added
6-14-2011 by Ord. No.
5198]
South 1108 West Chestnut Street
§ 266-64. Schedule XXIII: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-28, no person shall park a vehicle
upon either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below,
whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway:
Name of Street Location
Chestnut Street From Colonial Avenue to the Garden State
Parkway
Indiana Street Entire length
Stuyvesant Avenue Entire length
Vauxhall Road From Burnet Avenue to Valley Street
Vauxhall Road From Oakland Avenue and the Rahway Valley
Railroad
§ 266-65. Schedule XXIV: Parking Meter Zones. [Amended
8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 5209]
A. On-street parking meter zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a
parking meter space in the on-street parking meter zones described
below shall be lawful during the hours specified only upon the deposit
of such amount as is indicated for each specified period of time.
Name of
Street
Side Hours/Days Time Limit/
Rate
Location
Emerson
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m. to
9:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
2 hrs./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Stowe Street
Emerson
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Stowe Street
Morris Avenue North 9:00 a.m. to
9:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Grandview
Avenue to
Pine Avenue
§ 266-63 UNION CODE § 266-65
260:474
Name of
Street
Side Hours/Days Time Limit/
Rate
Location
Morris Avenue North 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
2 hrs./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Stuyvesant
Avenue east
for 500 feet
Morris Avenue North 9:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.
15
mins./$0.10
for 15 mins.
From a point
519 feet east
of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a
point 540 feet
7 inches east
of Stuyvesant
Avenue
Morris Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From the
Friberger
Park entrance
to Grandview
Avenue
Morris Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
9:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From Bond
Drive to
Johnson Place
Morris Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
9:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From Johnson
Place to
Grandview
Avenue
Morris Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
East and west
of the
entrance to
the Union
Township
Municipal
Building
Morris Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From Burke
Parkway to
Grandview
Avenue
§ 266-65 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-65
260:475
Name of
Street
Side Hours/Days Time Limit/
Rate
Location
Morris Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
2 hrs./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Courtesy
House to a
point 150 feet
east of
Grandview
Avenue
Pine Avenue East 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
2 hrs./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From Morris
Avenue to
Stowe Street
Rosemont
Avenue
North 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
2 hrs./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Stuyvesant
Avenue
southeast for
250 feet
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
2 hrs./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From Johnson
Place to
Vauxhall
Road
Stuyvesant
Avenue
East 9:00 a.m. to
9:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Vauxhall
Road to a
point 160 feet
south of
Roosevelt
Avenue
Stuyvesant
Avenue
West 9:00 a.m. to
9:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
1 hr./$0.05
for 30 mins.;
$0.10 or
$0.25 for 1
hr.
From
Vauxhall
Road to a
point 100 feet
northeast of
Johnson Place
B. Parking lot meter zones. [Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 5245]
§ 266-65 UNION CODE § 266-65
260:476
§ 266-66. Schedule XXV: Parking by Permit Only in Residential
Areas. [Added 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4337]
Name of
Street Side Hours/Days
Time Limit/
Rate Location
Lot No. 4 All/All 3 hrs./$0.25
for 30 mins.
Columbus
Park
Lot No. 7 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All;
no parking
2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
except by
permit
(shared
parking);
senior
permit
parking
permits
exempt
4 hrs./$0.25
for 30 mins.
Bonnell Court
(near Senior
Center)
Lot No. 8 All/All 100 spaces: 4
hrs. (closest to
stores); 30
spaces: 12
hrs. or by
permit (shared
parking)/$0.25
for 30 mins.
Stowe Street
Lot No. 17 All/All 3 hrs./$0.25
for 30 minutes
Axton Avenue
A. Parking by permit only in designated residential areas is effective on
the following described streets or portions thereof in the Township of
Union between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday:
Name of Street Side Location
Brookside Drive
[Amended 2-14-1995
by Ord. No. 4374]
From Azalea Road to Skyview
Road
Elker Road From Regina Street to its
terminus
§ 266-65 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-66
260:477
Name of Street Side Location
Lowden Avenue [Added
7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4464; repealed
3-11-1997 by Ord. No.
4494]
Marianne Way [Added
7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4464]
From a point 138 feet east of the
north curbline of the intersection
of Marianne Way and Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 118 feet east of
the south curbline of the
intersection of Marianne Way and
Stuyvesant Avenue
Norton Road [Amended
2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
4374]
From the southeast side of Norton
Road commencing 150 feet from
the northeast curbline of Morris
Avenue and the northwest side of
Norton Road commencing 165
feet from the northeast curbline of
Morris Avenue to its intersection
with Brookside Drive
Regina Street [Repealed
7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4464]
Woodland Avenue
[Added 7-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 4464;
repealed 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 4494]
B. Parking by permit only in designated residential areas is effective on
the following described streets or portions thereof in the Township of
Union 24 hours per day on every day of the week:
Name of Street Location
Arsdale Terrace, East [Added
11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 5655]
From a point south 117 feet from
Mill Road eastbound for 53 feet
south (Start of Fire Zone on
Arsdale Terrace East Side)
Commerce Avenue [Added
9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 5352]
Southeast side, 90 feet south of
Kent Place to 224 feet south of
Kent Place
Dewey Street [Added 1-27-2015
by Ord. No. 5329]
Between West Chestnut Street and
Brighton Street
Floyd Terrace [Added
10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 5279]
From Morris Avenue to its
terminus
§ 266-66 UNION CODE § 266-66
260:478
Name of Street Location
Gallini Drive [Added 2-23-1999
by Ord. No. 4586]
Entire length
Grandview Avenue [Added
11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 4979]
From Vauxhall Road to Haines
Avenue
Henry Street North [Added
1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 5329]
Easterly side only
Hobson Street [Added
1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 5329]
Between West Chestnut Street and
Brighton Street
Ingersoll Terrace [Added
7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 4464]
Entire length
Jeanette Avenue [Added
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 5586]
From a point north 112 feet from
Morris Avenue, eastbound for 150
feet north (end of property line of
1019 Jeanette Avenue)
Lafayette Avenue [Added
1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 5329]
Between West Chestnut Street and
Henry Street
Lakeside Place [Added
10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5404]
Entire
Marianne Way [Added
7-26-1994 by Ord. No. 4344;
amended 2-28-1995 by Ord.
No. 4375; repealed 7-9-1996
by Ord. No. 4464]
Moessner Avenue [Added
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4432;
amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4464]
Entire length
Niles Road [Added 7-26-2016
by Ord. No. 5384]
Between Palmer Street and West
Chestnut Street
Ostwood Terrace [Added
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4432;
repealed 7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4464]
Roosevelt Avenue [Added
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4432;
amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4464]
Entire length
Savitt Place [Added 4-23-1996
by Ord. No. 4436]
From Elmwood Avenue to Hoover
Playground
Savitt Place [Added 7-26-2016
by Ord. No. 5384]
Between Palmer Street and West
Chestnut Street
§ 266-66 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-66
260:479
C. Parking by permit only in residential areas is effective on the following
described streets or portions thereof in the Township of Union during
the hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. at any time Monday through
Sunday: [Added 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4353; amended
11-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4363; 2-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4375]
Name of Street Side Location
Andrew Street Pleasant Parkway to Melrose
Parkway
Concord Avenue Laurel Avenue to the Maplewood
line
Creston Avenue Laurel Avenue to the Maplewood
line
Denk Court Hillcrest Terrace to terminus
Edmund Terrace Pleasant Parkway to the
Maplewood line
Halstead Road Entire length to the Elizabeth line
Hillcrest Terrace Pleasant Parkway to Melrose
Parkway
Hillside Avenue [Added
9-28-1999 by Ord.
No. 4616]
Both From Walker Avenue to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Laurel Avenue Burnet Avenue to the Maplewood
line
Melrose Parkway Edmund Terrace to the Maplewood
line
Ostwood Terrace
[Added 7-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 4464]
Entire length
Porter Road Pleasant Parkway to the
Maplewood line
Potter Avenue [Added
3-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 5563]
Both Entire length
Prospect Street Concord Avenue to the Maplewood
line
Raymond Terrace
[Added 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 4494]
Both From Crestview Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Revere Avenue Laurel Avenue to the Maplewood
line
Van Ness Terrace Ostwood Terrace to Pleasant
Parkway
§ 266-66 UNION CODE § 266-66
260:480
§ 266-66.1. Schedule XXVI: Approximate Locations of Yield to
Pedestrian Signs. [Added 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 5025]
Street Name Perpendicular to
Perpendicular to Property
Line Between
Axton Avenue 1036 Stuyvesant
Avenue
1057 Stuyvesant
Avenue
Chestnut Street 502 and 506 Chestnut Street
464 and 470 Chestnut Street
Name of Street Side Location
Villa Terrace [Added
2-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 5559]
South From a point on the southwest
corner of Villa Terrace to 80 feet
north of Raymond Terrace
D. Parking by permit only in residential areas is effective on the following
described streets or portions thereof in the Township of Union during
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. at any time Monday through Friday:
[Added 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4482]
Name of Street Side Location
Birch Avenue [Added
12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. 4923]
Both Entire length
Buell Avenue South
[Added 12-27-2005
by Ord. No. 4923]
Both Entire length
Kent Place [Added
12-26-2017 by Ord.
No. 5448]
Both Entire length
Lowden Avenue Entire length
Palisade Road [Added
3-11-1997 by Ord.
No. 4494]
Both From a point 400 feet south of
Woodland Avenue to Woodland
Avenue
Summit Road
[Added 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 4494;
amended 9-9-1997 by
Ord. No. 4512]
Both From the northeast terminus to
Lakeside Place
Woodland Avenue
[Added 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 4494]
Entire length
§ 266-66 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-66.1
260:481
Street Name Perpendicular to
Perpendicular to Property
Line Between
Morris Avenue 978 Stuyvesant
Avenue
1036 Stuyvesant
Avenue
Rosemont Avenue 940 Stuyvesant
Avenue
978 Stuyvesant
Avenue
§ 266-66.2. Schedule XXVII: Residential Permit Exemptions. [Added
6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 5139]
Name of Street Side Location
Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Exception to
Code
Section
Adams Avenue
[Added
9-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 5213]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; 8:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Alfieri Court
[Added
2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 5232]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; All/All § 266-59
Axton Avenue
[Added
11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 5172]
Both Between
Adams Avenue
and a point 200
feet east of
Stuyvesant
Avenue
2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Beechwood
Avenue [Added
10-23-2018 by
Ord. No. 5616]
Both From
Rosemont
Avenue to
Roosevelt
Avenue
2 hrs.; 9:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Braun Terrace
[Added
6-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 5312]
Both Between
Morris and
Layton
2 hrs.; 8:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Monday
through
Saturday
§ 266-59
§ 266-66.1 UNION CODE § 266-66.2
260:482
Name of Street Side Location
Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Exception to
Code
Section
Browning Place
[Added
2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 5624]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Commerce Avenue
[Added
11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 5172]
Both Between Ken
Place and
Vauxhall Road
2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Coolidge Avenue
[Added
4-23-2013 by
Ord. No. 5264]
Both Between
Morris Avenue
and Vauxhall
Road
2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Creger Avenue
[Added
12-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 5449]
Both Entire length 2 hrs; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Crestview Avenue
[Added
12-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 5449]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; All/All § 266-59
Falls Terrace
[Added
10-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 5221]
Both Between
Morris Avenue
and Berwyn
Street
2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
§ 266-59
Francyne Way Both Entire length 1 hr.; 6:00
a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Grandview Avenue
[Added
12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 5253]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
§ 266-66.2 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-66.2
260:483
Name of Street Side Location
Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Exception to
Code
Section
Harding Avenue
[Added
5-27-2014 by
Ord. No. 5307;
amended
8-26-2014 by
Ord. No. 5316]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Jensen Lane
[Added
9-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 5439]
Both Entire length 7:00 a.m. to
7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
§ 266-59
Johnson Place
[Added
8-26-2014 by
Ord. No. 5316]
West Entire length 2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Midland
Boulevard [Added
2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 5232]
East From a point
120 feet south
of Morris
Avenue
southeast to
Euclid Avenue
2 hrs.; 9:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Midland
Boulevard [Added
2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 5232]
West From a point
120 feet south
of Morris
Avenue to a
point 422 feet
north of Euclid
Avenue
2 hrs.; 9:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Park Terrace
[Added
8-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 5149]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Rosemont Avenue
[Added
4-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 5580]
Both From
Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Route 22
2 hrs./All § 266-59
§ 266-66.2 UNION CODE § 266-66.2
260:484
Name of Street Side Location
Time Limit;
Hours/Days
Exception to
Code
Section
Stowe Street
[Added
6-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 5196]
Both Between
Vauxhall Road
and its
terminus
1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
§ 266-59
Union Terrace
[Added
8-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 5149]
Both Entire length 2 hrs.; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
§ 266-59
Woodland Avenue
[Added
12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 5253]
South Between Green
Lane and
Summit Road
All/All § 266-59
§ 266-66.3. Schedule XXVIII: Trucks prohibited. [Added 2-10-2015
by Ord. No. 5332145]
In accordance with the provisions of § 266-16.3, the streets or parts of
streets upon which trucks are prohibited shall be as follows:
Name of Street Limits
Woodland Avenue Entire length
145. Editor's Note: This section was adopted as § 266-67 but was renumbered to avoid
duplicate section numbers.
§ 266-66.2 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-66.3
260:485

Part 2
[Adopted 3-25-1997 By OrPda.r Nkion.g 4 L49ot5s146 (Ch. 266, Part 2 Of The
1986 Code)]
ARTICLE VII
Open-Air Parking Stations
§ 266-67. License required.
It shall be unlawful to manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of
an open-air parking station, as defined by the terms of this article, without
first having obtained and paid for a license, as herein provided.
§ 266-68. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN-AIR PARKING STATION — An open area, other than a street or other
public way, used for the parking of motor vehicles, including access drives
and aisles, and available for public use, whether for a fee or as a service or
privilege for clients, customers, suppliers or residents.
§ 266-69. License application.
§ 266-70. Fees.
A. Each application for a license to conduct an open-air parking station
shall be made in writing and shall set forth the name of the owner of the
place, its location, the person making the application and the area, by
square feet, of the space proposed to be licensed. Such application shall
be made to the Clerk of the Township and submitted by him to the
Township Committee. Whenever the applicant is not the owner, then the
consent of the owner of the premises shall be endorsed on such
application. Licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk upon
direction of the Township Committee.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by the annual license fee to be
due thereon, which shall be returned if the license is not granted.
A. The fee for each license for an open-air parking station shall be $300
per year. The annual license fee for a station where new motor vehicles
are exhibited for sale or sold shall be $500 per annum. The annual
license fee for a station where used motor vehicles are exhibited for
sale or sold shall be $600 per annum.
146. Editor's Note: This Ordinance Superseded Former Ch. 196, Parking Lots, Comprised As
Follows: Art. I, Open-Air Parking Stations, Adopted 4-28-1936 By Ord. No. 833, As
Amended; Art. II, Private Parking Lots, Adopted 5-9-1972, As Amended; And Art. III,
Municipally Operated Lots, Adopted 6-27-1972 By Ord. No. 2729 And Amended In Its
Entirety 8-13-1996 By Ord. No. 4468.
§ 266-67 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-70
260:487
§ 266-71. Expiration of license.
Each license shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which
it was issued. If, at the time of the granting of the license, less than six
months of the current year shall have elapsed, the licensee shall pay the
full annual license fee, and if more than six months of the current year shall
have elapsed at the time such license is granted, then the fee to be paid
shall be 1/2 the annual fee.
§ 266-72. Seasonal licenses.
§ 266-73. Operation of business.
Every open-air parking station licensed under this article shall be conducted
in a peaceful, law-abiding manner and in conformity with any other
ordinance of the Township of Union, in the County of Union, or of its Board
of Health that may pertain to the subject and shall be operated in such a
manner as not to create any public or private nuisance or be wrongfully
detrimental to persons or property.
§ 266-74. Security; costs to be borne by owner.
B. If any motor vehicle dealer maintains both a new-car lot and a used-car
lot on the same premises, then and in that event said motor vehicle
dealer shall only be required to pay the fee of $600 mentioned in
§ 266-70A hereof.
A. In case an open-air parking station shall be used exclusively by patrons
of a business that is seasonal in its nature in connection with the
operation of an amusement or athletic park or other seasonal
enterprise, the Township Committee may, upon application, direct the
issuance of a seasonal license in place of the annual license.
B. Each such seasonal license shall set forth the time during which the
station is to be operated, which in no event shall be for less than two
months.
C. The fee for a seasonal license shall accompany the application, and the
amount thereof shall be determined by multiplying the number of
months for which said license is issued by 1/10 of the annual license fee
which would have been due from such a station for an annual license. If
a license is not granted, the fee shall be returned.
A. Retail establishment parking areas shall provide for security guards to
protect the personal property of those who utilize the parking area,
during all hours of operation, unless otherwise deemed unnecessary by
the Chief of Police.
B. One guard will be required for each parking area consisting of 500 or
more parking spaces. In addition to the foregoing, any parking area
consisting of 1,000 or more parking spaces will also provide for a roving
§ 266-70 UNION CODE § 266-74
260:488
§ 266-75. Required illumination.
§ 266-76. Signs and markings; costs to be borne by owner.
patrol throughout the parking area by means of a motor vehicle. The
expenses for the vehicle as well as the required security guards shall be
borne by the owner of the premises.
C. Any security guard hired for the above purposes shall be in good
general health and shall be subject to physical and psychological
examinations prior to employment. Each guard shall be subject to an
extensive criminal history background check by the Police Department
prior to employment, and final hiring will be subject to the approval of
the Chief of Police.
D. One guard will be required for each parking area consisting of 100 or
more parking spaces up to 499 parking spaces. The said security guard
is to be provided for exterior security between the hours of dusk and
dawn for those parking areas serving retail establishments open for
business during all or a part of those dusk-to-dawn periods. The Chief of
Police shall be the supervising Township authority hereunder.
A. Any parking area whose retail business or businesses are to be open
later than one hour after sunset or open earlier than one hour before
sunrise shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
B. Illumination during the period beginning one hour after sunset until
one hour before shall be as set forth hereunder:
(1) An average minimum illumination of 0.5 footcandle throughout the
lot shall be maintained during the above-referred-to hours.
(2) Lighting fixtures which provide for parking area illumination shall
be mounted at a height of not more than 25 feet or the height of the
building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the
center line of the light source.
(3) Lighting fixtures shall be spaced at a distance not to exceed five
times the mounting height.
(4) Lighting shall be shaded in such a manner that no direct rays are
visible to adjacent property owners or motorists using public
streets.
C. All plans upgrading and/or implementing parking area security shall be
subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.
A. Appropriate paving, signs and striping, where required, shall be
provided in each individual open-air parking station and shall conform
to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
§ 266-74 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-76
260:489
§ 266-77. Applicability.
This article shall be restricted to open-air parking stations for the use of
commercial and retail establishments only.
§ 266-78. Revocation of license.
Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the Township
Committee for violation of any of the provisions herein, after notice given
to the licensee and a hearing afforded thereon. Such notice, containing a
statement of the charges, shall be served upon the licensee in person, if he
can he located, and, if not, then by registered mail directed to the address
of such parking station at least five days prior to the date of the proposed
hearing.
§ 266-79. Violations and penalties.
B. The cost of said paving, signing and striping shall be borne by said
operator.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more
than $500 or not more than 90 days' imprisonment, or both, at the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
B. Upon conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this article, the
continued operation of any such open-air parking station may be
deemed an additional violation for each day such parking station is
operated after such conviction.
§ 266-76 UNION CODE § 266-79
260:490
ARTICLE VIII
Private Parking Lots
§ 266-80. Individual plans.
§ 266-81. Chief of Police to designate regulated areas; cart corrals.
§ 266-82. Plan to become public document; changes.
A. The Fire Prevention Bureau of the Township of Union, in the County of
Union, shall file with the Chief of Police of said Township an individual
plan for each private public parking area to which this article shall be
applicable. Said plan shall contain the outline of said parking area,
together with such areas located therein as shall be designated as
traffic or prohibited parking zones.
B. The individual plan herein mentioned shall be provided by the
individual operator of each of the private public parking areas to be
affected by this article, at the cost and expense of said individual
operator, and shall be submitted by said operator to the Police
Department.
A. Upon the receipt of any such individual plan by the Chief of Police, he
shall cause to be designated, on said plan, traffic directional lanes and
areas on which the parking of motor vehicles shall be prohibited as set
forth under § 266-85 herein.
B. Every vehicle parked in said private public parking lots shall be parked
in such a way that said vehicle shall be entirely within the limits of the
parking space marked upon the pavement.
C. In the event of the installation of a cart corral as authorized by Section
11 of the ordinance adopted August 10, 1971, entitled "An Ordinance
Regulating Shopping Carts in the Township of Union, County of Union
and State of New Jersey," 147 then and in such event the stopping of
motor vehicles shall be permitted in any area designated as a "no
parking" or "no stopping or standing" area adjacent to such cart corral
for such period of time required to transfer purchases from shopping
carts to such stopped motor vehicles, provided that the operator of such
motor vehicle remains at his motor vehicle.
A. Upon the completion of the aforesaid plan, the same shall become a
public document filed in the office of the Township Clerk and in the
Record Office of the Police Department of said Township and with the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
B. Changes may be made in the completed plan after filing upon proper
application therefor to the Township Committee and approval thereof.
147. Editor's Note: See Ch. 439, Shopping Carts.
§ 266-80 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-83
260:491
§ 266-83. Signs and markings; costs to be borne by owner.
§ 266-84. Responsibility of owner.
The plans mentioned in § 266-80 of this article shall be provided by the
individual operator of each of the private public parking areas to be affected
by this article, and the cost of signing and striping such areas shall,
likewise, be borne by said operator.
§ 266-85. Regulations.
A. Appropriate signs and striping, where required, shall be provided in
each individual public private parking area for which a plan is filed, as
aforesaid and shall conform to the current Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
B. The cost of such signing and striping shall be borne by said operator.
A. The private public parking lots to be affected by this article and the
areas subject to the regulations herein contained and the regulations
applicable to this are as follows:
(1) 1185 West Chestnut Street, Union, New Jersey.
(a) No parking anytime, entrance (thirty-five-foot width).
(b) No stopping or standing within 35 feet of the sides, back and
front of the building.
(2) 731 Route 22 West (and Sayre Road North), Union, New Jersey:
(a) No parking anytime, front of the building for a width of 35 feet.
(b) No stopping or standing within 35 feet of the building on the
sides of the building.
(c) No stopping or standing in entrances or exits.
(3) 1235 West Chestnut Street (at Route 22 West), Union, New Jersey
(West Chestnut Street Mall):
(a) No parking anytime at the entrance.
(b) No stopping or standing within 35 feet of the building, side,
rear and front.
(4) 1000 Galloping Hill Road, Union, New Jersey (Union Hospital/Saint
Barnabas Health Care System):
(a) No parking anytime, front entrance and emergency entrance.
(b) No stopping or standing at the sides of the building or
driveway entrances or exits or within 35 feet of the building.
(5) 203 Beech Spring Road, Union, New Jersey:
§ 266-83 UNION CODE § 266-85
260:492
(a) No parking anytime, 35 feet from the building and along the
front of the building.
(b) No stopping or standing at the back and sides within 35 feet of
the building.
(6) 1201 Stuyvesant Avenue, Union, New Jersey (Supermarket):
(a) No parking anytime, 35 feet from the building along the front
and rear of the building.
(b) No stopping or standing 35 feet from the building along the
sides of the building.
(7) Supermarket, 1319 Magie Avenue, Union, New Jersey:
(a) No parking anytime, 35 feet from the building in the front and
at the entrances.
(b) No stopping or standing within 10 feet of any entrance, exit or
Fire Department siamese hose connection along both sides of
the building.
(8) 650 Green Lane, Union, New Jersey (K. Hovnanian at Station
Square): [Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 5333]
(a) The four main travel aisles through the complex shall be
designated as both fire zones and fire lanes.
(9) (Reserved)
(10) 1350 Galloping Hill Road, Union, New Jersey (Galloping Hill
Shopping Center):
(a) No parking anytime and one-way traffic south for a width of 22
feet in front of stores.
(b) No stopping or standing within 35 feet of the sides and rear of
the buildings.
(c) No stopping or standing in the exit lane for a width of 22 feet.
(11) 2643 Morris Avenue, Union, New Jersey (supermarket):
(a) No parking anytime within 35 feet of the fronts of stores.
(b) No stopping or standing within 35 feet of the sides or backs of
the buildings.
(c) No stopping or standing anytime within the entrance and exit
lanes.
(12) 2455 Route 22 West (and Springfield Road), Union, New Jersey
(shopping center):
§ 266-85 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-85
260:493
§ 266-86. Violations and penalties.
(a) No parking anytime within 35 feet of the fronts or sides of the
buildings.
(b) No stopping or standing within the entrance or exit lanes.
(13) 2445 Springfield Avenue (at Valley Street), Union, New Jersey:
(a) No parking anytime within 35 feet of the front of the stores.
(b) No stopping or standing within 35 feet of the sides or backs of
the buildings.
(c) No stopping or standing within the entrance or exit lanes.
(14) 342 Chestnut Street (and Galloping Hill Road), Union, New Jersey
(Five Points Shopping Center):
(a) No parking anytime within 35 feet of the fronts of the stores.
(b) No stopping or standing at anytime within the entrance and
exit lanes.
(15) 2933 Vauxhall Road, Union, New Jersey (Millburn Mall):
(a) No parking anytime in the fronts of stores for a width of 35
feet.
(b) No stopping or standing for a width of 35 feet at all entrances,
exits and rears and sides of buildings.
(16) 1721 Morris Avenue (and Route 22 East), Union, New Jersey
(shopping center):
(a) No parking anytime 35 feet from the fronts of the buildings.
(b) No stopping or standing within 35 feet of the sides or rears of
the buildings.
(c) No stopping or standing at anytime within entrance or exit
lanes.
A. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article pertaining to
parking or failing to follow directional signs shall, upon conviction, be
liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge of the
Municipal Court.
B. Any person, firm or corporation failing to provide the plan herein set
forth and failing or refusing to sign and stripe the lot, as herein
provided for, shall, upon conviction for such failure, be subject to a fine
of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 266-85 UNION CODE § 266-86
260:494
ARTICLE IX
Municipally Operated Lots
§ 266-87. Creation and location of parking lots.
There are hereby established and created the following municipally
operated parking lots:
A. Lot No. 1, located on the westerly side of the access roadway between
Morris Avenue and Bond Drive (south lot).
B. Lot No. 2, located on the westerly side of the access roadway between
Morris Avenue and Bond Drive (center lot).
C. Lot No. 3, located on the westerly side of the access roadway between
Morris Avenue and Bond Drive (north lot).
D. Lot No. 4, located on the southwesterly side of Morris Avenue adjacent
to the Courtesy House.
E. Lot No. 5, located on the southwesterly side of Morris Avenue at the
intersection of same with Burke Parkway.
F. Lot No. 6, located on the southeasterly side of Bonnel Court.
[Amended 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 4632]
G. Lot No. 7, located on the northerly side of Bonnel Court.
H. Lot No. 8, located on the northerly side of Stowe Street between Pine
Avenue and Emerson Avenue.
I. Lot No. 9, located on the southerly side of Stowe Street between Pine
Avenue and Emerson Avenue.
J. Lot No. 10, located on the westerly side of Caldwell Avenue north of
Morris Avenue (Burnet Middle School).
K. Lot No. 11, located on Springfield Avenue between Martha and Mary
Avenue (Kearse Center).
L. Lot No. 12, located on the southwesterly side of Morris Avenue between
Grandview Avenue and Floyd Terrace.
M. Lot No. 13, located on Stuyvesant Avenue at High Street.
N. Lot No. 14, located on the northerly side of Morris Avenue at Lorraine
Avenue.
O. (Reserved)148
P. Lot No. 16, located on the southerly side of Wewanna Avenue east of
Chestnut Street.
148. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, Lot No. 15, was repealed 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 4632.
§ 266-87 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-87
260:495
Q. Lot No. 17, located on the south side of Axton Avenue east of Stuyvesant
Avenue and on the northeasterly side of Morris Avenue, south of
Stuyvesant Avenue and contained within the mall (Columbus Park).
[Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5104]
R. Lot No. 18, located on the easterly side of Jeanette Avenue.
S. Lot No. 19, located on the westerly side of Jeanette Avenue.
T. Lot No. 20, located on the southeasterly side of Caldwell Avenue
between Morris Avenue and Berwyn Street (Burnet Middle School).
U. Lot No. 21, located on the northerly side of Winslow Avenue (at
Biertuempfel Park).
V. Lot No. 22, located on Hilton Avenue at Burkley Place.
W. Lot No. 23, located on Springfield Avenue between Russell Street and
Montclair Avenue.
X. (Reserved)149
Y. Lot No. 25, located on Swanstrom Place (Department of Public Works).
Z. Lot No. 26A, located on Caldwell Avenue, adjacent to police
headquarters, entrance from Caldwell Avenue.
AA. Lot No. 26B, located on Caldwell Avenue, adjacent to police
headquarters, entrance from Elmwood Avenue.
BB. Lot No. 27, located on Bond Drive adjacent to fire headquarters.
CC. Lot No. 28, located immediately to the rear of the Municipal Building.
DD. Lot No. 29, located on the westerly side of Stuyvesant Avenue, between
Emerson Avenue and Vauxhall Road.
EE. Lot No. 30, located on Tucker Avenue between Frances Court and
Sinclair Avenue.
FF. Lot No. 31, located on the northeasterly side of Caldwell Avenue at
Elmwood Avenue.
GG. Lot No. 32, located on the southwesterly side of Morris Avenue at
Caldwell Avenue.150 [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 4659]
HH. Lot No. 34, located at 2175 Morris Avenue. [Added 6-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 4788]
149. Editor's Note: Former Subsection X, Lot No. 24, was incorporated and merged into
Subsection Q, Lot No. 17 (Lot No. 17 and Lot No. 24 were combined into Lot No. 17),
6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5104.
150. Editor's Note: Former Subsection HH, Vauxhall Library Parking Lot, which was added
9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 4517 and immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4560.
§ 266-87 UNION CODE § 266-87
260:496
§ 266-88. Township of Union Municipal Parking Lots Map.
The lots set forth in § 266-87 hereof are set forth on a certain map entitled
"Parking Lot Map of the Township of Union," made by the Township
Engineer and on file in the offices of the Township Clerk and the Township
Engineer and the Police Department.
§ 266-89. Authority to designate spaces.
Authority is hereby given for the marking of the pavement in any of the
parking lots mentioned in this article by suitable lines or other markers for
the purpose of designating the parking spaces therein.
§ 266-90. Vehicles to be parked head-on and within marked lines.
Every vehicle parked in said municipal parking lots shall be parked in such a
way that said vehicle shall be entirely within the limits of the parking space
marked upon the pavement and must be parked head-on.
§ 266-91. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause, allow,
permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such
person, firm or corporation to be parked in any of said parking lots except
in the manner provided in this article.
§ 266-92. Parking of large trucks prohibited; servicing of vehicles
prohibited.
§ 266-93. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to blow any automobile horn unnecessarily or to make
any other unnecessary noises within said parking lots.
§ 266-94. Depositing of refuse prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit any refuse or other materials within said
parking lots.
II. Lot No. 35, located at Western Hills at Stuyvesant Avenue. [Added
9-27-2005 by Ord. No. 4903]
JJ. Lot No. 36, located at Union Train Station at 900 Green Lane. [Added
9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 5218]
A. The parking of motor vehicles in said parking lots shall be restricted to
private passenger automobiles or trucks of a capacity of up to 3/4 ton.
B. The servicing of motor vehicles, such as repairs thereto or change of oil
therein or other similar service activities, while any said motor vehicle
is parked in any of the aforementioned parking lots is prohibited.
§ 266-87 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-95
260:497
§ 266-95. Loitering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter within the area of
said parking lots.
§ 266-96. Compliance with existing laws.
Every person, firm or corporation using said parking lots shall, in addition
to complying with the provisions of this article, also comply with all existing
state laws, municipal ordinances and other regulations.
§ 266-97. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by such department or individual as may be
designated therefor by the Township Committee.
§ 266-98. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions, regulations
or directions of this article, with the exception of violations of § 266-99,
Public handicapped parking, section below, shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $50 for a first offense and $100 for
subsequent offenses or to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or to both,
in the discretion of the Judge at the Municipal Court.
§ 266-99. Public handicapped parking; violations and penalties.
The purpose of this section is to establish parking prohibitions in certain
areas of municipally operated parking lots which are open to the public or
to which the public is invited, as set forth below.
§ 266-100. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 18.
In Lot No. 18, located on the easterly side of Jeannette Avenue, there
shall be reserved unto the Township five parking spaces, to be properly
identified, for the use of the Recreation Department of the Township of
Union.
A. Legislative authority. This section is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.46 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 et seq., which confers upon the
Township of Union the right to establish certain regulations in order to
preserve and safeguard the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
B. Handicapped parking areas designated; authority. Authority is hereby
given for the marking of the pavement in any of the parking lots
mentioned in this article by suitable lines or other markers for the
purpose of designating the handicapped parking spaces therein.
C. Violations and penalties. For violation of any provision of this
subsection, the maximum penalty shall be a fine of $100 for a first
offense and not less than $100 nor more than $250 for a subsequent
offense, or 90 days of community service, or both.
§ 266-95 UNION CODE § 266-100
260:498
§ 266-101. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 20.
In Lot No. 20, located on the southeasterly side of Caldwell Avenue between
Morris Avenue and Berwyn Place, there shall be reserved unto the Township
eight parking spaces, to be properly identified, for the use of the Senior
Center staff of the Township of Union and the Burnet Middle School
administration.
§ 266-102. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 28.
A. One parking space in said Municipal Lot No. 18 (Jeannette Avenue), as
shown on the attached site plan (said site plan is on file in the Township
offices and made part of this subsection), shall be reserved for the use
of municipal employees of the Recreation Department. All vehicles in
said reserved space must bear authorized emblems which the Township
Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to issue to said employees.
[Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 4574]
B. Vehicles illegally parked in any of said reserved parking spaces shall be
considered to be parked in violation of this section.
C. Parking shall be reserved for free two-hour parking per lot, not per
space, from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive.
[Added 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 5244]
A. Five of the eight parking spaces in said Municipal Lot No. 20 (Caldwell
Avenue), as shown on the attached site plan (said site plan is on file in
the Township offices and made part of this subsection), shall be
reserved for the use of municipal employees of the Biertuempfel Senior
Center. All vehicles in said reserved spaces must bear authorized
emblems which the Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed
to issue to said employees.
B. Vehicles illegally parked in any of said reserved parking spaces shall be
considered to be parked in violation of this section.
A. The use of Parking Lot No. 28, herein mentioned in § 266-87CC hereof,
shall be reserved for the use of the municipal officials and departments.
B. Authority is hereby given to the Administrator to assign the spaces set
forth in § 266-102A hereof to the various persons and departments
occupying and holding the positions therein named and to designate
such parking spaces in said parking lot as reserved for handicapped
parking, with the provisions and penalties described in § 266-99 herein.
Such parking spaces shall not be reassigned, transferred or otherwise
changed without prior approval of the Municipal Administrator.
C. All vehicles parking in said Parking Lot No. 28 must bear an authorized
emblem which the Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to
issue to those municipal officials and employees authorized parking
spaces as provided in § 266-102A hereof.
§ 266-100 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-102
260:499
§ 266-103. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 10 at Burnet Middle
School.
Lot No. 10, located at Morris Avenue and Caldwell Avenue northwest side:
§ 266-104. Parking Lot No. 1 reserved for municipal and library
employees. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189; 3-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 5633]
D. Parking shall be prohibited in said Parking Lot No. 28 on Monday
through Friday, inclusive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.,
except for those persons authorized by this article to park in the
assigned spaces. Parking is also prohibited in said Parking Lot No. 28
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on each day of the week.
Said lot shall be opened to unrestricted public parking between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. on each day of the week and on legal
holidays from 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. of the following day.
E. By direction of the Municipal Administrator, parking may be authorized
in any of the aforesaid assigned spaces on a space-available basis to the
public for five days prior to and 10 days subsequent to each municipal
tax due date, namely: February 1, May 1, August 1 and November 1.
F. Parking within nondesignated areas or the driveway areas of said
Parking Lot No. 28 shall be prohibited at all times.
G. The provisions of §§ 266-90 through 266-99C of this article be and the
same are hereby made applicable to said Parking Lot No. 28.
A. Said parking lot shall be reserved for the administrative staff of said
Burnet Middle School and the staff of the Senior Citizens Department,
both of which are located within said school.
B. The regulations concerning the use of said parking lot shall be fixed and
determined by the Township Administrator.
A. Use of Parking Lot No. 1, herein mentioned in § 266-87A shall be
reserved for the use of municipal library employees. All vehicles parked
in said parking lots must bear an authorized emblem which the
Township Administrator is authorized and directed to issue to those
municipal and library employees employed in the Municipal Building
and Library Building. The reservation herein contained shall be
enforced on Monday through Friday, inclusive, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
B. No parking shall be allowed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Monday through Friday inclusive, except for shared parking as
may be permitted by the direction of the Municipal Administrator
pursuant to the provisions and requirements of § 266-117. Said lots
shall be opened to unrestricted public parking, including shared
parking, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. from Monday to
§ 266-102 UNION CODE § 266-104
260:500
§ 266-105. Location of multispace prepayment parking control
systems; intent; shared parking.
§ 266-106. Payment station rates; parking permit areas.
Saturday, and on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays from 8:00 a.m.
to 2:00 a.m.
C. Shared parking may be permitted in Lots 1 and 2 by the direction of the
Municipal Administrator pursuant to the provisions and requirements
of § 266-117, subject to the restrictions and exclusions of Subsections A
and B herein.
A. Multispace prepayment systems are located as follows:
(1) Lot No. 6, located on the westerly side of Bonnel Court.
(2) Lot No. 7, located on the northerly side of Bonnel Court.
(3) Lot No. 8, located on the northerly side of Stowe Street between
Pine Avenue and Emerson Avenue.
(4) Lot No. 12, located on the southwesterly side of Morris Avenue
between Grandview Avenue and Floyd Terrace.
B. It is the intent of the Township Committee of the Township of Union, in
the County of Union, that the use of the lots mentioned in this article
which have a multispace prepayment parking control system is such
that no motor vehicle parked in accordance with this article is allowed
to remain for longer than the amount of time purchased by the insertion
of the appropriate coin in said parking control system.
C. Shared parking may be permitted by the direction of the Municipal
Administrator pursuant to the provisions and requirements of
§ 266-117, subject to the restrictions and exclusions of Subsections A
and B herein, except that shared parking shall not be subject to a fee or
the time limitations set forth in Subsection B, except for any applicable
annual fee for shared parking that may be required pursuant to
§ 170-239.1F. [Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189]
A. Payment stations.
(1) Rates: $0.25 per hour up to seven hours; $2 per 12 hours; $0.25
minimum; $2 maximum.
(2) Payment stations accept quarters and Township of Union parking
cards.
B. Parking permits and electronic cards.
(1) The southeast reserved area in Lot No. 12 will be available by
permit only at a cost of $60 per year. The permit decals for this area
are not recognized in other lots.
§ 266-104 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-106
260:501
§ 266-107. Restrictions in Parking Lot Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 17, 24
and 29; prepayment stations. [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
4561; 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4788; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842;
5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189; 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 5209; 8-28-2012
by Ord. No. 5248; 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 5633]
(2) The permits shall be issued in the form of a decal, the color of
which shall be changed each year.
(3) Decals must be displayed on the lower left-hand corner of the rear
window of the vehicle for which issued.
(4) Electronic cards for the payment system located at the Bonnell
Court Lot Nos. 6 and 7 and Stowe Street Lot No. 8 and Lot No. 12
will be available at $30. Each time the card is used, the amount is
deducted automatically. The card should last approximately six
months.
(5) The issuance of a permit does not guarantee a parking space.
(6) The Township Clerk shall restrict the issuance of parking permits
for all permit parking areas within the Township of Union to Union
Township residents and to officers and employees of businesses,
stores and offices located within Union Township.
A. Lot Nos. 2, 3, 9, 24 and 29 shall be reserved for free two-hour parking
per lot, not per space; over two hours to be enforced between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, inclusive.
Parking in said lots between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on
Sundays and legal holidays shall be unrestricted. Parking shall be
prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any of the
foregoing lots.
(1) Lot No. 17 (Axton Avenue).
(a) Rate: $0.25/1/2 hour.
(b) Meter limit: three-hour limit.
(c) Fee/permit required: 24 hours/day, seven days a week.
(d) Enforced: 24 hours/day, seven days a week.
(2) Lot No. 4 (Columbus Park).
(a) Rate: $0.25/1/2 hour.
(b) Meter limit: three-hour limit.
(c) Fee/permit required: 24 hours/day, seven days a week.
(d) Enforced: 24 hours/day, seven days a week.
B. Lot Nos. 7 and 8 shall be restricted to the prepayment station.
§ 266-106 UNION CODE § 266-107
260:502
(1) Rates and regulations.
(a) Lot No. 7 (Bonnell Court near Senior Center).
[1] Rate: $0.25 per 1/2 hour.
[2] Meter limit: four-hour limit.
[3] Fee/permit required: 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
[4] No parking: 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., except by shared
parking permit.
[5] Exceptions: senior parking permit, SID parking permits
and shared parking permits are exempt from restrictions.
[6] Enforced: 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
[7] Cost of SID parking permit: $60 per quarter.
[8] Permit does not guarantee a parking space.
(b) Lot No. 8 (Stowe Street).
[1] Rate: $0.25 per 1/2 hour.
[2] Meter limit:
[a] Thirty spaces: four-hour limit (closest to retail stores).
[b] Ninety-five spaces: twelve-hour limit or by SID
parking permits or shared parking permits.
[3] Fee/permit required: 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
[4] Enforced: 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
[5] Cost of SID parking permit: $60 per quarter.
[6] Permit does not guarantee a parking space.
(2) Senior citizens shall be permitted to park in said lots with a permit
properly issued by the Supervisor of Senior Citizen Activities.
(a) An application must be completed prior to an issuance of a
permit. Said application is to be prepared by the Supervisor of
Senior Citizen Activities and shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
[1] Name, address and phone number of the applicant.
[2] Year, make and model of car utilizing the permit.
(b) The permit shall be issued in the form of a decal.
(c) The permit shall be affixed to said vehicle on the lower lefthand
corner of the rear window of said vehicle.
§ 266-107 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-107
260:503
§ 266-108. Restrictions in Parking Lot No. 5. [Amended 3-28-2000
by Ord. No. 4627; 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189; 9-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 5396]
Lot No. 5, hereinabove mentioned, shall be two hour free parking, or by
permit only for SID members, shared parking, and for municipal employees
whose vehicle bears an authorized emblem which the Township
Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to issue to those municipal
employees employed in the municipal building. Two hour free parking and
parking for SID members, shared parking, and municipal employees shall
be allowed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, inclusive. Parking in said lots between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 2:00 a.m. and on Sundays and legal holidays shall be unrestricted.
No parking shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. except that shared parking may be permitted by the direction of the
Municipal Administrator pursuant to the provisions and requirements of
§ 266-117.
(d) The Supervisor of Senior Citizen Activities is to keep a list of all
permits issued.
(e) The issuance of a permit does not guarantee a parking space.
(f) Signage. Said parking lot shall be designated and
appropriately signed in accordance with this section.
C. Parking Lot No. 24.
(1) Parking in Lot No. 24, hereinabove mentioned, shall be limited to
two-hour free parking between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
on Monday through Saturday, inclusive. Parking in said lot between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on Sundays and legal
holidays shall be unrestricted. No parking shall be permitted
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in said Lot No. 24.
(2) The provisions of § 266-107A through C of this article, its
supplements and amendments, be and the same are hereby made
applicable to said Parking Lot No. 24.
D. Shared parking may be permitted in Lots 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, and 17 by the
direction of the Municipal Administrator pursuant to the provisions and
requirements of § 266-117, subject to the restrictions and exclusions of
Subsections A through C herein except that shared parking as may be
permitted shall not be subject to the time restrictions set forth in
Subsections A and B herein except that shared parking shall not be
permitted in any spaces that may be otherwise assigned by the
Administrator pursuant to this section. Shared parking shall not be
subject to a fee or the time limitations set forth in Subsection B, except
for any applicable annual fee for shared parking that may be required
pursuant to § 170-239.1F.
§ 266-107 UNION CODE § 266-109
260:504
§ 266-109. Overnight parking in certain lots; special permit
required; fees.
A. Parking in Lot Nos. 11, 16, 19, 20, 22 and 23, herein mentioned, shall be
unrestricted, except that no parking shall be allowed between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. Parking in Lot 17 shall be two-hour free parking. No parking shall be
allowed between the hours of 2:00 am. and 6:00 a.m., except for shared
parking as may be permitted by the direction of the Municipal
Administrator pursuant to the provisions and requirements of
§ 266-117. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189]
C. Parking in Lot No. 22, hereinabove mentioned, shall be unrestricted,
except that no parking shall be allowed between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
D. Parking in Lot No. 23 shall be unrestricted, except that parking in the
first five nonhandicapped parking spaces shall be restricted to two-hour
free parking between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday. Parking in the first five nonhandicapped parking
spaces between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Sundays and
legal holidays shall be unrestricted. No parking shall be allowed for all
parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless
any vehicle parked in said numbered lot, not including the first five
nonhandicapped parking spaces, during said restricted hours bears a
special permit which authorizes parking during said restricted hours.
Said special permit is issued by the Chief of Police upon application
made therefor. Vehicles parked during said restricted hours not bearing
said special permit shall be considered to be parked in violation of this
article. Said special permit shall be affixed to said vehicle on the rear
lower corner of the rear right-hand window of said vehicle. The annual
fee for said special permit shall be the sum of $25. Said special permit
shall be renewed by January 1 of each year. [Amended 3-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 5573]
E. Parking in Lot No. 21 shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Monday to Friday, inclusive, except holidays;
provided, however, that during the prohibited hours of 6:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m. said lot may be used for parking purposes only by those persons
utilizing the recreational activities located at Biertuempfel. Any vehicle
parked in the aforementioned parking lot must comply with all other
ordinances and regulations not inconsistent herewith governing
parking in municipal parking lots. Said parking lot may be used during
any of the prohibited hours without a parking permit during any time
that the general recreational area on Winslow Avenue is being used for
a major public event. [Amended 9-11-2018 by Ord. No. 5609]
F. Parking in Lot No. 18, mentioned in § 266-100 of this article, shall be
unrestricted, except that no parking shall be allowed between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless any vehicle parked in said numbered
§ 266-109 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-109
260:505
§ 266-110. Certain lots reserved for official use.
lot during said restricted hours bears a special permit which authorizes
parking during said restricted hours, which said special permit will be
issued by the Chief of Police upon application made therefor upon the
payment of a fee of $25 for said special permit, which said fee shall be
good for a period of one year, expiring on December 31 of each year.
Permits issued subsequent to July 1 of any one year may be issued upon
the payment of $12.50. Vehicles parked during said restricted hours not
bearing said special permit shall be considered to be parked in violation
of this article. Said special permit shall be affixed to said vehicle on the
rear lower corner of the right-hand window of said vehicle.
G. Parking in Lot No. 31 shall be unrestricted, except that no parking shall
be allowed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added
11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 4698]
A. Parking in Lot Nos. 25 and 27, as hereinabove set forth, shall be limited
to the employees of the departments adjacent to the designated parking
lot and to persons having official business with any of said departments.
Said parking in said aforementioned lots shall be unrestricted; except,
further, however, that no parking shall be authorized in Lot No. 25
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. Parking in Lot Nos. 26A and 26B shall be unlimited, but the use thereof
shall be reserved for official Police Department vehicles and employees
of the Police Department and Municipal Court. All vehicles parked in
said parking lot, other than official vehicles, must bear an authorized
emblem, which the Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to
issue to such members of the Police Department and municipal
employees of the Police Department and Municipal Court entitled to the
use of said parking Lot Nos. 26A and 26B. Authority is hereby given to
the Chief of Police to assign the spaces set forth in § 266-110B hereof to
the various Police Department and Municipal Court officials occupying
and holding the positions therein named and to designate parking
spaces in said parking lots as those reserved for handicapped parking,
with the provisions and penalties described in § 266-99 herein.
C. Shared parking may be permitted in Lot Nos. 25 and 27 by the direction
of the Municipal Administrator pursuant to the provisions and
requirements of § 266-117, subject to the restrictions and exclusions of
Subsection A except that shared parking as may be permitted shall not
be subject to the time restrictions set forth in Subsection A herein and
that shared parking shall not be permitted in any spaces otherwise
assigned by the Administrator pursuant to this section. Shared parking
shall not be permitted in Lot Nos. 26A and B. [Added 5-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 5189]
§ 266-109 UNION CODE § 266-111
260:506
§ 266-111. Certain lots unrestricted. [Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 4613; 11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 4698; 6-10-2003 by Ord. No.
4788]
Parking in Lot No. 30 hereinabove set forth shall be unrestricted at all
times.
§ 266-112. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 12; permit fee.
[Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189; 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 5209;
7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 5245]
§ 266-113. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 29. [Amended
10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 4659; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Parking Lot No. 29 shall be restricted to parking for two hours between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, inclusive.
Parking in said lot between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. and
on Sundays and legal holidays shall be unrestricted. No parking shall be
permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in said lot.
§ 266-114. Restrictions for Parking Lot Nos. 13 and 14; permit fee.
A. Parking Lot No. 12 shall be controlled by a multispace prepayment
parking control system and a separate area for reserved for permit
parking.
B. Entry into and exit from said Lot No. 12 shall be unrestricted.
C. Parking meter fee and limit.
(1) Rate: $0.25/1/2 hour; $3 per 12 hours.
(2) Meter limit:
(a) Forty-three spaces leased Monday through Friday.
(b) One hundred forty-eight spaces, forty-eight-hour limit.
(3) Fee/permit required: 24 hours/day, seven days a week.
(4) Enforced: 24 hours/days, seven days a week.
A. Lot No. 13, located on Stuyvesant Avenue at High Street, shall be by
permit parking or two-hour free parking between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, inclusive. Parking in said lot
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on Sundays and legal
holidays shall be unrestricted. No parking shall be permitted between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in said lot.
B. Lot No. 14, located on the northerly side of Morris Avenue at Lorraine
Avenue, shall be by permit parking or two-hour free parking between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
inclusive. Parking in said lot between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 2:00
§ 266-111 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-114
260:507
§ 266-114.1. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 31. [Added 6-10-2003
by Ord. No. 4788]
Parking Lot No. 31 is located on the northeasterly side of Caldwell Avenue
at Elmwood Avenue.
a.m. and on Sundays and legal holidays shall be unrestricted. No
parking shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. in said lot.
(1) Fourteen parking spaces are reserved for the Gard of 1401 Morris
Avenue, Inc., its employees and patrons. [Added 6-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 4680]
(a) Parking shall be unrestricted.
(b) Said spaces are to be constructed in accordance with a site
plan prepared by Bohler Engineering, P.C., and in accordance
with the final approval granted to the owner of 1401 Morris
Avenue by the Township of Union Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Signage. Said parking lots shall be designated and appropriately signed
as available for permit parking and two-hour free parking.
D. Permit parking.
(1) A certain portion of said Lot Nos. 13 and 14 shall be designated and
appropriately signed as available for permit parking.
(2) The number of slots allocated for permit parking shall be sufficient
to accommodate the average number of permits issued.
(3) Parking permits will be available from the Township Clerk on a
yearly basis upon the payment in advance of a fee of $60.
(4) Permits will expire on December 31.
(5) The permits shall be issued in the form of a decal, the color of
which shall be changed each year.
(6) The issuance of a permit does not guarantee a parking space.
(7) Decals must be displayed on the lower left-hand corner of the rear
window of the vehicle for which issued.
E. Shared parking may be permitted in Lot 13 by the direction of the
Municipal Administrator pursuant to the provisions and requirements
of § 266-117, subject to the restrictions and exclusions of Subsections A
through D herein except that shared parking as may be permitted shall
not be subject to the time restrictions set forth in Subsections A and B
herein and that shared parking shall not be permitted in any spaces
otherwise assigned for permit parking pursuant to Subsection D or as
may otherwise be assigned by the Administrator pursuant to this
section. [Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189]
§ 266-114 UNION CODE § 266-114.1
260:508
§ 266-115. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 32.151 [Added 6-10-2003
by Ord. No. 4788]
Parking Lot No. 32 is located at Morris Avenue and Caldwell Avenue.
§ 266-115.1. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 34. [Added 6-10-2003
by Ord. No. 4788; amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Parking Lot No. 34 is located at 2175 Morris Avenue.
§ 266-116. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 15; fee. [Added
8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 4613]
A. Parking in Lot No. 31 shall be restricted for four hours between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
B. Permit parking shall be allowed for Police Department employees. All
vehicles parked in said lot must bear an authorized emblem which the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to issue to those
employees who request a permit.
A. Parking in said lot shall be restricted for four hours between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
B. Parking in said lot between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on
Sundays and legal holidays shall be unrestricted.
C. Parking is prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. each
day of the week.
A. Parking in said lot shall be restricted to two-hour free parking between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
inclusive. Parking in said lot between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 2:00
a.m. and on Sundays and legal holidays shall be unrestricted. No
parking shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. in said lot.
B. Signage. Said parking lots shall be designated and appropriately signed
as available for two-hour free parking.
A. Entry into Parking Lot No. 15 shall be accessible from both Galloping
Hill Road and Chestnut Street.
B. Exit from Parking Lot No. 15 shall be restricted subject to the following:
Each automobile shall pay a rate of $2 upon exiting the lot.
C. Payment stations will accept either quarters, tokens, dollar bills or any
other medium of exchange as determined by the Township
Administrator.
151. Editor's Note: Former § 266-115, Regulations pertaining to Lot No. 32, located at Morris
Avenue and Caldwell Avenue, was repealed 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 4659.
§ 266-114.1 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-116
260:509
§ 266-116.1. Restrictions for Parking Lot No. 36; permit fee. [Added
9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 5218]
D. Tokens will be made available to purchase from the Township Clerk's
office.
E. Signage. Said parking lot shall be designated and appropriately signed
in accordance with this section.
A. Parking Lot No. 36 shall be controlled by a multispace parking control
system and reserved areas for permit parking, The Avenue/Korman
Hotel Visitors and Kean University.
B. Entry into and exit from said Lot No. 36 shall be unrestricted.
C. Long-term parking shall be prohibited. Long-term parking shall be
defined as parking beyond a twenty-four-hour period.
D. Parking fees and permits shall be administered through an agreement
with NJ Transit Corporation.
E. Enforcement of all parking violations shall be conducted by the Union
Township Police Department.
F. Daily parking.
(1) The daily parking rate shall be $3.50 per vehicle per space per
calendar day, or such other amounts as are set from time to time by
New Jersey Transit Corporation in conjunction with its obligations
with the Township of Union.
(2) Daily parking shall be limited to "numbered white lined spaces"
only.
G. Permit parking.
(1) Monthly permits shall be made available and paid on a quarterly
basis at a rate of $60 per month and renewed quarterly by mail, or
such other amounts as are set from time to time by New Jersey
Transit Corporation.
(2) Permit parking shall be limited to "numbered yellow lined spaces"
only.
(3) Permits shall be computer-generated with permit numbers and
validation period.
(4) Permits shall be displayed on the vehicle's rear view mirror and
must be plainly visible through the front windshield.
(5) The issuance of a permit does not guarantee a parking space.
H. Kean University.
§ 266-116 UNION CODE § 266-116.1
260:510
§ 266-117. Shared parking in municipally operated lots. [Added
5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5189]
(1) Vehicles with valid Kean University parking decals shall be
permitted to park after 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, without
paying daily or permit fees.
I. The Avenue/Korman Hotel.
(1) Forty two spaces shall be reserved for exclusively for visitors of The
Avenue/Korman Hotel Complex: 10 of the spaces south and 32
spaces north of the main driveway multiparty easement area.
A. Shared parking as defined in Article XXVIII,152 Chapter 170 (§ 170-5),153
of the Township Ordinance may be permitted in municipally operated
lots as specified herein by the direction of the Municipal Administrator
subject to the limitations, conditions and requirements of this chapter
and Chapter 170 of the Township Ordinance.
B. The Municipal Administrator shall be responsible for administering
shared parking, including the issuance of shared parking permits and
the assessment of applicable fees, in accordance with the provisions
and requirements of § 170-239.1 of the Township Ordinance and as
otherwise set forth herein.
C. Shared parking permits shall be issued by the Municipal Administrator
in accordance with the following procedures and requirements:
(1) The administrator shall maintain a list and inventory of available
shared parking permits by project and unit.
(2) Shared parking permits will be available to eligible residents on a
yearly basis upon the payment of the specified annual fee.
(3) An application for a shared parking permit must be completed prior
to the issuance of a permit and shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
(a) Name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
(b) Year, make and model of the car utilizing the permit.
(4) The permit shall be issued in the form of a decal, the color of which
shall be changed each year.
(5) Shared parking permits will expire on December 31.
(6) The permit shall be affixed to said vehicle on the lower left-hand
corner of the rear window of said vehicle.
(7) The Administrator is to keep a list of all permits issued.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Art. XXVIII, § 170-239.1.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Art. II, § 170-5.
§ 266-116.1 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-117
260:511
§ 266-118. Shared parking in Parking Lot No. 35. [Added 5-10-2011
by Ord. No. 5189]
Shared parking may be permitted in Lot 35 by the direction of the Municipal
Administrator pursuant to the provisions and requirements of § 266-117.
(8) The issuance of a shared parking permit does not guarantee a
parking space.
§ 266-117 UNION CODE § 266-118
260:512
Chapter 268
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health fees — See Ch. 563.
§ 266-118 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 266-118
260:513

ARTICLE I
Various Township Documents
[Adopted 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 3595 (Ch. A325, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 268-1. Copies of items.154 [Last amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
The following list of charges be and the same are hereby imposed for copies
of the items hereinafter set forth [pursuant to the Open Public Records Act
(OPRA), N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.], namely:
A. Zoning Map, 24 inches by 36 inches: $3 each.
B. Township Map with street index, 24 inches by 36 inches: $3 each.
C. Tax Map sheet, 24 inches by 36 inches: $5.
D. Land Development Ordinance and Code book.
(1) Land Development Ordinance: $100 each.
(2) Code of the Township of Union, New Jersey: $150 each.
(3) Annual update service, per calendar year:
(a) Land Development Ordinance: $75.
(b) Code of the Township of Union: $125.
E. Master Plan/Housing Element/Master Plan reexamination: $30 each.
F. Diazo process whiteprints: $0.50 per square foot.
G. Photogrammetric Topographic Map, 24 inches by 36 inches: $50 each.
H. Storm Sewer Inventory Map, 24 inches by 36 inches: $50 each.
I. Photocopies, letter and legal size documents.
(1) One to 10: $0.75 each.
(2) Eleven to 20: $0.50 each.
(3) Over 20: $0.25 each.
J. Duplicate copies of recordings of Township meetings, Board of
Adjustment meetings or Planning Board meetings: $25 per CD or DVD
copied.
K. Construction plans, 24 inches by 36 inches: $5 per page.
L. Computer disk/CD/DVD, $25 per disk/CD/DVD copied.
154. Editor's Note: For copies of items maintained by the Police Department, see Art. II of this
chapter.
§ 268-1 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 268-1
260:515
§ 268-2. Hours of business; request form; time for filling requests.
[Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 4154; 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 4295]
Reviewing and copying of any of the aforesaid documents, which by law
are authorized, shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
on business days upon completion of the Township of Union Request for
Documentation Form. The appropriate Township office may require three
business days' notice before producing copies of any recording tapes.
§ 268-3. Construal. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 4154]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed or used in any way to interfere
with the right of every citizen of this state to copy the records or reports
herein referred to, by hand or otherwise, during regular business hours and
under the supervision of a representative of the custodian of said records
and completion of the Township of Union Request for Documentation Form,
as permitted by law of this state.
M. Extraordinary service charges shall be applied for any extensive use of
information technology or for the labor cost of personnel providing the
service that is actually incurred by the Township for the programming,
clerical and supervisory assistance required to provide a government
record in the medium requested if it is not a medium routinely used by
the Township, not routinely developed or maintained by the Township
or requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or programming of
information. This rate shall be $45 per hour for supervisory or
programming and $35 per hour for clerical. All costs from an outside
agency to provide the government records in a form or medium not
available from the Township shall be borne by the requester of the
information.
§ 268-1 UNION CODE § 268-3
260:516
ARTICLE II
Police Department Documents
[Adopted 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 3600 (Ch. A325, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 268-4. Charges enumerated and authorized.155
The following list of charges be and the same are hereby authorized for
copies of items maintained by the Police Department of the Township of
Union in the County of Union, as hereinafter set forth, namely:
A. (Reserved)156
B. Photographs: eight inches by 10 inches, minimum of three: $15 each.
[Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4377]
C. Accident reports, police and fire. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No.
4377]
(1) By mail: $5 for the first three pages, then at the rate of $1 for each
additional page.
(2) Over the counter: $1 per page. One page to 10 pages: $0.75 each;
11 pages to 20 pages: $0.50 each; over 20 pages: $0.25 each.
[Amended 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
D. Fingerprint reports for compliance with various ordinances and
employment applications. [Amended 5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 3845]
(1) Taken but not submitted by the Town of Union Identification
Bureau:
(a) As a community service: $15 for each card. [Amended
3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4377]
(b) For any employee or candidate for employment by the
Township of Union, the Union Township Board of Education or
the Free Public Library: fee is waived. [Added 10-8-1991 by
Ord. No. 4164]
(2) Taken and submitted to the State Bureau of Identification.
(a) The current fee as stated by:
[1] The Superintendent of State Police pursuant to N.J.S.A.
53:1-20.5 to 53:1-20.7, inclusive;
[2] The Federal Bureau of Investigation; or
155. Editor's Note: For copies of items maintained by other Township departments, see Art. I of
this chapter.
156. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Breathalyzer: Purchase of a copy of video tape, as
amended, was repealed 5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 3845.
§ 268-4 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 268-4
260:517
§ 268-5. Hours of furnishing copies.
The furnishing of copies in accordance with the above schedule shall be
authorized only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on regular
business days.
§ 268-6. Construal.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed or used in any way to interfere
with the right of every citizen of this state to copy the records or reports
herein referred to, by hand or otherwise, during regular business hours and
under the supervision of a representative of the custodian of said records,
as is permitted by the law of this state.
[3] A Township of Union police administrative fee of $15.
[Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4377]
(b) All payments shall be made by certified check, cashier's check
or money order, payable to each agency as may be required.
E. Installation, replacement or repair of damaged property, signs or
signals: labor plus material and equipment in accordance with the fee
schedule for the same as published by the Chief of Police. [Amended
5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 3845]
F. Blood technician work done for outside governmental agencies: to be
paid by said governmental agency at such rate as may be mutually
agreeable to the Chief of Police and said other governmental agency.
G. Compilation of civil reports and furnishing copies thereof: minimum of
$25.
H. Compilation of criminal, drunk driving or motor vehicle discovery
cases: a fee of $30 for paper document discovery. [Added 5-13-1986
by Ord. No. 3845; amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 4377]
§ 268-4 UNION CODE § 268-6
260:518
ARTICLE III
Tax Sale Redemption Calculation
[Adopted 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5151]
§ 268-7. Fee.
There shall be no fee for calculation by the Tax Collector of the amount
required to redeem a tax sale certificate for the first two requests per
calendar year, but for any subsequent calculation requested in the same
calendar year, there shall be a fee of $50 per calculation request, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
§ 268-8. Form of request.
A request for redemption must be made in writing.
§ 268-9. Tax Collector and municipality not liable.
Neither the Tax Collector nor the municipality has any liability if the
redemption calculation is incorrect.
§ 268-7 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 268-9
260:519
Chapter 271
FINES
§ 271-1. Traffic violation fines. [Amended 8-24-2004 by Ord. No.
4835]
The following enumerated sections of local traffic violations shall provide
for a fine as follows:
Order Number Short Description Fine
OM Overtime parking meter $20
OT Time limit parking $20
PA Prohibited area $30
§ 196-15157 Fire zones $30
§ 266-90 Parked within marked lines/headon
$30
§ 266-100 Reserved Parking - Lot 18 $30
§ 266-102 Prohibited Parking - Lot 28 $30
§ 266-104 Prohibited Parking - Lots 1 and 2 $30
§ 266-105 Overtime Parking (ParkMaster) $30
§ 266-109 Overnight parking prohibited $30
§ 266-110 Certain municipal lots - official
use
$30
§ 266-113 Restricted parking - Lot 29 $30
§ 266-114 Regulated parking - Lots 13 and
14
$30
§ 266-115 Prohibited parking - Lot 32 $30
§ 266-7 Prohibited U-turn $52
§ 266-8 Prohibited turn at intersection $52
§ 266-9 Prohibited right turn on red $52
§ 266-16 Overweight truck/light traffic st. $52
§ 266-18 Parking prohibited at all times $30
§ 266-19 No stopping or standing $30
§ 266-20 Parking prohibited certain hours $30
§ 266-21 No stopping/standing certain
hours
$30
§ 266-22 No truck parking $30
157. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 196, Parking Lots, was relocated to Ch. 266, Part 2, Parking
Lots.
§ 268-9 UNION CODE § 271-1
271:520
Order Number Short Description Fine
§ 266-23 One-hour parking $30
§ 266-23.1 Seventy-two-hour parking limit $30
§ 266-29 Posting: emergency no parking $52
§ 266-41.1 Parking by permit only $30
§ 266-41.11 Restricted parking - trailer park $30
§ 271-2. Nontraffic violation fines.
The following enumerated sections of the Code shall provide for a fine as
follows:
Order Number Short Description Payable Amount
§ 168-2A Unlicensed dog $53
§ 168-28 Unlicensed cat $53
Chapter 273
FIREARMS; HUNTING
§ 271-1 FIREARMS; HUNTING § 271-2
273:521

ARTICLE I
Hunting
[Adopted 1-8-1935 by Ord. No. 818A (Ch. 143, Art. I of the 1986
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 273-1. Hunting restrictions; target practice.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot or kill wild birds, animals
or game of any kind within the limits of the Township of Union, in the County
of Union, or to discharge guns or firearms in the pursuit of wild game or
animals in said Township, or to discharge guns or other firearms in said
Township in any other manner; provided, however, that the discharge of
guns or firearms in target practice may be permitted, if such target practice
be carried on in a safe and prudent manner, without annoyance or danger
to neighbors or other persons in the municipality. It shall be unlawful
to discharge guns or other firearms at target practice, except in such
safe and prudent manner, without annoyance or danger to neighbors or
other persons in said municipality. The discharge of any firearm within the
Township borders shall be prohibited, unless it takes place at a permitted
target range.
§ 273-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 273-1 FIREARMS; HUNTING § 273-2
273:523

ARTICLE II
Bows and Arrows and Firearms
[Adopted 5-8-1956 by Ord. No. 1658 (Ch. 143, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 273-3. Use restricted; archery range.
No person shall shoot, discharge or propel any arrow, metal ball, pellet
or other projectile by use of any bow, longbow, crossbow, slingshot, spring
gun or other similar device within the Township of Union, except upon a
properly located and constructed archery range which has been approved
as to safety of location and construction by the Township Committee of the
Township of Union.
§ 273-4. Use for hunting unlawful.
No person shall hunt any wild birds, animals or game of any kind within the
Township of Union, in the County of Union, by the use of any bow, longbow,
crossbow, slingshot or other similar device.
§ 273-5. Use by minors.
No minor under the age of 18 years shall shoot, discharge or propel any
arrow, metal ball, pellet or other projectile by use of any bow, longbow,
crossbow, slingshot, spring gun or other similar device, except upon a
properly located, constructed and approved archery range and then only
under the immediate supervision of an adult.
§ 273-6. Places of archery or marksmanship restricted.
It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct in the Township of
Union, in the County of Union, any place for archery or similar
marksmanship practice or contest, without first presenting an application
and receiving a license to operate the same and paying the fee hereinafter
prescribed for such license.
§ 273-7. License fee.158
The annual fee for the operation of a place for archery or similar
marksmanship practice or contest shall be $500.
§ 273-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998159]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 273-3 FIREARMS; HUNTING § 273-8
273:525
$1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to
become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 273-8 UNION CODE § 273-8
273:526
Chapter 277
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
§ 277-1. Use limited to Fire Department.
All fire hydrants located within the Township of Union, in the County of
Union, are and shall be for the use only of the Fire Department of said
Township, and no other person or persons, firm or corporation shall use the
same, except in a manner as hereinafter provided.
§ 277-2. Use permit; fee; procedures; hydrant wrench.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation, desiring to use any fire hydrant in
the Township of Union, for lawful business and for legitimate and necessary
reasons, shall make application, in writing, therefor to the Chief of the
Fire Department or his designated representative and shall present written
permission for the use thereof from the water company serving water to
such fire hydrant, as the case may be, and the Chief of the Fire Department
of said Township shall thereupon, in his discretion, have power to grant
such application. For every permit so granted, the applicant shall pay to
the Fire Department the sum of $100 for the use of said fire hydrant. If
the Chief of the Fire Department or his designated representative approves
such application and the proper fee is received by the Fire Department,
the Fire Department shall loan said applicant the proper hydrant wrench
for applicant's use. The applicant is hereby required to sign a statement,
absolving the Fire Department, its members and the Township and its
members from any liability in connection with such use of the fire hydrant.
In addition, the applicant shall sign a statement acknowledging that any
damage incurred to the fire hydrant shall be the liability of the applicant.
Upon the expiration date of the permit, the applicant shall notify the Fire
Department that said applicant has completed use of the fire hydrant, and
the applicant shall return the hydrant wrench to the Fire Department. After
inspection of the fire hydrant by the Fire Department and ascertaining that
there is no damage to the fire hydrant, a release shall be signed by the Fire
Chief or his designated representative.
§ 277-3. Violations and penalties.160
Any person, persons, firm or corporation, using or attempting to use any fire
hydrant in the Township of Union without having made proper application in
writing and obtaining said hydrant wrench, as heretofore set forth, or who
uses or attempts to use any wrench or other tool or implementation for the
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 273-8 FIRE HYDRANTS § 277-3
277:527
purpose of opening or using any fire hydrant in said Township, or who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
$1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 277-4. Violation complaints; disposition of fines.
Complaints for violation of this chapter shall be made by the Chief of the
Fire Department or his designated representative, and all fines shall be
collected for the benefit of the Fire Department of said Township and shall
be transferred to the account of the Fire Department on the first day of the
month next after said fine has been imposed and collected.
Chapter 281
FIRE LIENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
§ 281-1. Taxes and assessments to be paid prior to payment of
claims.
It shall be unlawful for any insurance company authorized to issue fire
insurance policies in the State of New Jersey to pay to any claimant any
claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on any real property located
within the Township of Union pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued
or renewed after the adoption of this chapter and after the filing of this
chapter with the State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as all
taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and
payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid.
§ 281-2. Official certificate of search.
The official certificate of search shall be provided by the Tax Collector
of the Township of Union upon proper application of the claimant and
such certificate may, from time to time, be altered by the bonded official
responsible for preparing such certificates in order to correct any errors or
omissions or to add any municipal liens or related charges due and payable
subsequent to the preparation of the official certificate.
§ 281-3. Taxes, assessments and municipal liens; appeals.
All taxes and assessments and other municipal liens or charges due and
payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall be paid by the
owner of the property or any insurance company prior to the payment of
§ 277-3 UNION CODE § 281-3
281:528
any claims in excess of $2,500 on the property and such insurance company
is hereby authorized and required to pay to the municipality the amount
of the liens appearing on the official certificate of search and such other
recorded liens or related charges which may be certified to said insurance
company; provided, however, that if an appeal is taken to the amount of
any lien or charge (other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of
real property, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21), the insurance company shall
withhold 75% of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested,
pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all
interest accruing thereon at a rate paid on interest-bearing accounts, in
banking institutions or savings and loan associations in the state, shall be
disbursed in accordance with the final order or judgment of the court.
§ 281-4. Agreement to pay all delinquent taxes.
The governing body of the Township of Union may enter into an agreement
with the owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent
taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment
payments, pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, if the governing body of the municipality is satisfied
that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the
fire-damaged property. An insurance company receiving a certified copy of
a resolution of agreement from the governing body of the municipality is
authorized to make full payment on the claim to the insured person.
§ 281-5. Processing claims.161
A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance
policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged
property, where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the
mortgagee as a named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee
to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien under this chapter
only to the extent of the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under
the mortgage contract.
§ 281-6. Provision not to affect municipal lien enforcement.
This chapter shall not affect the authority of the Township of Union to
enforce a municipal lien under any other law of this state.
§ 281-7. Filing of provision with State Commissioner of Insurance.
The Township Clerk shall file a certified copy of this chapter with the State
Commissioner of Insurance within 15 days of its enactment.
Chapter 285
161. Editor's Note: As to municipal claims generally, see Ch. 17, Claims Approval and Payment.
§ 281-3 FIRE LIENS § 281-7
281:529
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves — See Ch. 192.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 277.
Fire liens — See Ch. 281..
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 373.
Smoking; tobacco products — See Ch. 450.
Liquid-fuel-burning space heaters — See Ch.
467.
§ 281-7 UNION CODE § 281-7
281:530
ARTICLE I
Enforcement and Administration
[Adopted 7-23-1985 by Ord. No. 3803 (Ch. 149 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 285-1. Local enforcement.162
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),163
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township
of Union, in the County of Union.
§ 285-2. Agency designation.
§ 285-3. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act164
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Union, in
the County of Union, State of New Jersey, except owner-occupied buildings
used exclusively for dwelling purposes and containing fewer than three
dwelling units, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 285-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 285-2 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 285-5. Organization. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
A. There is hereby created the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire
Department of the Township of Union, in the County of Union, which
said Bureau shall be operated under the control of the Chief of the Fire
Department and the daily supervision of an officer of the Township of
Union Fire Department.
B. The local enforcing agency shall be the Township of Union Fire
Department, through the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A. The local enforcing agency established by § 285-2 of this article shall be
a part of the Township of Union Fire Department and shall be under the
162. Editor's Note: The preamble for this ordinance read as follows: "Whereas, the Uniform
Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383) was enacted for the purpose of establishing a system for
the enforcement of minimum firesafety standards throughout the State of New Jersey.
Whereas, the Uniform Fire Safety Act authorizes municipalities to provide for local
enforcement and to establish local enforcement agencies for that purpose. Whereas, it is
in the best interest of the Township of Union to have the Uniform Fire Safety Act enacted
locally. Whereas, all fire departments, fire companies and fire districts have agreed to the
plan, which is set forth herein, for the administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Fire Safety Code."
163. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
164. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 285-1 FIRE LIENS § 285-5
281:531
§ 285-6. Appointments; terms of office; removal.
direct supervision and control of the Fire Official, who is a sworn,
uniformed member of the Township of Union Fire Department, who
reports to the Chief of the Department, and shall be comprised of the
membership of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and such other sworn
officers and members as are certified by the Bureau of Fire Safety to
conduct such work.
B. The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by this article shall be under
the direct control of the Chief of the Fire Department and shall be
comprised of an officer of the Fire Department, who shall be known as
"Chief Inspector of the Fire Prevention Bureau." The Chief of the Fire
Department shall appoint such other members as needed to carry out
the functions of this Bureau.
A. Appointments.
(1) The Fire Official shall be appointed by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
(2) The Chief Inspector of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be
appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(3) The Chief of the Fire Department shall appoint such other members
as needed to carry out the functions of the Fire Prevention Bureau
and the local enforcing agency.
B. Term of office. Such appointments shall be for a period of one year,
commencing on the first day of each subsequent year. The Chief of the
Fire Department shall appoint the Fire Official initially commencing on
the effective date of this article, which appointment shall expire on
January 1, 1986. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unfilled term of
office.
C. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
Chief of the Fire Department to carry out the functions of the local
enforcing agency and the Fire Prevention Bureau.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, Chief Inspector of the Fire
Prevention Bureau, inspectors and such other employees described
above shall be subject to removal by the Chief of the Fire Department
for inefficiency or misconduct. Each person or employee so removed
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority
or a designated hearing officer, in accordance with the law.
§ 285-5 UNION CODE § 285-7
281:532
§ 285-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,165 any person
aggrieved by an order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the Township of Union.
§ 285-8. Required inspections and fees.
§ 285-9. Technical amendments; enforcement of certain ordinances.
Enforcement under the following entitled ordinances be and the same is
hereby vested in the local enforcing agency and/or the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, namely:
§ 285-10. Warning signs on heaters.170
Any retail dealer of portable, flammable, liquid-burning space heaters
within the Township of Union shall be required to post a warning sign at the
A. In addition to the inspection fees required pursuant to the act and the
regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required.
B. Periodic inspections shall be completed on other structures not
mandated by the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code,
other than one- and two-family owner-occupied dwellings. There shall
be no inspection fee involved.166
A. Ordinance No. 2980, adopted on May 13, 1975, and entitled "An
Ordinance Prohibiting Smoking and Carrying Lighted Objects in
Specified Places in the Township of Union, Requiring Enforcing by
Persons Having Control of Premises, Authorizing the Chief Inspector of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention to Prohibit Safety, and Prescribing
Penalties for Violations of Its Provisions."167
B. Ordinance No. 3372, adopted on May 8, 1979, and entitled "An
Ordinance Requiring the Installation of Household Fire Warning
Devices and Fixed Penalties For Violations of this Ordinance."168
C. Ordinance No. 1712, adopted on December 11, 1956, and entitled "An
Ordinance Prohibiting the Use, Keeping, Storing and Maintenance for
Use of Portable Liquid Fuel-Burning Space Heaters in Structures on
and after July 1, 1957, and Providing Penalties For the Violation
Thereof."169
165. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively.
166. Editor's Note: Former § 149-9, Permits, which previously followed this section, was
repealed 3-23-1993 by Ord. No. 4235.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 450, Art. I, Smoking; Carrying Lighted Objects.
168. Editor's Note: This ordinance was repealed 3-23-1993 by Ord. No. 4235.
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 467, Space Heaters, Liquid-Fuel-Burning.
170. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 467, Space Heaters, Liquid-Fuel-Burning.
§ 285-7 FIRE LIENS § 285-10
281:533
point of sale of said heaters and to provide warning cards or tags to bear
the statement that "The use of these heaters within the Township of Union
in the County of Union is hereby prohibited."
§ 285-10 UNION CODE § 285-10
281:534
ARTICLE II
Rapid Access Key Boxes
[Adopted 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4845]
§ 285-11. Key box requirement.
All properties within the Township of Union having an automatic fire alarm
system and/or an automatic fire suppression system shall be equipped
with a rapid entry key box. Residential property shall be exempt from this
requirement.
§ 285-12. Type of box; installation.
The rapid entry box shall be of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL)
type and approved by the Fire Official of the Township of Union Bureau
of Fire Prevention. The rapid entry key box shall be installed in a location
outside of the building, structure or other improvement approved by the
Fire Official.
§ 285-13. Contents of box.
The rapid entry key boxes shall contain the following:
§ 285-14. Time for compliance.
All existing occupied buildings shall comply with this article within 18
months of the effective date of this article. All existing buildings not
occupied on the effective date of this article shall comply prior to occupancy.
All existing buildings at a change of occupancy shall comply prior to
reoccupancy. All buildings, structures and other improvements under
construction or newly constructed buildings, not yet occupied, shall comply
immediately and, in all events, prior to occupancy.
§ 285-15. Violations and penalties.
Any building owner violating this article after notice from the Township of
Union Fire Official shall be subject to assessed penalties in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12.
A. Keys to locked points of ingress or egress, whether such points are on
the interior or exterior of the building.
B. Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
C. Keys to locked electrical rooms.
D. Keys to elevator controls.
E. Keys to other areas as mandated by the Fire Official.
§ 285-11 FIRE LIENS § 285-15
281:535

ARTICLE III
Non-Life-Hazard Uses
[Adopted 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 5443]
§ 285-16. Certificate of registration; exemptions; inspections.
§ 285-17. Additional required registration and permit fees.
In addition to the registration and permit fees required by the Uniform Fire
Safety Act, the Fire Official, with the approval of the Township Committee
of the Township of Union, hereby establishes the following registration and
permit fees:
A. The owner of all businesses, occupancies, buildings, structures or
premises required to be inspected under the Uniform Fire Code shall
apply annually to the Fire Prevention Bureau for a certificate of
registration upon forms provided by the Fire Official. An owner shall be
in violation for failure to return such forms to the Fire Prevention
Bureau and/or Fire Official within 30 days of receipt. If ownership is
transferred, whether by sale, assignment, gift, reorganization,
foreclosure or any other method, the new owner shall file with the Fire
Prevention Bureau an application for a certificate of registration after
notification by the Fire Prevention Bureau and/or Fire Official.
(1) Exemptions:
(a) Owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings.
(b) Occupancies required to register with the Division of
Community Affairs as life hazard use groups per the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
B. Vacant buildings, which create a fire hazard, shall be charged and
inspected according to the previous use of the building.
C. The local enforcing agency shall periodically inspect such premises.
These inspections shall be made in accordance with the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code at an annual cycle and as often as may be necessary
for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere
with fire operations, endanger life, or any conditions constituting
violations of the provision or intent of the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code.
A. Local registration fees. The following buildings, uses and premises
contained in this section shall be subject to a fee when the business is
inspected, but in no case shall a fee be collected more than one time per
year.
§ 285-16 FIRE LIENS § 285-17
281:537
Use Group Fee
A-Assembly
A-1 Eating establishments maximum
occupancy load under 50
$25
A-2 Takeout food service (no seating) $50
A-3 Churches, synagogues or other houses of
worship
N/C
A-4 Recreation centers, multipurpose rooms
occupancy load under 50
$50
A-5 Condominium centers, fraternal
organizations, libraries occupancy load
under 50
$50
A-6 Senior citizen centers occupancy load
under 50
$50
B-Business
B-1 All business/professional use less than
1,000 square feet
$25
B-2 All business/professional use 1,000
square feet to less than 2,500 square feet
$50
B-3 All business/professional use 2,500
square feet to less than 5,000 square feet
$75
B-4 All business/professional use 5,000
square feet to less than 7,500 square feet
$100
B-5 All business/professional use 7,500
square feet to less than 10,000 square
feet
$150
B-6 All business/professional use 10,000
square feet to less than 20,000 square
feet
$200
B-7 All business/professional use 20,000
square feet or more
$250
M-Mercantile
M-1 Mercantile use less than 2,500 square
feet
$50
M-2 Mercantile use 2,500 square feet to less
than 5,000 square feet
$75
M-3 Mercantile use 5,000 square feet to less
than 12,000 square feet
$100
M-4 Mercantile use 12,000 square feet or
more
$125
F-Factory
§ 285-17 UNION CODE § 285-17
281:538
§ 285-18. Local permits.
In addition to the permits required by the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the
following safety permits are required, and the annual fee shall be paid as
set forth below:
Use Group Fee
F-1 Factory use less than 2,500 square feet $75
F-2 Factory use 2,500 square feet to less than
5,000 square feet
$100
F-3 Factory use 5,000 square feet to less than
12,000 square feet
$200
F-4 Factory use 12,000 square feet or more $250
S-Storage
S-1 All storage use less than 2,500 square
feet
$50
S-2 All storage use 2,500 square feet to less
than 5,000 square feet
$50
S-3 All storage use 5,000 square feet to
12,000 square feet
$100
S-4 All storage use 12,000 square feet or
more
$150
A. Class 1 permits.
(1) The storage or handling of Class I flammable liquids in closed
containers of aggregate amounts of more than one gallon but less
than 10 gallons within a building, or more than one gallon but less
than 60 gallons outside a building.
(2) The storage or handling or Class II or Class IIIA combustible liquids
in closed containers of aggregate amounts of more than five gallons
but less than 25 gallons inside a building, or more than 10 gallons
but less than 60 gallons outside a building.
(3) The storage, handling or use of one to 10 thirty-three-pound
liquefied petroleum gas cylinders for use as a motor fuel.
(4) The storage, handling or sale in an occupancy other than
residential of liquefied petroleum gas in cylinders of any size
having an aggravate capacity of less than 60 pounds when utilized
or offered as a fuel source for portable cooking, portable heating or
flame-producing devices.
(5) The occasional use of any room in a multipurpose building with a
maximum permitted occupancy of less than 100 persons for
amusement, entertainment or mercantile purpose.
§ 285-17 FIRE LIENS § 285-18
281:539
B. Class 2 permits.
(1) Mobile food vendors when flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum
gas are utilized for food preparation or warming.
(2) The storage, handling or use of 11 to 20 thirty-three-pound
liquefied petroleum gas cylinders for use as a motor fuel.
(3) The handling, storage, use or sale of cut evergreen and/or pine-type
Christmas trees, branches or bundles of pine or other evergreentype
boughs and/or grave covers, wreaths and similar decorations
made of pine or evergreen-type boughs or branches.
(4) The storage, handling or sale in any occupancy other than
residential of liquefied petroleum gas in cylinders of any size
having an aggregate capacity of 60 pounds or more but less than
150 pounds when utilized or offered as fuel sources for portable
cooking, potable heating or flame-producing devices.
C. Class 3 permits.
(1) The storage or use at normal temperatures and pressures of less
than 2,000 cubic feet of flammable compressed gas or less than
6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
(2) The storage or use of 10 gallons or less of liquid oxygen, flammable
cryogenic liquid or cryogenic oxidizers, or the storage of 500
gallons or less of nonflammable, nontoxic cryogenic liquids.
(3) The storage or handling of (except medicines, beverages,
foodstuffs, cosmetics and common consumer items when packaged
according to common accepted practices):
(a) Fifty-five gallons or less of corrosive liquids.
(b) Five hundred pounds or less of oxidizing materials.
(c) Ten pounds or less of organic peroxides.
(d) Five hundred pounds or less of nitro methane.
(e) One thousand pounds or less of ammonium nitrate.
(f) Ten pounds or less of flammable solids.
D. Local permit fee schedule.
(1) Class 1 permits: $25 to $50.
(2) Class 2 permits: $50 to $75.
(3) Class 3 permits: $100.
E. All nonprofit organizations must take out a permit, but will not be
required to pay a fee.
§ 285-18 UNION CODE § 285-19
281:540
§ 285-19. Fees.
§ 285-20. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. All uses requiring registration fees and/or permits shall receive invoices
prior to the current certificate of inspection expiration. All fees shall be
paid within 30 days of receipt of invoice.
B. When more than one registered use exists under one ownership at a
given location, the highest use shall be registered at the full scheduled
fee and subsequent uses at 1/2 the scheduled fee.
C. Unpaid fees outstanding after the 30th day shall result in a penalty of
an amount equal to double the application registration fee, but not less
than $200 or more than $1,000 for each registration as established by
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-2:12.
(1) The enforcing agency, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2:12, may
initiate said enforcement in the Union Municipal Court pursuant to
the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11.
(2) Following the expiration of a ninety-day period, the Township
Committee may by resolution approve the amount of the fees,
whereupon the same shall become a lien against the property,
collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolutions approving
the fees shall be certified by the Township Clerk and filed with the
Tax Collector of the Township, who shall be responsible for
collection thereof, and a copy of the resolution shall be sent by
certified mail to the owner.
A. Enforcement, violations and penalties shall be managed in conformity
with the Uniform Fire Safety Act, The Uniform Fire Code, and all other
laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.6, all permit fees and other
fees provided for or allowed by this article and any penalties collected
pursuant hereto shall be collected and retained fully on behalf of the
Bureau and shall be appropriated by the governing body to the Bureau
for the purpose of enforcing this code, operating the local enforcing
agency, advancing local fire prevention interests and training.
§ 285-19 FIRE LIENS § 285-20
281:541
Chapter 298
GASOLINE AND AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
§ 298-1. License required for sale or storage of gasoline; fees.
[Amended 5-24-1960 by Ord. No. 1922; 11-25-1975 by Ord. No.
3037A]
§ 298-2. License required for erection of dispenser. [Amended
10-22-1996 by Ord. No. 4477]
No person, firm or corporation shall install or erect upon his, her or its
premises, or upon any public street or sidewalk or elsewhere in the
Township of Union, any gasoline, diesel fuel or oil dispenser or tank for the
storage or sale of gasoline, diesel fuel or oil without first obtaining a license
so to do as hereinafter set forth.
§ 298-3. Application for license; review. [Amended 10-22-1996 by
Ord. No. 4477]
Applications for a license for the sale or storage of gasoline, diesel fuel or
oil shall be made to the Township Clerk, in triplicate, upon forms supplied
by the Township Clerk, signed by the applicant, setting forth in detail the
location at which the same are to be sold or stored and containing on
said application the written consent of the owner of the premises, if the
said premises is not owned by the applicant, and setting forth other data
that may be material, and each such application shall be accompanied by
detailed plans, including a plot plan of any dispenser or structure proposed
A. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the sale of gasoline or in
the sale of oil or motor oil without a license first had and obtained from
the Township Committee.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install or erect
upon his, her or its property any tank for the storage of gasoline or oil
for the personal use and accommodation of such person, firm or
corporation without first receiving a license from the Township
Committee. Such license shall be effective for a period of one year
commencing the first day of January of each year. The annual license
fee for each such license so issued shall be the sum of $125; provided,
however, that in the event the license is issued subsequent to July 1, the
fee therefor shall be $60. [Added 11-25-1975 by Ord. No. 3038;
amended 12-13-1988 by No. 3997; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
§ 285-20 UNION CODE § 298-3
298:542
to be used in the sale or storage of gasoline, diesel fuel or oil or in the
operation of said station. A copy of said application shall be submitted,
together with the said plans to the Construction Code Official, the Chief
of the Fire Department and the Plumbing Inspector, who shall certify,
in writing, to the Township Clerk that the application and plans are in
conformity with all municipal regulations within the scope of their
supervision.
§ 298-4. Fees; expiration of license. [Amended 5-24-1960 by Ord.
No. 1922; 11-25-1975 by Ord. No. 3037A]
§ 298-5. Transferability of license; fee. [Amended 11-25-1975 by
Ord. No. 3037A]
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be transferred
upon payment of a transfer fee of $5.
§ 298-6. Compliance required.
A license for the sale of gasoline, diesel fuel or oil issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall become void and of no effect unless, within
90 days from the date of granting thereof, the station from which said sales
are to be conducted shall be actually in lawful operation and in conformity
with the ordinances and regulations of the Township affecting such station.
§ 298-7. Distance from street. [Amended 10-22-1996 by Ord. No.
4477]
No gasoline, diesel fuel or oil dispenser or structure for the sale or storage
of gasoline, diesel fuel or oil to be used, or usable, in connection with
automobiles or other motor vehicles shall be located nearer than 15 feet to
any street line.
§ 298-8. Distance from certain buildings.
No permit shall be issued or granted for the erection or enlargement of
a public automobile garage or commercial garage, or for a motor vehicle
service station, or for the conversion to any such use of any premises not
A. A minimum annual fee of $125 shall be paid for each license issued
under this chapter for the sale of gasoline and/or oil, provided that if the
license is intended to apply to more than six dispensers, then an
additional annual fee of $15 shall be paid for every dispenser in excess
of six dispensers, provided that, when a license is issued after the first
day of July in any year, the fee shall be $60, plus the additional fee of $7
for every dispenser in excess of six dispensers. [Amended 12-14-1993
by Ord. No. 4282; 10-22-1996 by Ord. No. 4477; 9-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 4745]
B. Each such license shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year
of issue.
§ 298-3 GASOLINE AND AUTOMOBILE SERVICE § 298-8
298:543
theretofore used for such purpose or purposes, if any part of the premises
intended or used for the location of such proposed public automobile garage
or commercial garage or of such proposed motor vehicle service station is
within a distance of 200 feet from any of the following buildings:
§ 298-9. Commercial garages.
A "commercial garage," as defined by and coming within the purview of
this chapter, shall be considered any place intended or used for the storage
of one or more business automobiles or commercial trucks or other selfpropelled
commercial vehicles owned and used by a person, firm or
corporation and operated or intended to be operated for business or
commercial purposes; provided, however, that a private garage located on
premises of a private dwelling or on premises of a multifamily dwelling and
used incidentally, but not chiefly, for the storage of a business automobile
or commercial truck or other self-propelled commercial vehicle shall not be
construed to be a commercial garage.
§ 298-10. Public automobile garages.
A "public automobile garage," as defined by and coming within the purview
of this chapter, shall be considered any place intended or used for the
general public storage of one or more automobiles or parts of automobiles
or other self-propelled vehicles, not, however, including motorcycles,
whether such storage is in connection with purposes of manufacture, repair,
exhibition, demonstration, sale, rental, hire, painting, adjustment or
equipment or any other purpose.
§ 298-11. Violations and penalties.171
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
A. A public school.
B. A duly organized school giving regular instructions at least five days
per week for at least eight months or more a year.
C. A hospital.
D. A church.
E. A theater or opera house or other building used or intended to be used
for theatrical or operatic purposes or for public entertainment.
F. A public library.
G. A public art museum.
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 298-8 UNION CODE § 298-11
298:544
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 302
GOLF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 164.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 216.
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 415.
§ 302-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall construct or maintain, or cause to
be erected, constructed or maintained, any miniature golf course or any
golf driving course or golf driving tee upon his, its or their premises, or
elsewhere in the Township of Union, without a license first had and obtained
from the Township Committee of the Township of Union.
§ 302-2. Miniature golf course license fee. [Amended 12-13-1988 by
Ord. No. 3997; 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282]
There shall be paid for each license issued for the construction or
maintenance of any such miniature golf course a license fee of $500, for a
term of not greater than one year, expiring on December 31 of the year in
which said license is issued.
§ 302-3. Driving course license fee. [Amended 11-25-1975 by Ord.
No. 3039]
There shall be paid for each license issued for the construction or
maintenance of any such golf driving course or golf driving tee a license fee
of $75 for a term of not greater than one year, expiring on December 31 of
the year in which the said license is issued.
§ 302-4. Application requirements.
No such license for the construction or maintenance of any miniature golf
course, or for the construction or maintenance of any golf driving course
or golf driving tee, shall be issued until the applicant shall first have filed
with the Township Clerk an application specifying the premises on which it
is intended to install such miniature golf course or such golf driving course
or golf driving tee, and the name and address of the owner of the premises.
§ 298-11 GOLF § 302-5
302:545
§ 302-5. Nontransferability.
No license for the construction or maintenance of any miniature golf course,
or for the construction or maintenance of any golf driving course or golf
driving tee, issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be
transferable.
§ 302-6. Revocation or suspensions.
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to revocation for violation of any ordinances, rules or regulations of the
Township of Union, which may pertain to the construction or maintenance
of such miniature golf courses or such golf driving courses or driving tees.
§ 302-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-9-1938 by Ord. No.
889: 11-25-1975 by Ord. No. 3039; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879;
12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998172]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by
the municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding
90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date
of this section. Each day that any violation continues may be considered a
separate offense.
Chapter 313
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Damaging of buildings and fixtures — See Ch.
198.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
§ 313-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall purposely or knowingly vandalize, deface or otherwise
damage the tangible property of another by painting, writing, drawing or
otherwise inscribing in any fashion or materials what is commonly known as
"graffiti." For the purposes of this chapter, "graffiti" shall include any form
of painting, writing or inscription, regardless of the content of same or the
nature of the materials used in the commission of the act.
§ 313-2. Sale of spray paint containers and indelible markers.173
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 302-5 UNION CODE § 313-2
313:546
§ 313-3. Prosecution of persons under 18.
If, at any time of the offense charged, any persons shall be under the age
of 18 years, the Family Part of the Superior Court of New Jersey shall have
exclusive jurisdiction of the trial of such infant or infants, and such infant
or infants shall be surrendered to the Family Part of the Superior Court of
New Jersey, and the case, including all papers and process thereto, shall be
transferred to said Court as provided in N.J.S.A. 2C:4-11.
§ 313-4. Violations and penalties; restoration of property. [Amended
7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4342]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tip marker, china marker or similar
device that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing
surface 1/2 inch or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PERSON — Any retail establishment.
B. Prohibited conduct.
(1) No person shall sell or offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer
any spray paint container or indelible marker unless such spray
paint container or indelible marker is held for sale or transfer in an
enclosed device which is constructed to prevent removal of the
merchandise except by authorized attendants or is stored, out of
sight, in such a way as to prevent free access to the merchandise by
the public.
(2) No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint container
or indelible marker to a minor, unless said minor is accompanied by
a parent or legal guardian at the time of purchase or transfer.
(3) No minor shall, at the time of purchase of items specified in
Subsection B(2), knowingly furnish fraudulent evidence of majority,
including but not limited to a motor vehicle operator's license, a
registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service
Act, an identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces
or any document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal
government.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or
to performance of 90 days of community service and/or to a fine not
exceeding $1,250 at the discretion of the Municipal Court.174
173. Editor's Note: This section was added to former Ch. 115, Buildings and Fixtures,
Damaging of, 8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 4348. This section was moved to this chapter at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 313-2 GRAFFITI § 313-4
313:547
§ 313-5. Parents responsible for damage.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of an infant under 18 years of age who fails or neglects to
exercise reasonable supervision and control of such infant shall be liable in
a civil action for any destruction or damage caused by such infant offender
under § 313-1 above.
§ 313-6. Reward program.175
The Township may offer rewards, not exceeding $500 each, for the
detection and apprehension of any person guilty of purposely or knowingly
damaging tangible property of another by an act of graffiti. A reward is to be
payable after a conviction out of those funds of the Township made available
therefor. The reward shall be paid to any person who the Township, acting
upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, may deem entitled thereto,
but no reward shall be paid to any public employee whose duty it is to
investigate or to enforce the law or to the employee's spouse, child or
parent, living in the same household.
Chapter 317
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 173.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 216.
Christmas trees — See Ch. 228.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 324.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Outdoor displays — See Ch. 390, Art. II.
Sales — See Ch. 428.
B. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall have the
authority to order that the offender be responsible for cleaning,
repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged property to the
condition it was in prior to being damaged. In the event that the
offender is unable, for any reason, to comply with the above, the
Municipal Court shall have the authority to order that said offender
make the necessary monetary restitution to restore the property to its
original undamaged condition.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
175. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 313-4 UNION CODE § 313-6
313:548
ARTICLE I
Transient Merchants; Itinerant Vendors
[Adopted 11-24-1931 by Ord. No. 739A (Ch. 168, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 317-1. Definitions; determination of definition. [Amended
11-13-1973 by Ord. No. 2821]
§ 317-2. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor as defined in this article, without first having obtained from the
Clerk of the Township a license as hereinafter set forth, and without first
having paid the fee herein named.
§ 317-3. Application for license.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS or ITINERANT VENDORS — Include
persons, corporations or partnerships, principal or agent, who engage
in a merchandising business in the Township of Union with intent to
close out or discontinue such business within a period of 180 days from
the date of commencement and including those who, for the purpose
of carrying on such business, hire or lease or occupy any building,
structure or railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such goods,
wares and merchandise; provided, however, that nothing in this article
shall be construed to affect the sale of fruits, vegetables and farm
products, such as meat, poultry, butter and eggs.
B. The determination of whether or not an applicant for the license
hereinafter mentioned is a transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall
be under the direction of the Clerk of the Township, who may consider,
in such determination, the fact that an applicant presents a paid tax bill
indicating that he is a taxpayer in the Township.
A. Any applicant for a license as such transient merchant or itinerant
vendor shall make application, in writing, to the Clerk of the Township,
which application shall set forth, under oath, the number of days the
applicant proposes to engage in such business, together with a specific
statement as to the location of such goods, wares, merchandise or
bankrupt stock by street and number and whether on the premises from
which it is to be sold or in warehouses or storage.
B. Such application shall also set forth, under oath, the name or names
and residences of the owners or persons in whose interest such
business is conducted, the average quantity and kind, as nearly as can
be, and the value of the stock of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt
stock intended to be sold or exposed for sale in the Township of Union,
and also set forth all the names and post office addresses of the persons
§ 317-1 GRAFFITI § 317-3
313:549
§ 317-4. Licensing official; license fee; separate licenses required.
[Amended 11-13-1973 by Ord. No. 2821]
§ 317-5. Bond requirements.
Before a license as herein provided shall issue, the applicant shall execute
and deliver to the licensing official of the municipality a good and sufficient
bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties, to be approved by said
licensing official, equal in the amount to 25% of the value of the stock of
goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, as shown in the declarations
and disclosures required under the provisions of this article, but in no
event shall the bond be less than $1,000 in amount, and said bond shall
remain in force for one year and shall be conditioned to indemnify and
pay said Township any penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this article and shall also, by its terms, be
conditioned to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser of goods, wares,
merchandise or bankrupt stock in a sum equal to at least the amount of
any payment or payments such purchaser may have been induced to make
through the misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of such goods,
wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, whether said misrepresentations
were made by the owners or their agents, servants or employees, either at
the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character
whatsoever printed or circulated with reference to said stock of goods,
wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, or any part thereof.
or corporations from which goods making up the stock were or are to be
purchased, and the Clerk of the Township, in arriving at the valuation,
may require the submission of bills or invoices of such goods, wares,
merchandise or bankrupt stock.
A. The Clerk of the Township is hereby designated as the licensing official
of the Township of Union, for the purposes of this article.
B. Upon compliance with the provisions of this article, affecting such
licenses, and upon the payment by the applicant to the Clerk of the
Township of the sum of $500, which sum is hereby designated as the fee
for such license, the Clerk of the Township shall issue to the applicant a
license as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor, and such license
shall be effectual in favor of the person to whom it is issued, for the
period of 180 days from the day of the commencement of said sale.
C. A separate license must be obtained for each branch, establishment or
separate place of business in which the trade, following, profession or
occupation of a transient merchant or itinerant vendor, as defined in
this article, is carried on, and for each such license, there shall be paid
the fee hereinabove mentioned, and each such license shall authorize
the person, corporation or partnership obtaining it to carry on, pursue
or conduct the business of a transient merchant or itinerant vendor only
at the location or place of business which is indicated thereby.
§ 317-3 UNION CODE § 317-6
313:550
§ 317-6. Applicant to nominate Clerk as lawful authorized agent.
Before a license as herein provided for shall issue, the applicant shall
also file with the Township Clerk an instrument in writing nominating
and appointing said Township Clerk his true and lawful agent, with full
power and authority to acknowledge service or notice of process for and
on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters connected with or
arising out of said license, and the bond provided for in this article or for the
performance of the conditions of said bond or for any branch thereof, which
said instrument in writing so nominating and appointing the Township Clerk
as such agent, shall contain recitals to the effect that the applicant for said
license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be
made upon said agent and when so made shall be taken and held to be as
valid as if personally served upon the person applying for said license under
this article, according to the laws of this or any other state, and waiving
all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or
manner of service.
§ 317-7. Certain organizations and societies exempted. [Amended
11-13-1973 by Ord. No. 2821]
Nothing in this article contained shall apply to or require the obtaining of
a license by any charitable or religious society that shall conduct sales of
goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, when the proceeds thereof
shall be applied to the payment of the expenses thereof and to the
charitable or religious object for which such charitable or religious society
exists. Said charitable or religious society conducting any such sale shall,
within 30 days from the termination thereof, file an accounting with the
Township Clerk showing the receipts and disbursements in connection with
said sale and the proceeds thereof that were retained by said charity.
§ 317-8. Violations and penalties; failure to secure license or file
statement. [Amended 11-13-1973 by Ord. No. 2821; 10-28-1986 by
Ord. No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998176]
Any transient merchant or itinerant vendor of goods, wares, merchandise
or bankrupt stock, as defined in this article, who shall offer for sale or sell
any goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, without first paying to
the licensing official of the municipality the license fee as herein required,
or who shall fail to secure the license provided for herein, or who shall
neglect or refuse to file the statement provided for herein, or who shall
make a false or fraudulent representation therein or falsely represent by
advertising or otherwise that such goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt
stock are in whole or in part damaged goods saved from fire, or make
any false statement as to the previous history or character of such goods,
wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, or shall fail to file the bond required
under this article, or shall fail to nominate said licensing official his agent
upon whom service can be made for the purpose mentioned herein, or shall
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 317-6 GRAFFITI § 317-8
313:551
refuse or neglect to comply with the requirements of this article in any
part, shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 317-8 UNION CODE § 317-8
313:552
ARTICLE II
Hucksters, Hawkers and Peddlers
[Adopted 12-10-1931 by Ord. No. 740A (Ch. 168, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 317-9. License required; exemptions. [Amended 3-22-1955 by Ord.
No. 1577]
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of huckster,
hawker, peddler, soliciting sales or contractual agreements in the Township
of Union in the County of Union, without first applying for and obtaining
a license in the manner herein provided and paying the fee required for
said license; provided, however, that the fee shall be waived in the case
of persons exempt from payment of such fee by any statute of this state
or any federal enactment or provision, and provided, further, that nothing
herein contained shall prevent farmers and gardeners from selling, without
license, the products of the farm or garden in the Township of Union owned
or occupied by them, and provided, further, that the fee shall be waived in
the case of any non-profit-making vendor, such "non-profit-making vendor"
being herein defined as a person who sells goods, the proceeds of which
are devoted exclusively to the purposes of a philanthropic, charitable or
religious society, on whose behalf he acts as an agent without pay.
§ 317-10. Application; procedure; approval. [Amended 3-22-1955 by
Ord. No. 1577; 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 3427A]
A. Application procedure.
(1) Application for such license shall be in writing and shall set forth
the kind of goods or merchandise to be sold or the purpose for
which the canvass or solicitation shall be made by the applicant,
the name, address, age and description of the applicant, and shall
be accompanied by two photographs of the applicant taken within
30 days prior to the application, of a size approximately 2 1/2
inches by 2 1/2 inches, on thin paper, having a light background
and clearly showing a front view of the applicant's face, one of
which is to be pasted or attached to the application, and the other
to be attached to the license, if granted.
(2) Such application form shall require the applicant to give the
following information concerning himself:
(a) Name.
(b) Specific addresses for the past five years.
(c) Date and place of birth and citizenship.
(d) Marital status.
(e) Arrest or conviction at any time of any crime or for disorderly
conduct, or of any municipal ordinance or regulation.
§ 317-9 GRAFFITI § 317-10
313:553
(f) Name and addresses of employers for the past five years and
respective dates of employment.
(g) Identification and location of sponsor of project for which
permit is sought.
(3) By the filing of the application, the applicant consents to the
impression of fingerprints being taken by the Township and of the
filing thereof with proper federal and state authorities.
(4) Such application shall be made to and licenses issued by the Chief
of Police, after investigation by the Police Department.
(5) No license shall be granted until after an interval of 10 days from
the presentation of a proper application for purposes of
investigation and report thereon by the Police Department. This
period may be waived upon consent of the Chief of Police for
appropriate cause.
(6) Each license shall set forth the goods authorized to be sold or the
purpose for which the canvass or solicitation is made and the time
for which it is granted.
(7) No person shall sell, or offer to sell, any articles, except those
permitted under such license, nor canvass or solicit for any purpose
other than that authorized by such license, and said license shall be
carried by the licensee and exhibited upon demand of any resident
or citizen of the Township or any member of the Police Department.
(8) Upon the filing of the application hereinabove provided, the
applicant shall deposit the sum of $5. In the event that the
application for a permit is denied, said fee shall be returned to the
applicant. If the license is granted, said deposit of $5 shall be
credited towards the license fee.
(9) Upon the granting of the license hereinabove mentioned, each
licensee, upon depositing $5 and as security therefor, shall be given
a badge of such size and design as may be determined by the
Township Committee. Each licensee is required to wear said badge
at all times that said licensee is operating under the license, and
said badge shall be worn on the outer garment at chest level and be
visible at all times, and no licensee shall perform any of the acts
authorized under this article, unless said badge is so worn. Each
badge must be returned to the officer in charge of police
headquarters at the end of each and every day and may be reissued
to said licensee on each day for which his license authorizes him to
operate within the Township of Union; and each licensee shall leave
with the officer in charge of police headquarters as a deposit, each
time that the badge is issued to him, the sum of $5, which said sum
of $5 shall be returned to said licensee each time that the badge is
returned to the officer in charge of police headquarters.
§ 317-10 UNION CODE § 317-10
313:554
§ 317-11. License fees. [Amended 11-25-1975 by Ord. No. 3041]
(10) The failure to return said badge as aforesaid without a justifiable
reason therefor shall, in addition to any other penalty herein
provided for, result in the forfeiture of the license issued to said
licensee.
(11) Each such license shall be effective only for the period for which it
was issued.
B. Approval.
(1) The approval hereinabove mentioned of the application shall be
granted unless the Chief of Police finds any of the following:
(a) That the criminal record of the applicant shows that he has
been convicted (including pleas of nolo contendere and
forfeitures) of a crime involving moral turpitude or of a felony,
within five years from the date of the application.
(b) That the applicant has been convicted (including pleas of nolo
contendere and forfeitures) of more than one misdemeanor,
excluding Motor Vehicle Code violations, within five years from
the date of the application.
(c) That the applicant has made false, fraudulent or misleading
material statements in the application.
(d) That the applicant has been convicted (including pleas of nolo
contendere and forfeitures) of a violation of the laws of any
jurisdiction relating to selling, vending, soliciting, peddling,
hawking or canvassing, within five years from the date of the
application.
(e) That the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving a
fraud upon any person, whether or not such fraud was
perpetrated in the course of his conducting a solicitation
activity.
(f) That as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character
and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory.
(g) Complaints were received against the applicant by authorities
in the last municipalities in which the applicant conducted
similar activities for which the application is filed.
(2) If it is found and determined as a result of such investigation that
mitigating circumstances exist as to any of the foregoing, then
notwithstanding the same, the application may be approved.
A. There shall be paid for each license issued a fee or fees as follows:
§ 317-10 GRAFFITI § 317-11
313:555
§ 317-12. Nontransferability.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable,
and no person except the one named in the license shall be entitled to the
privileges and authority conferred by such license.
§ 317-13. Licenses granted to citizens.
Licenses under this article shall be granted only to citizens of the United
States.
§ 317-14. Record of applications. [Amended 12-11-1979 by Ord. No.
3427]
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of applications and licenses issued
and shall remit to the Township Treasurer before the end of each month all
fees paid for the issuance of licenses during the preceding month.
§ 317-15. Enforcement regulations.
The Township Committee is authorized to make rules and regulations
governing the issuance of such permits and the keeping of records thereof
as may be deemed necessary by the Committee for the proper enforcement
of this article.
§ 317-16. Use of vehicles.
In case any licensee under this article shall use a cart, wagon, dray,
wheelbarrow or any other vehicle in connection with hawking, huckstering
or peddling of goods, there shall be issued to such licensee two plates to be
furnished by the Township, which shall bear the name of the municipality,
the number of the license, the year during which the same shall be in force
and said plates shall be fastened securely on the sides of such vehicle in
a conspicuous position, and there shall be painted upon each side of every
such cart, wagon, dray, wheelbarrow or vehicle licensed, as aforesaid, the
(1) Fifteen dollars for each license covering a period of a week, or any
part thereof.
(2) Twenty-five dollars for each license for the period of a year, or any
part thereof greater than one week.
(3) A licensee may use a cart, wagon, dray, wheelbarrow or any other
vehicle in connection with such license, provided that in such case
the fee shall not be less than $25. Payment of $25 for each separate
cart, wagon, dray, wheelbarrow or any other vehicle shall be
inclusive of the fee for each vehicle and the licensed operator
thereof.
B. All licenses shall expire according to their terms, and no license shall
extend beyond the 31st day of December of the year in which it is
issued.
§ 317-11 UNION CODE § 317-16
313:556
name and address of the owner, in plain letters and figures, at least two
inches in height.
§ 317-17. Sale of articles from original packages. [Amended
6-14-1932 by Ord. No. 750A; 11-27-1934 by Ord. No. 800A]
§ 317-18. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license granted hereunder may be revoked by the Township Committee
for violation of any of the provisions of this article or any municipal
ordinance or any state or federal statute or for violating the terms of the
license or for falsification in the application or for other good cause, and in
the event of such revocation, the licensee shall not be entitled to the return
of the license fee paid, or any part thereof. The licensed person whose
license is sought to be revoked shall be granted a hearing, upon his request,
but a license may be suspended by the department issuing the same for no
more than two weeks, without such a hearing.
§ 317-19. Methods of attracting attention. [Amended 6-27-1939 by
Ord. No. 910A; 3-22-1955 by Ord. No. 1577]
A. It shall be unlawful for any huckster, hawker or peddler to sell any
article, other than in original packages, except from sealed scales,
weights and measures, or to have in his possession any unsealed or
altered scales, weights or measures.
B. It shall be unlawful for any huckster, hawker or peddler to conduct any
sales or to ply or carry on his business of huckstering, hawking or
peddling, within a distance of 1,200 feet from any public school or any
public school building of the Township of Union, in the County of Union,
said distance to be measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would
properly walk from said proposed place of sale to said public school or
public school building.
A. Each person to whom a license or permit has been granted under the
provisions of this article and every person privileged to engage in any
business herein described without a license shall use only such methods
of attracting an owner, tenant or resident of a building as may be
reasonable, and no licensee or permittee or other person shall annoy
any such owner, tenant or resident, by use of indecent, offensive or
insulting language, remarks or actions or by unnecessarily knocking
upon a door, taken by the Police Department of or causing a bell or
other alarm to function unnecessarily, and no licensee, permittee or
other person shall delay his departure for any unreasonable length of
time after such tenant, owner or resident has signified his or her lack of
intention to purchase.
B. Approach to any building or property for canvassing or distribution of
advertisements, circulars, literature or for any of the purposes
enumerated in this article shall be made only on the walks or paths
§ 317-16 GRAFFITI § 317-19
313:557
§ 317-20. Construal of provisions.
This article shall not be construed to apply so as unlawfully to interfere with
interstate commerce, nor to any sales conducted pursuant to an order of
any court, nor to require a license for any person selling personal property
at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to salesmen or canvassers doing
business with any factory, store or place of business in the Township of
Union, nor to require a license from merchants having an established place
of business in the Township of Union for soliciting, through themselves
or employees, of orders from customers and delivering the same, but the
provisions in this article as to manner of approach and deportment shall,
nevertheless, apply.
§ 317-21. Canvassing or soliciting. [Amended 8-9-1938 by Ord. No.
888A; 6-27-1939 by Ord. No. 910A; 8-26-1947 by Ord. No. 1131A;
12-26-2017 by Ord. No. 5550]
leading to the front door of said building or property and without
crossing any lawns, shrubbery, flowers or private grounds.
C. It shall be unlawful to distribute advertisements, circulars or literature
or to perform any of the objectives enumerated in this article in such
manner as to litter or cause a littering of any street or public or private
property, or in any manner to cause annoyance to any person.
A. No person shall canvass, solicit for business purposes, distribute
business circulars, handbills, pamphlets or other matter or call from
house to house in the Township of Union for any of the foregoing or
other purposes, without having first applied for and received and paid
for a license in the manner set forth in this article. The application for a
license to distribute business circulars, handbills, pamphlets or other
matter shall be accompanied with a copy of said business circular,
handbill, pamphlet or other matter intended to be distributed along
with a written proof of intended recipients' acknowledgment to receive
such circular, handbills, pamphlets or other matter or call, provided
that in the case of persons exempt from the necessity of a license by
§§ 317-9 and 317-20 of this article, no such persons nevertheless shall
canvass, solicit for business purposes, distribute business circulars,
handbills, pamphlets or other matter or call from house to house in the
Township of Union for any of the foregoing or other purposes without
first setting forth, in writing, to the Police Department of Union
Township the name, address, age and description of such person and
sufficient data to show that such person is authentically engaged in the
business indicated and is so exempt. Upon compliance, as indicated
herein, the Chief of Police shall issue a certificate to such person
indicating his exemption from the necessity of such license, and said
person shall not be required to pay a fee therefor.
B. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to distribute circulars,
handbills, pamphlets or other matter not for a business or commercial
§ 317-19 UNION CODE § 317-21
313:558
§ 317-22. Failure to comply with provisions. [Amended 12-19-1935
by Ord. No. 826; 8-9-1938 by Ord. No. 888; 11-25-1975 by Ord. No.
3041; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998;
12-26-2017 by Ord. No. 5550]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section. In addition to the above, any person, firm or corporation violating
§ 317-21 shall be subject to a fine of no less than $0.50 and no more
than $10 per pamphlet, circular, handbill, coupon book or other matter
distributed.
§ 317-23. Hours of activity. [Added 3-22-1955 by Ord. No. 1577]
No person shall engage in any of the activities authorized under this article
by his license in the Township between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.,
unless authorized by the Township Committee.
§ 317-24. Badge required. [Added 3-22-1955 by Ord. No. 1577]
Every person to whom a certificate or permit is issued as set forth in
§ 317-21 of this article shall be required to wear the badge mentioned in
§ 317-10 of this article and to post the deposit mentioned in said section.
§ 317-25. Nonapplicability. [Added 3-22-1955 by Ord. No. 1577;
amended 12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 3427; 4-22-1980 by Ord. No.
3441-A]
This article shall not apply to any of the following:
purpose and not for pecuniary profit shall first obtain a permit from
the Chief of Police as herein set forth for that purpose but shall not be
required to pay a fee for such permit.
C. Persons, firms or corporations granted certificates or permits as
provided for in this section shall conform to the provisions of this article
relating to orderly conduct as set forth in § 317-19 or elsewhere in this
article.
D. It is hereby declared that the purpose of this provision is for revenue
and also to prevent the molestation of inhabitants, the misuse or
littering of streets or private property and to maintain public order.
A. Employees of any public utility which is subject to the regulation of the
Board of Public Utilities Commission of the State of New Jersey;
provided, however, that such employee shall display the identification
badge or card issued by his employer.
§ 317-21 GRAFFITI § 317-25
313:559
B. Any person calling upon any occupant of any dwelling or residence or
building in the Township pursuant to a request to do such call.
C. Bona fide members of any church, social, civic, fraternal or
philanthropic organizations; provided, however, that any such member
of any such type of organization shall be required to advise the Chief of
Police of his intention to canvass within the Township of Union, and in
such event, the hours during which said canvassing shall be permitted
shall be between the hours 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
§ 317-25 UNION CODE § 317-25
313:560
Chapter 324
JUNK DEALERS; JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Hawkers, peddlers and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 317.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Littering — See Ch. 354.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Garage and house sales; flea markets — See
Ch. 428, Art. II.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 523.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 589.
§ 324-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in this Township in the business
of junk dealer or engage in the business of conducting or conduct a junkyard
or place for the storage or sale of junk or the sale of automobiles
secondhand or as junk, without first obtaining a license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
§ 324-2. Application for license; review; issuance.
§ 324-3. License fee.
§ 324-4. Expiration of license; fees may be prorated.
A. Each application for a license to conduct a junkyard or the business of a
junk dealer shall be made in writing and shall set forth the name of the
owner of the place, its location, the person making the application and
the area, by square feet, of the space proposed to be licensed. Such
application shall be made to the Clerk of the Township and submitted by
him to the Township Committee. The application should first be
approved by the Construction Code Official and the Fire Department.
Whenever the applicant is not the owner, then the consent of the owner
of the premises shall be endorsed on such application.
B. Licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk upon direction of the
Township Committee.
A. Each application shall be accompanied by the annual license fee to be
due thereon, which shall be returned if the license is not granted.
B. For carrying on the business of a junkyard, the annual license fee shall
be $500.
A. Each license shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in
which it was issued.
§ 317-25 JUNK DEALERS; JUNKYARDS § 324-4
324:561
§ 324-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days.
Chapter 339
(RESERVED)
Chapter 345
LIBRARY
§ 345-1. Keeping books overtime prohibited; notice.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material, video
tape or any other article borrowed from the Free Public Library of the
Township of Union after 30 days have elapsed from the date of posting
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice demanding return
thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished to the library.
§ 345-2. Damaging books and other library property.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, disfigure, damage or
destroy any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph
recording, video tape, audio-visual material or other article, or any part
thereof, which is borrowed from, owned by or in the custody of such library.
§ 345-3. False registration; misuse of library cards.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address, or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing a book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction,
phonograph recording, audio-visual material, video tape or other article
from said library.
B. If, at the time of the granting of the license, less than six months of the
current year shall have elapsed, the licensee shall pay the full annual
license fee, and if more than six months of the current year shall have
elapsed at the time such license is granted, then the fee to be paid shall
be 1/2 the annual fee.
§ 324-4 UNION CODE § 345-4
345:562
§ 345-4. Violations and penalties.177
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or to
performance of 90 days of community service and/or to a fine not exceeding
$1,250 at the discretion of the Municipal Court.
Chapter 350
LICENSES AND PERMITS
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 345-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 345-4
350:563

ARTICLE I
Late Fees and Expiration
[Adopted 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4286 (Ch. 174A, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 350-1. Penalty for late payment.
Any licensee may make application for a new license for the succeeding
year and pay the required fee therefor on or before the expiration date of
any license or licenses issued to him for the current year. Whenever any
application and license fee payment therefor is not received on or before the
expiration date of any license issued for the current year, and the licensee
continues to engage in the business or activity for which the license was
issued, a penalty of 10% of the amount of the license fee shall be imposed
and collected, and an additional 5% of the original fee shall be added on the
last day of each calendar month after the expiration date.
§ 350-2. Continuance after expiration; violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
In addition to the above penalty provision, it shall be unlawful for a licensee
to continue to engage in any business or activity after his license therefor
has expired, and any violation thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,250, imprisonment for not more than 90 days, community service
for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof, for each day of said
continuance, upon conviction of the same in the Union Township Municipal
Court.
§ 350-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 350-2
350:565

ARTICLE II
Payment of Delinquent Taxes and Assessments
[Adopted 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 4803 (Ch. 174A, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 350-3. Conditional issuance or renewal.
As a condition for the issuance or renewal of any license or permit issued
by, or requiring the approval of, the Township, the applicant, if he is the
owner thereof, must pay any delinquent property taxes or assessments on
the property wherein the business or activity for which the license or permit
is being sought or wherein the business or activity is to be conducted.
§ 350-4. Suspension or revocation of license or permit.
The Township may suspend or revoke the license or permit of any licensee,
who is an owner of the property upon which the licensed business or activity
is conducted, if the licensee has failed to pay the taxes due on the property
for at least three consecutive quarters. Upon payment of the delinquent
taxes or assessments, the license or permit shall be restored.
§ 350-5. Exception for alcoholic beverage license or permit.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act.178
178. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. See also Ch. 160, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 350-3 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 350-5
350:567

ARTICLE III
Raffle and Bingo Licensing
[Adopted 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. 5032]
§ 350-6. Municipal Clerk as issuing authority.
The Municipal Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to act as the issuing
authority to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses.
§ 350-6 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 350-6
350:569
Chapter 354
LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 490.
§ 354-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a fee for the preparation of a
license to operate, for each limousine:
§ 354-2. Compliance.
All persons licensed under this chapter must comply with N.J.S.A. 48:16-13
to 48:16-22.7, which sets forth all regulations for limousines in the State
of New Jersey, and the Municipal Land Use Code of the Township of Union
which regulates the location of limousines in the Township of Union.
§ 354-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAR FOR HIRE — An owner of a (one) limousine who stores his limousine
at his home in the Township of Union, works for another company located
outside of the Township of Union and who does not operate a limousine
service within the Township of Union as a private business.
EXCLUSIONS — Limousines providing transportation for funeral services.
LIMOUSINE — Includes any automobile or motor car used in the business
of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity in
no event of more than 14 passengers, not including the driver.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — The location of the main place of
business of the limousine company in the Township of Union where
limousine service is conducted, where limousines are dispatched and where
limousine drivers report for duty.[Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 5293]
A. Which owner has his principal place of business in the Township of
Union, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-17;
B. Which owner stores his limousine at his home but works for a limousine
business outside of the Township of Union, i.e., car for hire.
§ 350-6 UNION CODE § 354-4
350:570
§ 354-4. License fee.
The fee for the preparation of the license to operate, for each limousine,
shall be set at $50 per vehicle.
§ 354-5. Insurance policy; issuance of license.
The Clerk of the Township of Union, upon the filing of the required
insurance policy in the amount of $1,500,000 and payment of the fifty-dollar
fee, shall issue, in duplicate, a license to operate, showing that the owner
of the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A.
48:16-13 to 48:16-22.7.
§ 354-6. Insurance provisions.
The license to operate shall recite the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of every limousine
insured thereunder and the registration number of same. In lieu of recital of
insurance information required on the license, the owner of a limousine may
affix to the original license retained within the limousine a notarized letter
from an insurance company containing the same insurance information
required in the recital, which shall constitute proof of insurance coverage,
and which shall also be available for inspection by any police officer in the
state. A copy of the notarized letter shall constitute proof to the Director
of the Division of Motor Vehicles that the applicant has complied with the
insurance provisions.
§ 354-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 358
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves — See Ch. 192.
Graffiti — See Ch. 313.
Junk dealers; junkyards — See Ch. 324.
Parks and recreational areas — See Ch. 397.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 523.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 589.
§ 354-4 LITTERING § 354-7
358:571
§ 358-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and the words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
B. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Includes garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein,
and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other
structure, designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private
residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds or any
river or stream or stormwater sewer traversing such premises, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.[Amended
2-12-1968 by Ord. No. 2451]
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all street, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
river or tributaries thereof or streams or any sanitary or storm sewer,
catch basins or other public ways and any and all public parks,
including municipally owned parking lots, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.[Amended 2-12-1968 by Ord. No. 2451]
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including any used or unconsumed substance or waste
material whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or
other natural or synthetic material, or combination thereof, including
but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, and unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, grass clippings, leaves or other lawn or garden
wastes, glass crockery, scrap metal, junk, newspapers, magazines,
plastic or paper containers, or other packaging or construction
material, plastic, chemicals, dead animals, discarded shopping carts,
tree stumps and limbs, abandoned automobiles, solid market and
industrial wastes and any and all types of solid debris.[Amended
2-12-1968 by Ord. No. 2451; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 4912]
§ 354-7 UNION CODE § 358-1
358:572
§ 358-2. Receptacles.
§ 358-3. Manner of using receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 358-4. Accumulation. [Amended 1-13-1973 by Ord. No. 2826A]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Township, the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free
of litter. In areas zoned Business A or Business B, the owner or occupants
of said premises in accordance with the terms of this section shall cause
said sidewalks in front of said premises to be swept free of any litter that
may be found thereon not later than 10:00 a.m., from Monday to Saturday,
inclusive.
§ 358-5. Places of business.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place, within the Township,
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Township, except in public receptacles or
in authorized private receptacles.
B. Litter receptacles are hereby required to be placed and serviced on a
regular basis at the following locations: sidewalks used by pedestrians
in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a minimum there
shall be no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle; buildings
held out for use by the public, including schools, government buildings,
railroads and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor
locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline
service stations islands: shopping centers; parking lots; trailer parks;
bathing areas: and at special events to which the public is invited,
including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available. [Added 6-28-1988 by Ord. No.
3976]
§ 358-1 LITTERING § 358-5
358:573
business within the Township shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter.
§ 358-6. Drivers or passengers in vehicles.
§ 358-7. Parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Township,
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided herein.
§ 358-8. Posting; notices.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
§ 358-9. Insecure placement of advertisements and handbills.
[Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4219]
It shall be considered unlawful for any person to place, to cause to be
placed or to hire another to place any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited
material of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, building, vehicle, utility
pole, traffic directional sign or any waste disposal container within the
Township of Union in such a careless manner so that it may be removed
solely by natural forces.
§ 358-10. Private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Township, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
A. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the Township
or upon private property. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or
allowed to fall from a vehicle in violation of this chapter, the operator or
owner, or both, of the vehicle shall also be deemed to have violated this
chapter. [Amended 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 4912]
B. Drivers of vehicles shall not leave any type of cargo exposed or
unsecured while the vehicle is in motion, which would allow such cargo
to drop, leak or escape from the vehicle onto the roadway. [Added
6-28-1988 by Ord. No. 3976]
§ 358-5 UNION CODE § 358-10
358:574
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 358-11. Responsibility of owner of private property.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all times,
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 358-12. Open or vacant property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Township, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 358-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-28-1970 by Ord. No.
2592; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879; 4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3963;
12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 358-14. Enforcement. [Added 12-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4424;
amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Health Officer and Department of Public
Works Code Enforcement Division Officers, Division of Solid Waste and
Recycling, as well as the Construction Code Official, shall be designated
as the enforcing officers. The enforcing officers shall be authorized by
the Township Committee to designate as many subcode officials as are
deemed reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
The enforcing officer or his designee is authorized to perform as a law
enforcement officer solely with respect to the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter by being empowered to issue summonses for any violations
of this chapter, in accordance with rules governing the courts of the State
of New Jersey. Members of the Union Township Police Department are also
authorized to enforce this chapter when a littering violation occurs in plain
view of an officer.
§ 358-10 LITTERING § 358-14
358:575
Chapter 362
LOCOMOTION DEVICES, HUMAN-POWERED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 179.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
Motorcycles and similar vehicles — See Ch.
369.
Parks and recreational areas — See Ch. 397.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
§ 362-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public welfare, safety and
convenience and to reduce the safety hazards of pedestrian and vehicular
accidents, injuries and deaths resultant from the operation of such devices
and to prevent the damage and destruction of public property caused by the
operation of such devices and to ensure the safe and unobstructed passage
of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and about the Township of Union.
§ 362-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HUMAN-POWERED LOCOMOTION DEVICE — Includes any skateboard,
skates, sled, toboggan, skis, scooter, big-wheel tricycle or any humanpowered
device designed to be ridden by a person or persons, which has no
steering device or mechanism to steer or control the direction thereof while
being used or ridden, even though the direction may be controlled to some
degree by shifting the feet or weight of the rider during such use.
§ 362-3. Areas where use prohibited. [Amended 12-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 4126]
No person shall use, operate or ride upon any human-powered locomotion
device within the Friberger Park area nor on any public street, public
parking lot, public sidewalk, public tennis court, public paved field hockey
surface, public paved basketball court surface or other public place within
Zones BA, BB and BC within the Township of Union.179
179. Editor's Note: Former § 179-4, Establishment of rules and regulations, which previously
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 358-14 UNION CODE § 362-4
362:576
§ 362-4. Violations and penalties; confiscation of devices.180
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for
the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine
not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding
90 days for each offense. The Judge of said Municipal Court, in his or
her discretion, may, in lieu of the penalties herein set forth, confiscate the
human-powered locomotion device of the offender.
Chapter 369
MOTORCYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 179.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 226.
Human-powered locomotion devices — See
Ch. 362.
Noise — See Ch. 378.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 362-4 MOTORCYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES § 362-4
369:577

ARTICLE I
Minibikes, Scooters and Snowmobiles
[Adopted 10-25-1977 by Ord. No. 3240A (Ch. 184, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 369-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Includes, but is not expressly limited to,
minibikes, motor scooters, go-carts, swamp buggies, mopeds, all-terrain
vehicles, trail bikes and snowmobiles having a helper motor characterized
in that either the maximum piston displacement is less than 50 cubic
centimeters or said motor is rated at not more than 1.5 brake horsepower,
and said bicycle is capable of a maximum speed of no more than 25 miles
per hour on a flat surface.
§ 369-2. Use in certain areas restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit and suffer to be
operated any motorized bicycle as set forth described in § 369-1 hereof on
any public grounds or property, including Township-owned land, which shall
include, but not be limited to, parks, ballparks, recreational areas or any
other governmentally owned property, including all school properties or any
other areas owned by the Board of Education of the Township of Union in
the County of Union.
§ 369-3. Unnecessary and unreasonable noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit and suffer to be
operated a motorized bicycle as set forth and described in § 369-1 hereof,
within the Township of Union in the County of Union, in such manner as
to create loud and unnecessary noise, so as to unreasonably disturb or
interfere with persons in the peaceful and quiet enjoyment of their property
or in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety
of any person.
§ 369-4. Use by officers and employees.
It shall not be unlawful for any Township or School Board officer or
employee or other public employee to operate any motorized bicycle as
set forth and described in § 369-1 hereof for the purpose of maintaining,
repairing or doing work for the Township of Union or for the Board of
Education of the Township of Union or by members of the Police
Department in the performance of their duties.
§ 369-5. Impoundment; storage fee.
A. Any police officer may impound any motorized bicycle as set forth and
described in § 369-1 hereof operated by any person in violation of the
§ 369-1 MOTORCYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES § 369-5
369:579
§ 369-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998182]
provisions of this article or of any statute of the State of New Jersey
regulating the use of such vehicles.
B. The period of impoundment shall run from the date of the alleged
violation until the disposition of the alleged offense by such court of
competent jurisdiction as shall hear the same, and the owner thereof
shall pay the reasonable cost of said removal and storage, which is
hereby fixed at $10 per day, which said charge shall in no event exceed
30 days. If said operator or owner of said motorized bicycle is found not
guilty of said alleged offense, then and in that event there shall be no
removal and storage charge. Said expense of impoundment shall be in
addition to any other fine or penalty levied or collected under the terms
of this article.181
A. Any person under the age of 18 years who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall be cognizable before the Superior Court
of the County of Union.
B. Any person of the age of 18 years or over who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any
other place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners
for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become
effective on the effective date of this section.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 369-5 UNION CODE § 369-6
369:580
ARTICLE II
Motorcycles and Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 12-13-1977 by Ord. No. 3255A (Ch. 184, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 369-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORCYCLE — Motorcycles, motor bikes, bicycles with motor attached
and all motor-operated vehicles of the bicycle or tricycle type, having a
piston displacement of 50 cubic centimeters or more rated in excess of 1.5
brake horsepower and capable of maximum speeds in excess of 25 miles per
hour; whether the motive power is a part thereof or attached thereto, and
having a saddle or seat with driver sitting astride or upon it or a platform
on which the driver stands.
MOTOR-DRAWN VEHICLE — Trailers, semitrailers or any other type of
vehicle drawn by a motor-driven vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular power,
excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks and motorized
bicycles.
§ 369-8. Use in certain areas restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit and suffer to
be operated any motorcycle, motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle as
hereinabove defined, on any public grounds or property, including
Township-owned land which would include, but not be limited to, parks,
ballparks, recreational areas or any other governmentally owned property,
including all school properties or any other areas owned by the Board of
Education of the Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 369-9. Violations and penalties.183
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 369-7 MOTORCYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES § 369-9
369:581
Chapter 373
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves — See Ch. 192.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 207.
Certificates of occupancy for rental
property — See Ch. 221, Art. I.
Condominium and cooperative
conversions — See Ch. 233.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 278.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Rent control — See Ch. 421.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
Liquid-fuel-burning space heaters — See Ch.
467.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
§ 369-9 UNION CODE § 369-9
373:582
ARTICLE I
General Minimum Standards
[Adopted 3-8-1977 by Ord. No. 3173 (Ch. 187, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 373-1. Purpose.
This article is intended to establish standards of maintenance for the safety,
health and welfare of occupants of multiple dwellings.
§ 373-2. Owner's responsibilities.
The owner of any multiple dwelling shall be responsible at all times to the
extent of his responsibilities described herein for the following:
A. Clean and free of infestation and hazards to the health or safety of
occupants and other persons in or near the premises.
B. Avoiding, eliminating or abating any noises, light, odors, radiation or
vibrations arising out of the use or occupancy of the premises which
shall constitute a nuisance that is harmful to the health and well-being
of persons of ordinary sensitivity occupying or using the premises.
C. That every unit of dwelling space shall be so maintained as to be fit for
human use and habitation and to prevent progressive deterioration of
the unit to the detriment of the health, safety and well-being of its
occupants.
D. That the exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be
kept free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions and any hazards to the
health or safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing
the premises. Any of the foregoing conditions shall be promptly
removed and abated by the owner or operator.
E. To keep the premises free of such conditions which include, but which
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
(2) Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage,
constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be
kept pruned and trimmed to prevent any of the foregoing
conditions.184
(3) Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow
which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a
danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
184. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 516, Trees.
§ 373-1 MULTIPLE DWELLINGS § 373-2
373:583
(4) Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, litter, icy
conditions, uncleared snow and excretion of pets and other animals
on paths, walks, stoops and steps, driveways, parking lots and
parking areas and other parts of the premises. Holes and
excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced
and other conditions removed where necessary to eliminate
hazards or unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon
their discovery.
(5) Accumulations of water, vegetation or other matter which might
serve as a source of food or as a harboring or breeding place for
infestation.
(6) Walks, court and other paved areas shall be kept clean and free of
litter, dirt, mud, snow, ice or other conditions, hazardous to
pedestrians.
F. All parts of the premises shall be so graded and, where necessary,
provided with runoff drains and other means to carry off the dispose of
surface waters in such a manner as to eliminate any recurrent or
excessive accumulations of stormwater on the premises without
causing excessive accumulations of water on adjoining properties.
(1) Parts of the premises regularly used by occupants shall drain
within one hour of the termination of any storm creating surface
waters.
(2) Other parts of the premises not covered under Subsection F(1)
hereof shall drain within six hours of the cessation of any such
storm.
G. Foundations of all structures shall be kept, maintained and repaired to
eliminate all exposed holes, cracks and other defects so that the
foundation shall be at all times capable of resisting the penetration of
liquids into the building and be weathertight and serve to protect the
building against infestation. They shall also be maintained to prevent or
correct erosion around footings.
H. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, fence or other
improvement on the premises shall be kept in good repair, and all
exposed surfaces thereof, subject to deterioration, shall be protected
against weathering or deterioration by a protective coating appropriate
for the particular material involved as needed.
(1) All exterior windows and window frames shall be painted with at
least one coat of suitable exterior paint or other preservative as
needed, except where constructed of an approved atmospheric
corrosion-resistant metal or other equivalent material.
(2) The exterior surfaces shall be maintained to eliminate conditions
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, such as
§ 373-2 UNION CODE § 373-2
373:584
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick or excessive
peeling of paint.
(3) The exterior of the building shall be free of loose material that may
create a hazard by falling on persons utilizing the premises.
I. Leaders and drainpipes shall be securely fastened to the building and
maintained in good condition, free of leaks, kept clean and free of
obstructions and shall direct stormwaters into draining systems and
away from the foundation walls of the structure.
J. Sufficient illumination.
(1) Every garage or other accessory structure regularly utilized by
occupants after dark shall be equipped with artificial lighting which
shall be maintained and operated so as to render all parts of the
garage that are unlocked and accessible, visible to occupants and
also to illuminate all areas commonly used by occupants sufficiently
to enable persons of normal vision to traverse from such areas
safely to the point of egress from the garage. In garages or
structures not kept locked, lighting as required herein shall be kept
on continually from 1/2 hour before sunset to 1/2 hour after
sunrise, unless the lighting is connected to a dusk-to-dawn
photoelectric control device. In garages or structures which are
locked at all entrances, lighting may be provided which is operated
manually by individual occupants in lieu of continual night lighting,
and in such cases, the lighting fixtures shall be operable from a
switch located near the point of ingress into the interior of the
space to be lighted. Illumination of common areas shall be situated
so as not to shine into adjacent dwelling units.
(2) Exterior parking areas, pedestrian walkways or other portions of
the premises subject to regular and recurrent use by occupants at
night shall be illuminated continually from 1/2 hour before sunset
to 1/2 hour after sunrise, unless the lighting is connected to a duskto-
dawn photoelectric control device to enable safe passage of
persons of normal vision.
K. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces are to be free of moisture resulting
from liquid penetration from the exterior and shall be provided with
ventilation as required herein to prevent accumulations of moisture and
dampness. Floors of basements and cellars shall have a permanent
surface that is water resistant and capable of being kept broom clean so
as not to create a safety hazard. Subcellars and crawl spaces which are
neither usable nor occupiable need not be permanently surfaces.
L. Walls, ceilings and floors.
(1) All interior walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces in units of
dwelling space shall be kept smooth, clean, free of flaking, loose or
peeling paint, plaster or paper and capable of being maintained
free of visible foreign matter, vermin and in a sanitary condition. If
§ 373-2 MULTIPLE DWELLINGS § 373-2
373:585
and where necessary to accomplish the foregoing or any part
thereof, by reason of the surface material, such interior surfaces
shall be spackled, painted, papered or otherwise provided with a
protective coating as needed but not more frequently than once
every three years. Responsibility for the cost of said painting,
papering, surface preparation or other protective coating shall be
as set forth in the lease to the premises. Where the lease makes no
provision for said cost, it shall be presumed to be the responsibility
of the landlord. It shall also be the responsibility of the landlord
when required to correct conditions under this article other than
normal wear and tear.
(2) All common floors, walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces shall
be kept clean, free from visible foreign matter, sanitary and well
maintained at all times. If necessary to accomplish the foregoing,
these surfaces shall be kept painted, whitewashed, papered,
covered or treated with sealing materials or other protective
coatings as needed.
M. Garbage; receptacles.
(1) Receptacles for the collection of garbage shall be located so as not
to constitute a hazard and located so as to be accessible to the
collecting agency.185
(2) Garbage collection receptacles shall be kept covered, shall be
maintained in good repair and shall be kept in the area designated
for storage of such receptacles. All such receptacles shall be
cleaned and disinfected at least once a week.
N. Screens suited to protect the interior of the building against
mosquitoes, flies and other undesirable insects shall be provided and
kept in good repair for each exterior door and window of each unit of
dwelling space. Screens shall be installed and maintained by the owner
of all such doors and windows at least from May 1 to October 1 of each
year. All operable exterior windows, except those not located in
habitable or occupiable rooms, in a building must be equipped with
screens. Fixed windows need not be provided with screens. Exterior
doors in a unit of dwelling space must be equipped with screens, if the
doors provide any portion of the minimum ventilation area of at least
5% of the floor area of the room or space ventilated. Screens are not
required on windows or exterior doors in habitable rooms and spaces
where a mechanical ventilation system is provided which conforms to
applicable construction codes.
O. There shall be maintained in good operational condition in every
multiple dwelling electrical service, which shall comply with the
electrical requirements in effect at the time the structure first became a
multiple dwelling.
185. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 462, Solid Waste; Recycling.
§ 373-2 UNION CODE § 373-2
373:586
§ 373-3. Responsibility of tenant or lessee.
The tenant or lessee of any multiple dwelling shall be responsible at all
times to the extent of his responsibilities described herein for the following:
P. Lighting fixtures, wall plates and other electrical facilities in bathrooms
and toilet rooms shall be of the type or so located and maintained that
there will be no danger of short-circuiting from splashing of water from
any facility therein. No such fixtures shall be located so as to be
reached from a bathtub or shower enclosure.
A. Upon discovery by a tenant or lessee of any conditions on the premises,
failure of service, or defect in any equipment, which constitutes a
violation hereof, the tenant or lessee shall report the same promptly to
the owner or to the superintendent having charge of the premises.
B. No tenant or lessee or any other person shall:
(1) Remove or render inoperative any self-closing device on any door
which is required by any provision of law to be self-closing, or
cause or permit such door to be held open by any device.
(2) Place any encumbrance on or obstruct any means of egress.
(3) Take down, obscure, alter, destroy or in any way deface any notice,
certificate or sign required to be displayed.
(4) Cause any breach or substitution of materials which would impair
any fire wall or partition required for fire protection.
(5) Destroy safety equipment, empty fire extinguishers or remove fire
hoses from racks.
C. Tenants or lessees shall place all garbage within the receptacles
provided for garbage disposal. Where janitorial service is not required,
they shall place all containers with sufficient frequency to avoid an
unsanitary accumulation in the exterior area or areas set aside for the
same. Garbage, rubbish and other refuse shall not be thrown out of
windows or down dumbwaiters, nor shall garbage and refuse be set out
on stairways or fire escapes or in common hallways.
D. Tenants or lessees of each unit of dwelling space shall be responsible to
the extent of their own use and activities for keeping the interior
thereof safe and sanitary. Tenants or lessees shall prevent any
accumulation of garbage or waste matter, which may become a source
of infestation, a fire hazard or block access to the means of egress from
the unit.
E. Every tenant or lessee shall maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him
in a clean and sanitary condition, shall not deposit any material in any
fixture or sewer system which would cause stoppage of or damage to
properly maintained fixture or sewer systems and shall be responsible
§ 373-2 MULTIPLE DWELLINGS § 373-3
373:587
§ 373-4. Cooking requirements.
No cooking shall be permitted in any unit of dwelling space, unless there is
provision for the following minimum cooking and sanitary facilities:
for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation of
such fixtures.
F. Tenants or lessees shall not damage, remove or destroy screens needed
for the building.
G. Every tenant or lessee of any unit of dwelling space shall be responsible
for removing conditions resulting from the tenants or lessees own
activities or which may result in infestation conditions which are
subject to and under his exclusive control.
H. Every tenant or lessee shall be liable for willfully or maliciously causing
damage to any part of the premises which results in a violation of this
article. Any adult tenants or lessees shall be responsible and liable for
any violation of this section caused by minors under their care or
custody occupying the same unit of dwelling space, if the violations
were created or permitted to continue with the knowledge or
acquiescence or consent of said adult member.
I. No tenant or lessee shall cause excessive grease, soot or other foreign
matter to accumulate on side walls, ceilings or other exposed room
surfaces by improper use of heating or cooking equipment. Cooking
equipment shall be kept clean, free of garbage, food particles and
grease. Hoods, fans and ducts used in conjunction with cooking
facilities shall be kept free of grease and other flammable materials and
shall be cleaned by the tenants or lessees as frequently as is necessary
to eliminate fire hazards.
A. A kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material and drainboard of
appropriate materials, connected to and having available at all times a
supply of hot and cold water under sufficient pressure. The kitchen sink
shall be connected to a sanitary disposal or sewer system.
B. Cooking and preparation of food shall be undertaken only in areas
designated therefor.
C. Means of natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation sufficient to
remove promptly cooking odors to the exterior of the premises, without
first circulating them within the interior habitable space of the unit.
D. Place for storage of food free from infestation.
E. Facilities for refrigeration in good operating condition for protection of
food from spoilage permitting maintenance of temperatures for storage
above 32° F. and below 50° F., without regard to outside temperature.
F. A cooking facility which, if electrical, is connected with safety to an
electrical system of sufficient capacity or, if gas, connected by
§ 373-3 UNION CODE § 373-4
373:588
§ 373-5. Sanitary facilities.
Every unit of dwelling space shall contain the following minimum sanitary
facilities:
§ 373-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building of one or more stories in which three
or more units of dwelling space are occupied or are intended to be occupied
by three or more persons who live independently of each other.
§ 373-7. Inspections; violations; remedies.
If, upon inspection of any multiple dwelling, any violation of this article
is discovered, a written notice of violation will be served upon the owner
thereof requiring said owner to terminate or cause to be terminated such
violation within 60 days of the receipt of said notice, unless the exigencies
of the situation require a shorter period. Authority is hereby given to the
various department heads of the Township of Union to enforce such portions
of this article as lie within their respective jurisdictions and, if need be,
to petition the Superior Court of the State of New Jersey for mandatory
injunctive relief enforcing any order issued by any said department head.
permanent fixtures and tubing to avoid leakage of gas. The use of
gasoline stove or other similar fuel-burning appliances using highly
flammable liquids and the use of portable kerosene stoves or other
similar fuel-burning portable appliances for cooking is prohibited.
G. Cabinets or drawers or other storage areas for utensils, dishes and
other cooking and eating equipment.
A. A toilet equipped with a flushing mechanism.
B. A bathtub or shower or other complete bathing facility.
C. A wash basin in the toilet room or within close proximity thereto.
D. Every bathroom and toilet room shall be of sufficient dimension to
provide 1 1/2 feet clearance in front of each fixture, including but not
limited to toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower.
E. Every toilet, including the toilet seat, wash basin, shower, bath and
other plumbing or sanitary facility forming part of any toilet room or
bathroom, shall be maintained in good operating condition at all times
and shall be kept clean and free of material that might clog the same or
impair its operation and shall drain into a sanitary sewer or other
approved sanitary disposal system.
§ 373-4 MULTIPLE DWELLINGS § 373-8
373:589
§ 373-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998186]
In addition to the remedies herein provided for a violation of the terms of
this article, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of
this article may, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by
the municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding
90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of
this section. Each day that a violation continues to exist under this article
shall be considered a separate offense.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-8 UNION CODE § 373-8
373:590
ARTICLE II
Water Supply
[Adopted 10-12-1976 by Ord. No. 3127 (Ch. 187, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 373-9. Responsibility of owner to supply water.
In every multiple dwelling, as the same is defined in N.J.A.C. 5:10-2.2, the
owner thereof shall provide a water supply as herein provided.
§ 373-10. Compliance with requirements.
Every multiple dwelling shall be connected to a source of and system for
delivery of potable water sufficient to meet the requirements for hot and
cold water at all connected fixtures in accordance with the provisions of the
New Jersey Administrative Code and of the Plumbing Code of the Township
of Union.187
§ 373-11. Hot- and cold-water supply.
Every kitchen sink, bathroom or toilet room, sink, basin, tub or shower shall
be connected to both hot- and cold-water lines and shall be provided with
both hot and cold running water.
§ 373-12. Temperature requirements.
Each building constituting a multiple dwelling as herein defined shall be
served by a hot water distribution system capable of operating even when
the heating system itself is not in operation and of providing all units of
dwelling space and facilities therein requiring hot water with water at the
outlets at a minimum temperature of 120° F. and a maximum temperature
of 160° F. between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight in accordance
with anticipated need for the permissible number of occupants in any such
dwelling.
§ 373-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-25-1977 by Ord. No.
3163; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998188]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section. Each day that
a violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate offense.
187. Editor's Note: As to plumbing standards, see Ch. 237, Construction Codes, Uniform.
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-9 MULTIPLE DWELLINGS § 373-13
373:591

ARTICLE III
Safety and Security Fixtures
[Adopted 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 4298 (Ch. 187, Art. III of the 1986
Code)]
§ 373-14. Required equipment for security.
In addition to the provisions of all other laws and ordinances, in order
to increase and maintain the safety and security of tenants and other
occupants of premises and their lawful visitors and in order to help prevent
and combat crime, all owners, landlords, employers, operating agents or
other entities owning, managing or controlling any multifamily premises
consisting of 20 or more dwelling units, wherein there dwell or are located
any tenants, dwellers or occupants, however called, whereas under lease,
monthly tenancies, as occupants, employees or otherwise, shall provide
suitable access, safety and security fixtures and equipment, including the
following:
§ 373-15. Additional equipment to be maintained.
The above safety equipment is deemed minimal, but existing standards or
equipment shall not be abandoned, but must be maintained and kept in
good operating repair, and failure or refusal to do so shall constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 373-16. Violations and penalties.189
If any of the above tenant and occupant security and safety equipment is
out of service for a period of 24 hours after the owner, his manager or
A. Functioning locks on all apartment entrance doors and on all windows.
B. Functioning outside entrance light.
C. Functioning entrance lobby light.
D. Functioning locks on all common entrance doors.
E. Functioning name bells.
F. Functioning mailboxes with locks.
G. Functioning lights in all hallways and landings.
H. Functioning locks to all roof doors.
I. Keys for all of same as needed, with replacement keys in reasonable
number to replace lost keys.
J. Appropriate lighting functional in backyards, courts and areaways,
parking garages and on-site parking areas.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-14 MULTIPLE DWELLINGS § 373-16
373:593
responsible agent knows or should have known of such condition, such
failure to maintain and repair such safety equipment shall constitute a
violation, the penalty for which there shall be a fine of up to $1,250 and/or
up to 90 days in jail and/or up to 90 days of community service. Each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 373-17. Interpretation.
This article shall not relieve any person of any obligation or deprive any
person of protection to health and safety, except to provide and maintain
additional security, safety and protection as an added exercise of the police
power, and shall be so construed in harmony with all laws and ordinances
that have effect in the field of construction, operation and maintenance of
buildings.
§ 373-16 UNION CODE § 373-17
373:594
Chapter 378
(RESERVED)
Chapter 379
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers, peddlers and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 317.
Outdoor displays — See Ch. 390.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 450.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
Public telephones — See Ch. 494.
§ 379-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide definite and narrowly drawn
regulations governing newsracks placed on the public sidewalks, rightsof-
way or in other public areas, which regulations further the Township's
interest in protecting the health, safety, welfare and convenience of
pedestrians, motorists, residents and businesses; in ensuring the proper
cleaning and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, streets and various signs and
utilities; and in preserving the aesthetic beauty of the Township.
§ 379-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Building Official.
EXISTING NEWSRACKS — Any newsracks located in a public area on the
effective date of this chapter.
NEWSRACKS — Any machine, box or vending device into which newspapers
or news periodicals are placed for distribution or sale and includes coinoperated
machines as well as machines or boxes which permit removal of
newspapers or news periodicals without charge.
PERMIT REVIEW COMMITTEE — Consists of a committee composed of
the Township Engineer, the Township Administrator and the Chief of Police,
established pursuant to § 379-3 of this chapter.
PUBLIC AREA —
A. The public sidewalk.
B. The right-of-way for any public street or highway.
C. Any public park, playground, trail, path and other recreational area.
§ 373-17 (RESERVED) § 379-2
378:595
ROADWAY — That portion of the public street upon which vehicular traffic
passes and/or parks.
§ 379-3. Permit Review Committee.
There is hereby established the Permit Review Committee to hear appeals
from decisions of the Administrative Officer as provided in § 379-10 of
this chapter. The Permit Review Committee shall consist of the Township
Engineer, the Township Administrator and the Chief of Police, all of whom
shall be voting members of the Committee.
§ 379-4. Regulation of newsracks.
D. The site of public school or other public building and structure.
E. Other public open spaces.
A. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects
onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which
rests, wholly or in part, upon, or over any portion of a roadway.
B. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or
in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or public area, when such
installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or
property; unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the ingress into or egress from any
residence, place of business or any legally parked or stopped vehicle; or
unreasonably interferes with the removal of snow, ice, leaves or debris.
C. Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public
area shall comply with the following standards:
(1) No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width and
two feet in depth.
(2) Newsracks located on sidewalks shall only be placed near a curb or
adjacent to the wall of a building. If no building is located at the
edge of the sidewalk opposite the curb, then any newsrack not
placed near a curb shall be placed near the opposite edge of the
sidewalk. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less
than 18 inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed
adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such
wall and not be more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack
shall be placed or maintained on a sidewalk opposite another
newsrack, unless such placement permits a passageway for
pedestrians of at least three feet.
(3) Newsracks may be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any
permanently fixed object, provided that the owner of the property
or fixed object does not object to such attachment.
§ 379-2 UNION CODE § 379-4
378:596
§ 379-5. Permit required; application.
(4) Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another;
however, no more than three newsracks may be joined together in
this manner along any curb, and a space of no less than 18 inches
shall separate each group of three newsracks so attached.
(5) No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(a) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(b) Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
(c) Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
(d) Within three feet of any public telephone, fire call box, police
call box or other emergency facility.
(e) Within five feet of any driveway.
(f) Along any curb immediately adjacent to any designated bus
stop, or within 15 feet to the rear of such bus stop, unless such
newsrack is located 15 feet or more to the rear of any sign
marking the designated bus stop or such newsrack is located
adjacent to a bus shelter located at any such bus stop; or along
any curb immediately adjacent to any place marked for
handicapped parking.
(g) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than three feet.
(h) Within three feet of any display window of any building
abutting the sidewalk or in such manner as to impede or
interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display
purposes.
(6) No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase
of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein.
(7) Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition
and in good repair and operational at all times.
D. Each person who places or maintains a newsrack in a public area in the
Township shall have his name, address and telephone number affixed
thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen.
A. No newsrack shall be placed in any public area unless an application for
a permit has been made to the Administrative Officer. The
Administrative Officer shall issue the permit, provided that the
newsrack complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. All applications for newsrack permits shall be made on forms provided
by the Administrative Officer. The application shall identify the owner of
§ 379-4 (RESERVED) § 379-5
378:597
§ 379-6. Existing newsracks.
§ 379-7. Existing newsracks permitted to remain until decision on
permit.
Any newsrack for which an application for a permit has been made shall
be allowed to remain in its present location pending a decision by the
Administrative Officer on the permit application. If the Administrative
Officer denies the application, the newsrack shall be removed pursuant to
§ 379-9A, unless an appeal is taken from that decision. (See § 379-10B.)
In the event that an appeal is taken, and the Permit Review Committee
affirms the denial of the permit, the newsrack shall be removed pursuant to
§ 379-9A.
§ 379-8. Revocation of permits.
the newsrack, the location at which and manner in which the newsrack
will be or has been placed and any other information necessary to
evaluate the application against the requirements of this chapter.
C. The application shall be filed with the Township Clerk, who shall
forward the application to the Administrative Officer who shall issue or
deny the permit within 10 days of the filing date of the application. If
the Administrative Officer fails to act within 10 days of the filing date of
the application, the application shall be deemed to have been approved
and the permit issued. If the Administrative Officer denies the permit,
he shall so inform the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for that
denial. The applicant shall be entitled to a hearing pursuant to § 379-10
of this chapter if he so requests in writing within five days of service of
the notification of denial of the permit.
D. A permit for a particular newsrack shall terminate if the newsrack is
removed by the owner, except that the permit shall continue in effect if
the newsrack is replaced within five days by the owner with another
conforming newsrack at the same location.
A. This chapter shall apply to all existing newsracks located in any public
area as of the chapter's effective date. An application for a permit for
each such existing newsrack shall be made within 20 days of the
effective date of the Article and shall be processed in the manner
provided in § 379-5B and C.
B. Any existing newsrack for which an application for a permit has not
been made within the time provided in Subsection A above shall be
removed pursuant to § 379-9A.
A. A permit for a newsrack may be revoked for one or more of the
following causes:
(1) Whenever the application submitted in obtaining the permit is
found to be false or intentionally misleading.
§ 379-5 UNION CODE § 379-8
378:598
§ 379-9. Removal of newsracks.
(2) Whenever any of the provisions of this chapter are violated.
(3) Whenever the permittee maintains the newsrack at a location other
than that specified in the application.
(4) Whenever the newsrack has not been utilized by the permittee for a
period of 20 consecutive days.
B. No permit shall be revoked without first providing the owner with
written notification of the intent to revoke the permit, which notification
shall state the specific violation and, if for cause in Subsection A(2) or
A(3) above, the notification shall also state that the owner has five days
in which to correct the violation or, in the case of Subsection A(4), to
resume use of the newsrack. The written notification shall be served
either personally or by certified mail. Any permittee shall be entitled to
a hearing pursuant to § 379-10 of this chapter if he so requests in
writing within five days of service of the notification of intent to revoke
the permit. A request for a hearing shall stay the revocation of the
permit, pending the outcome of the hearing.
A. Any existing newsrack located in or new newsrack placed in a public
area as of or after the effective date of this chapter, for which an
application for a permit has not been made as required by § 379-5A or
for which such a permit has been denied, and no appeal has been taken
therefrom, shall be promptly removed. If an appeal has been taken and
the decision of the Administrative Officer denying the permit is affirmed
by the Permit Review Committee, the newsrack shall be promptly
removed upon notification of the Committee's decision. If the owner of
the newsrack fails to remove the newsrack within 25 days from the
effective date of this chapter, if no permit application has been filed, or
within five days of service of notification of denial of a permit, or of
notification of the Permit Review Committee's affirmance of the denial
of the permit, as the case may be, the Administrative Officer shall cause
the newsrack to be removed and stored at the owner's expense. The
newsrack will be returned to the owner only upon payment of the cost
of removal and storage.
B. In the event that a permit is revoked, the permittee shall promptly
remove the newsrack. If the permittee fails to remove the newsrack
within five days from the effective date of the revocation of the permit,
the Administrative Officer shall cause the newsrack to be removed and
stored at the permittee's expense. The newsrack will be returned to the
permittee only upon payment of the cost of removal and storage.
C. In the event that, in the determination of the Administrative Officer or
any Township Official responsible for responding to an emergency
situation, a newsrack presents a clear danger of imminent harm to
persons or property, the Administrative Officer or official shall
immediately cause the newsrack to be removed and shall inform the
§ 379-8 (RESERVED) § 379-9
378:599
§ 379-10. Appeal procedures.
permittee of the removal and the reason therefor. The newsrack shall
be returned to its location as soon as the immediate danger has been
eliminated. If the Administrative Officer determines that the danger
was created by the permittee or by a condition of the newsrack, the
permittee shall pay the costs of removal, storage and return of the
newsrack. The determination of the Administrative Officer shall be
appealable under the provisions of § 379-10 by written request for a
hearing within five days of service by the Administrative Officer of
a written demand for payment of the costs of removal, storage and
replacement, which demand shall be served by personal service or
certified mail.
A. An applicant for a permit or any permittee may appeal from any
determination of the Administrative Officer within the time provided in
this chapter by filing with the Administrative Officer a written request
for a hearing. Failure to request a hearing within the time permitted
shall render the decision of the Administrative Officer final.
B. An appeal shall stay all proceedings or actions in furtherance of the
Administrative Officer's decision from which the appeal arises.
C. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Administrative Officer shall
promptly forward to the Permit Review Committee the application, all
documents or other evidence upon which the Administrative Officer
relied in making his determination and a written explanation of the
reasons for his decision. Within 15 days from the date the request for a
hearing was made, the Permit Review Committee shall hold a hearing.
The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the hearing date at least
seven days in advance. At least five days prior to the hearing date, the
applicant or permittee shall be provided with a copy of all documents
and materials provided to the Committee by the Administrative Officer.
D. At the hearing conducted by the Permit Review Committee, the
applicant or permittee shall have the right to call witnesses, present
evidence and cross-examine any witnesses who appear before the
Committee, including the Administrative Officer. The applicant or
permittee shall have the burden of demonstrating that the decision
appealed from was incorrect. The Committee shall issue a written
decision affirming, reversing or modifying the decision of the
Administrative Officer within three days of the completion of the
hearing.
E. Any appeal from the decision of the Committee shall be to the Superior
Court of New Jersey, as provided by the rules of that court. Such an
appeal shall stay all proceedings or actions in furtherance of the
Committee's decision unless the Administrative Officer certifies that, by
reason of facts stated in the certification a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property.
§ 379-9 UNION CODE § 379-11
378:600
§ 379-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who places or causes to be placed a newsrack in any public
area without first having applied for a permit, or who fails to remove
any newsrack for which a permit has been revoked or denied, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 for each offense and
shall be subject to an additional fine not exceeding $25 per day until such
newsrack has been removed.
Chapter 384
NUISANCES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 250. Littering — See Ch. 358.
§ 384-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful, and shall be a public nuisance, for any person:
§ 384-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTIMATE PARTS — The following personal body parts: sexual organs,
genital area, anal area, groin, buttock, or female breast.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any and all areas, lands, buildings, and right-of-ways
within the boundaries of the Township of Union which are owned, leased, or
controlled by the Township of Union, County of Union, and/or State of New
Jersey.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Seeking sexual arousal or gratification by one
person's intentional direct touching his or her own intimate body part
A. To engage in any sexual contact upon public property, regardless of
whether such person knows or has reason to know that he/she will be
observed by other persons.
B. To expose his/her intimate parts to public view upon public property not
specifically designated for such activities, regardless of whether such
person knows or has reason to know that he/she will be observed by
other persons.
C. To urinate, defecate, or discharge other bodily fluids upon public
property, in areas not specifically designated for this activity, or upon
private property where susceptible to public view, regardless of
whether such person knows or has reason to know that he/she will be
observed by other persons.
§ 379-11 (RESERVED) § 384-2
378:601
or another person's intimate body parts or by indirect touching through
clothing of intimate body parts.
§ 384-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,250, imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days, a period of community service not to exceed 90 days,
monetary restitution in an amount of the pecuniary damage caused by the
violation, or a combination thereof at the discretion of the Municipal Court
Judge.
§ 384-4. Inconsistent ordinances.
In the event of any inconsistencies between the provisions of this chapter
and any prior ordinance of the Township of Union, the provisions hereof
shall be determined to govern.
Chapter 390
OUTDOOR CAFES; OUTDOOR DISPLAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 160.
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 173.
Hawkers, peddlers and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 317.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Special Improvement Districts — See Ch. 471.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
Food service personnel — See Ch. 568.
§ 384-2 UNION CODE § 384-4
378:602
ARTICLE I
Outdoor Cafes
[Adopted 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 4260 (Ch. 243, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 390-1. Purpose. [Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4269]
The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure and authorize rules
and regulations thereunder for the issuance of permits for outdoor cafes in
the Township of Union.
§ 390-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed in this section:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place of business
where food and/or other refreshments are served, or where permitted on
private property pursuant to Chapter 170, Land Development.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an eating
establishment.
§ 390-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged
in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks of the
Township of Union, or on private property, unless such person shall hold a
currently valid permit issued pursuant to the terms of this article.
§ 390-4. Requirements for issuance of permit.
No permit shall be issued hereunder unless the permittee shall demonstrate
that a minimum of six feet of unobstructed paved surface will be available
for pedestrian traffic around or through such outdoor cafe and that such
outdoor cafe is directly in front of an eating establishment as hereinabove
defined. No food or drinks served at such outdoor cafe shall be prepared
or stored other than in the interior of the eating establishment. The term
"directly in front of" shall confine the cafe to the area represented by an
extension of each side of the store occupied by the eating establishment
projected directly to the curbline immediately in front thereof.
§ 390-1 (RESERVED) § 390-5
378:603
§ 390-5. Application for permit.
Application for the permit required hereunder shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and shall be signed by the applicant. The
application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, residence, address and telephone number of each individual,
owner and partner; or if a domestic corporation, the names, residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
ten-percent or greater interest in the corporation and the chief
operating executive of the corporation; and if a nondomestic
corporation, the name, residence address and telephone number of the
managing officer for service of process within the State of New Jersey
and a copy of the qualification of said nondomestic corporation to
conduct business in the State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the trade name or corporate, business or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this article.
C. The address and description of each place where the applicant intends
to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
D. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
E. Proposed layout plan.
(1) Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing scaled drawings
clearly illustrating the number, type of materials, color and location
of all tables, chairs, umbrellas or other furnishings or fixtures
intended to be located in the outdoor cafe shall be submitted. The
perimeter of the outdoor cafe shall be defined and set off by a
portable-type enclosure, which may include live plantings. The
enclosure shall define the perimeter of the area to be used as an
outdoor cafe and shall separate it from the pedestrians traversing
the adjacent sidewalk. The enclosure shall not contain doors or
windows nor air-conditioning or heating equipment and shall be
open at all times to the air from a height of not more than three
feet. Awnings or outdoor umbrellas extending over the enclosure
are permitted.
(2) The scaled drawings shall also illustrate the following:
(a) The location of any doors leading from the eating
establishment to the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be
obstructed in any manner.
(b) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space
permitting free passages of pedestrian traffic around or
through each outdoor cafe.
§ 390-5 UNION CODE § 390-5
378:604
§ 390-6. Application review.
The Construction Code Official will review the application for completeness
and compliance with the terms of this article. If the application is complete,
the Construction Code Official will act upon the same within 10 business
days of the submittal of the application or within 10 business days after
the application becomes complete. If the application is not complete, the
Construction Code Official will so notify the applicant within 10 business
days of the submission and specifically detail the areas in which the
application lacks compliance with the requirements of this article.
§ 390-7. Issuance of permit.
If the application complies with the article, the Construction Code Official
shall issue a permit strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this
article.
§ 390-8. Nontransferability of permit.
The permit is personal to the applicant, and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the permit and shall require
new application and a new permit in conformance with all of the
requirements of this article.
(c) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to
be prepared.
(d) An illustration of the enclosure or protective barrier separating
the eating and serving area of each outdoor cafe from
pedestrian traffic.
(e) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees and any other
fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of the
eating establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or any
side.
(f) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and
fixtures.190
F. An application fee of $150 (per season) to be paid by the applicant for
any establishment located within the Special Improvement District. All
other application fees shall be $275. [Added 9-14-1993 by Ord. No.
4269; amended 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
190. Editor's Note: Former § 243-16F, which previously followed this subsection and contained
a seasonal application fee, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). See now § 390-5F.
§ 390-5 (RESERVED) § 390-9
378:605
§ 390-9. Inspections.
Acceptance of the permit by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police and building officials of the Township to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this
article and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the same.
§ 390-10. Indemnification and hold harmless clause.
No permit required by this article shall be granted to any person to operate
an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed with the Construction
Code Official a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the
Township of Union and its agents, servants, representatives or employees
from any or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses, including
attorney fees, which they or any of them may incur or be required to
pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property damage
suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related in any way to
the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the permit is
issued.
§ 390-11. Liability insurance required.
A. No permit required by this article shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Construction Code Official a comprehensive general liability policy
issued to such person by a public liability insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey affording the
coverages set forth below in the amounts specified. Such insurance
policy shall name the Township of Union, 1976 Morris Avenue, Union,
New Jersey 07083, and its agents, officers, servants, representatives
and employees, as additional insured with respect to the operation and
maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the following amounts: [Amended
4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 4316]
(1) For bodily injury.
(a) Each person: $500,000.
(b) Each accident: $500,000.
(2) For property damage.
(a) Each person: $500,000.
(b) Each accident: $500,000.
B. The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this
section to be filed with the Construction Code Official shall contain a
clause obligating the company issuing the same to give not less than 30
days' written notice to the Township Clerk before cancellation or
§ 390-9 UNION CODE § 390-11
378:606
§ 390-12. Insurance policy stipulations.
Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding
any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insured shall not be affected
by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured and that until the
policy is canceled the insurance company will not be relieved from liability
on account of nonpayment of premium or of any act or omission by the
named insured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the
payment of any and all judgments up to the limits of such policy.
§ 390-13. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable permit, which
shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Township Administrator
or Construction Code Official for failure of any permittee to comply with
this article or for violation of any other applicable federal, state, county
or municipal law, regulation or ordinance. Any permit issued hereunder
is issued upon the express understanding that the permittee obtains no
property right thereunder nor any interest in the continuation of said
permit.
§ 390-14. Operation following permit suspension prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable permit.
§ 390-15. Permittee responsible for cleanliness of area.
Each permittee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe
and the adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter
occasioned by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed and at the time
that business is closed and at the beginning of each business day, but not
later than 9:00 a.m. No disposable paper plates, styrofoam or plastic cups,
paper napkins or plastic utensils shall be used.
§ 390-16. Vending machines prohibited. [Amended 9-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 4269]
No vending machines, food serving stations or bars of any kind, are
permitted on the exterior of any building operating an outdoor cafe.
amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation shall
not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability for any injury
or claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. The
cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate effect of
suspending the permit of such person to operate the outdoor cafe
covered thereby until a new policy complying with the provisions of
this section is filed with the Construction Code Official and a letter in
writing confirming the new effective date of the permit is issued by the
Construction Code Official.
§ 390-11 (RESERVED) § 390-17
378:607
§ 390-17. Signs.
No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except signs on
the awnings complying with § 170-151 of Chapter 170, Land Development,
of the Township of Union Code. Outdoor umbrellas located in the outdoor
cafe shall be exempt from § 170-151 of Chapter 170, Land Development, of
the Township of Union.
§ 390-18. Notice of suspension or revocation of permit.
In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above,
the Township reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any permit on
10 days' written notice if the Township determines that pedestrian traffic
is, in fact, impeded or made unsafe because of the operation of the outdoor
cafe or because of any other safety issue which the Township determines
adversely affects the Township because of such operation. The permit may
also be suspended or revoked on 10 days' written notice in the event that
the Township determines that it is necessary to utilize the area or any
part thereof for the maintenance or installation of underground utilities. In
the event of an emergency, which emergency is certified by the Township
Administrator, the permit may be suspended or revoked without notice.
§ 390-19. Alcoholic beverage control permit. [Amended 9-14-1993
by Ord. No. 4269]
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control permit
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcoholic beverage control permit to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein. Such application shall be restricted to table
service of wine and beer only.
§ 390-20. Dates of operation; length of permit. [Amended 8-23-2011
by Ord. No. 5207]
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from January 1 to December 31
in any calendar year, said permit to be valid for one year.
§ 390-21. Affixing of equipment prohibited.
No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb or
sidewalk or property of the Township of Union within or near the permitted
area.
§ 390-22. Vacation upon permit expiration.
The permittee agrees at the end of the permit period, or in the event that
the permit is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
permittee will, at his own cost and expense, vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days'
§ 390-17 UNION CODE § 390-22
378:608
written notice shall grant to the Township the right to remove any property
on the sidewalk, and the permittee agrees to reimburse the Township for
the cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 390-23. Noise-producing or -amplifying devices prohibited.
The permittee shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from the area
occupied by the outdoor cafe any bell, chime, siren, whistle, loudspeaker,
public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device.
§ 390-24. Business hours. [Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4269]
No outdoor cafe shall open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. or remain
open for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor cafe
shall vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m. Said closing times may be
extended by the permittee for one hour on Friday and Saturday only.
§ 390-25. Table service required.
Table service is required.
§ 390-26. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days.
§ 390-22 (RESERVED) § 390-26
378:609

ARTICLE II
Outdoor Displays
[Adopted 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4381 (Ch. 243, Art. III of the 1986
Code)]
§ 390-27. Conditions for fruit, vegetable and floral displays.
Fruit, vegetable and floral displays may be established outdoors under the
following terms and conditions:
§ 390-28. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days.
A. A valid permit shall be issued.
B. A minimum of six feet of unobstructed paved surface will be available
for pedestrian traffic around said outdoor display.
C. Section 390-5 shall apply with respect to a permit for said outdoor
display.
D. Sections 390-6 through 390-18 and 390-20 shall apply to said outdoor
displays.
E. No display counters or materials shall be attached as set forth in
§ 390-21.
F. Food products on such display shall be on platforms, racks or counters
approved by the Construction Code Official, and no such products shall
be maintained outdoors in cartons, crates or bulk packages.
G. Stores displaying fruit, vegetables or flowers must primarily be
engaged in the retailing of these products.
§ 390-27 (RESERVED) § 390-28
378:611
Chapter 397
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Recreation — See Ch. 121.
Bicycles — See Ch. 179.
Damaging of buildings and fixtures — See Ch.
198.
Golf — See Ch. 302.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Human-powered locomotion devices — See
Ch. 362.
Motorcycles and similar vehicles — See Ch.
369.
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 415.
§ 397-1. Unlawful acts; definitions.
A. No person in a public park or recreational area shall:
(1) Damage or defacing.191 Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables,
benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving materials, waterlines
or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Sanitary conditions of rest rooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining
rest rooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No
person above the age of five years shall use the rest rooms and
washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
(3) Soil, rock or sand removal. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand,
stones, trees, shrubs or plants or other wood or materials or make
any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or
agency.
(4) Construction. Construct or erect any building or structure of
whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string
any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on
special written permit issued hereunder.
(5) Trees, shrubbery or monuments.192
(a) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any trees or plant, dig
191. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 198, Buildings and Fixtures, Damaging of.
192. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 516, Trees.
§ 390-28 UNION CODE § 397-1
397:612
in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure
the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(b) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property
not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(c) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(6) Ponds, streams and bodies of water. Throw, discharge or otherwise
place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond,
lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or
any tributary stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such water,
any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may
result in the pollution of said waters.
(7) Waste and garbage.193 Have brought in or shall dump in, deposit or
leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or
trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or
left any where on the grounds thereof but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where the same are provided; where
receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(8) Vehicles and parking.194
(a) Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary areas, including motorized vehicles,
such as minibikes and mopeds.
(b) Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area, and such shall be in accordance with posted
directions thereat and with the instruction of any attendant
who may be present.
(c) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established
parking areas or elsewhere in the park area.
(d) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack, when such
is provided and there is space available.
(e) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of
others.195
193. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 462, Solid Waste; Recycling; and Ch. 358, Littering.
194. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 266, Vehicles and Traffic.
195. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 179, Bicycles.
§ 397-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 397-1
397:613
(f) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against
trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip
over or be injured by them.
(9) Swimming and bathing. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or
waterways in or adjacent to any park.
(10) Boats and rafts. Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other
watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters,
except at places designated for boating. Such activity shall be in
accordance with applicable regulations as are now or hereafter
may be adopted.
(11) Firearms.196 No person shall carry or possess firearms of any
description or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or
any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and
dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded
with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device.
Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is
forbidden.
(12) Picnicking.
(a) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose.
(b) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas
and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are
crowded.
(c) Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished
and before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(13) Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving
thrown or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones,
arrows, javelins, horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes, except in
those areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
(14) Dogs. To allow a dog of which he is in charge to go upon any part of
the park property or recreational area, unless held by a leash not
longer than six feet.197
(15) Sale of goods and wares. To sell or offer for sale any goods, wares
or merchandise whatsoever or to display or distribute any
196. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 273, Firearms; Hunting.
197. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 168, Animals.
§ 397-1 UNION CODE § 397-1
397:614
§ 397-2. Conduct in parks.
While in a public park or recreational area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and, in particular, no person
shall:
advertising device, circular or card, in any park or recreational
area, except upon a written permit of the Chief of Police to be
specifically authorized for each occasion upon direction of the
Township Committee.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARK — Includes recreational areas.
A. Bring alcoholic beverages, drink the same at any time, nor shall any
person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor.198
B. Have in his possession, or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other fireworks,
firecrackers or explosives of inflammable material or discharge them or
throw them into any such areas from lands or highways adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or
article that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound,
would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standards. At the
discretion of the Superintendent of Recreation, permits may be given
for conducting properly supervised fireworks in designated park area.
C. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
D. Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated. No person shall drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park or
recreational area or on any highways, roads or streets abutting or
contiguous thereto.
E. Enter an area posted as "closed to the public," nor shall any person use
or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
F. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance, except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Superintendent of Recreation.
G. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas or
engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to
breach the public peace.
198. Editor's Note: See also § 160-26, State approval required for use in designated areas.
§ 397-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 397-2
397:615
§ 397-3. Hours.
§ 397-4. Permits for special events.
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Department of Recreation in accordance with the following procedure:
H. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
I. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard advertisement or
inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected
any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to
a park.
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during the designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
therein for public information.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public, at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporary or at regular and
stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely for
certain uses.
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Department of Recreation stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(5) Any other information which the Department of Recreation shall
find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued hereunder.
B. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Department of Recreation
include the following findings:
(1) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
(2) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
(3) The proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will
not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
§ 397-2 UNION CODE § 397-4
397:616
§ 397-5. Enforcement.
(4) The proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome
expense or police operation by the Township of Union.
(5) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
date and hour requested in the application.
C. Appeal. Within five days after the receipt of an application, the
Department of Recreation shall apprise an applicant in writing of its
reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the
right to appeal to the Municipal Administrator by service of a written
notice thereof on the Superintendent of Recreation and the Municipal
Administrator within five days of said refusal. Said Department shall
then immediately forward the application and the reasons for its refusal
to the Municipal Administrator who shall consider the application
under the standards set forth under Subsection B hereof and sustain or
overrule the Department of Recreation's decision, within 10 days from
the receipt of the appeal by him. The decision of the Municipal
Administrator shall be final.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
E. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever, by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall
have been issued. The Department of Recreation shall have the right to
require any permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering
injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted
activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by
the Department of Recreation, prior to the commencement of any
activity for which a permit has issued.
F. Revocation. The Department of Recreation shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.
A. The Department of Recreation and park attendants shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
B. The Department of Recreation and any park attendant shall have the
authority to eject from the park area any person or persons acting in
violation of this chapter.
C. The Department of Recreation and any park attendant shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the
park, or used in violation of this chapter.
§ 397-4 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 397-5
397:617
§ 397-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998199]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section.
Chapter 406
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves — See Ch. 192.
Damaging of buildings and fixtures — See Ch.
198.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 221.
Graffiti — See Ch. 313.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
Junkyards — See Ch. 324.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 373.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 589.
D. This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police Department of the
Township of Union.
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 397-5 UNION CODE § 397-6
397:618
ARTICLE I
Business and Commercial
[Adopted 4-22-1975 by Ord. No. 2827 (Ch. 204, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 406-1. Findings; declaration of policy.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Township of Union
premises of the aforesaid category which are, or may become, unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, due to dilapidation, defects
increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or due to other conditions rendering
such premises or part thereof unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or
detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare
of the residents of the Township of Union and persons upon or having
access to the premises. It is further found and declared that by reason of
lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration, the condition of certain
premises has the further effect of creating blighting conditions and
initiating slums and that, if the same are not curtailed and removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time
the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same and that, by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and
neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability and
amenities of premises and neighborhood enhanced and the public health,
safety and welfare protected and fostered.200
§ 406-2. Purposes.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance and condition of premises situated in the Township, used or
intended to be used or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for
commercial, business, industrial or any other nonresidential occupancy;
to establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other
physical components and conditions essential to make such premises fit for
human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and
duties upon owners and operators and distinct and separate responsibilities
and duties upon occupants; to prevent blighting conditions and
deterioration of property values; to authorize and establish procedures for
the inspection of such premises; to fix penalties for the violations of this
article; to provide for the right of access across adjoining premises to
permit repairs; and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of
premises unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use. This article is
hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest and it is
intended that this article be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose as
stated herein.
200. Editor's Note: Former Article A, Title, which immediately preceded this section, was
repealed 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879.
§ 406-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-3
397:619
§ 406-3. Applicability.
§ 406-4. Responsibility of owner, operator and occupants.
A. Buildings affected by this article. Each and every building and the
premises on which it is situated in the Township, used or intended to be
used or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for commercial,
business, industrial or any other nonresidential occupancy shall comply
with the provisions of this article, whether or not any such building
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the
enactment of this article and irrespective of any permits or licenses
which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of any such
building or premises for the construction, alteration or repair of any
such building or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities
therein or thereon prior to the effective date of this article. This article
establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy
and use of all such buildings and premises and does not replace, modify
or lessen standards otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of such buildings and premises, equipment or facilities
contained therein or thereon, except as provided in Subsection B
hereof. Where there is mixed occupancy of such buildings and
premises, the residential and nonresidential uses thereof shall be
regulated by and be subject to the applicable provisions of this article.
B. Higher standards to prevail in case of conflict with other ordinances or
laws. In any case where the provisions of this article impose a higher
standard than set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or laws
of the State of New Jersey applicable thereto, then the standards, as set
forth herein, shall prevail, but if the provisions of this article impose a
lesser standard than such other ordinance of the Township or law of the
State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in such other
ordinance or law shall prevail.
C. Issuance and renewal of other permits and licenses. After the date of
enactment hereof, all licenses and permits relating to such buildings
and premises, which may be issued or renewed pursuant to any other
ordinance of the Township, may be issued or renewed only upon
compliance with this article as well as compliance with the ordinances
under which such licenses and permits may be granted or renewed.
D. Enforcement and compliance with other ordinances. Compliance with
this article shall not constitute a defense against the violation of any
provisions of any other ordinance of the Township applicable to any
building or premises, nor shall compliance with any provision of this
article relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with
any such other provision nor relieve any official of the Township from
enforcing any such other provision.
A. Owner and operator. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and
responsibilities prescribed in § 406-5A hereof and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto; and no owner or operator shall be
§ 406-3 UNION CODE § 406-4
397:620
§ 406-5. Standards; definitions.
relieved from such duties or responsibilities nor be entitled to defend
against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the
other of them or the occupant is also responsible therefor and in
violation thereof.
B. Occupant. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in § 406-5G(4) and (8) and 406-5I hereof and all regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto; and the occupant shall not be relieved of
any such duties or responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or
operator or both is or are also responsible therefor and in violation
thereof.
C. Contract not to alter responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this article, the respective duties and responsibilities
imposed hereunder on the owner, operator and occupant shall not be
altered or affected by any agreement or contract to which one or more
of them is or are a party or parties.
A. The provisions of this section shall constitute the standards to guide the
Public Officer and his agents in determining the fitness of premises for
human habitation, use and occupancy and in determining whether
premises are being maintained in such condition as to not constitute a
blighting effect upon neighboring properties nor an element leading to
a progressive deterioration and downgrading of neighboring properties
with an accompanying diminution of property values.
B. Definitions.
(1) Words defined. The words, terms or phrases listed below, for the
purposes of this article, are hereby defined and shall have the
meanings indicated:
BATHROOM — Any enclosed space which contains one or more of
the following: bathtub, shower, water closet, lavatory, water closet
compartment, washbowl, sink or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, whether
used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outbuildings and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building, or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling,
rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive wear.
DILAPIDATION — Falling out of repair or decayed.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises, or part thereof,
which may be lawfully viewed by the public, or any member
§ 406-4 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-5
397:621
thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, parking lot or from any
adjoining or neighborhood premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES —
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects,
rodents and vermin by eliminating their harborage places, or by
removing or making inaccessible material that may serve as their
food, or by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or any other
approved means of pest elimination.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption
of food or other products.
INFESTATION — The presence, on or within a premises, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building containing one or more
dwelling units, rooming units or hotel or motel accommodations
and also having a portion thereof devoted to nonresidential uses.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANCY UNIT — Any room or group of rooms, or part thereof,
forming a single usable unit (used or intended to be used, or
designed to be used, for nonresidential purposes) and located
within a building used or intended to be used, or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, for commercial business, industrial or any
other nonresidential occupancy.
(a) Any part of the premises not occupied by any building thereon;
(b) Any open space on the outside of any building; or
(c) Any part of any building which is exposed to the elements.
Any public nuisance known at public law or in law or equity
jurisprudence, or as provided by the statutes of the State of
New Jersey, or the ordinances of the Township of Union.
(a)
Any inadequately protected well, shaft, basement, excavation,
abandoned or nondrivable motor vehicle or equipment,
structurally unsound fence or building, lumber, trash, debris or
vegetation, such as poison ivy, oak or sumac or other condition
which is or may be detrimental to the safety or health of
persons.
(b)
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist.
(c)
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or
detrimental to the health of human beings.
(d)
(e) Fire hazards.
§ 406-5 UNION CODE § 406-5
397:622
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons, including the owner in
actual possession of and using an entire building or an occupancy
unit in a building.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
premises, or part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title to premises in fee
simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any
who are in actual possession thereof.
PERSON — Shall be given the same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A.
1:1-2.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land and any buildings located
thereon.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The person or persons who are authorized by
this article to exercise powers prescribed by this article.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, (except
body wastes), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Includes all combustible and noncombustible waste
material, except garbage.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction,
including but not limited to buildings, stadiums, gospel and circus
tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers,
radio towers, water tanks, trestles, open sheds, bins, shelters,
fences and display racks and signs.
TRANSLUCENT — The property of admitting the passage of light
but diffusing it so that objects beyond it cannot be clearly
distinguished.
WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT — An enclosure containing a
single water closet.
WEATHERING — Deterioration, decay or damage caused by
exposure to the elements.
WINDOW — An opening in the wall or roof of a building for the
admission of light, which opening may be closed to the elements
by casements or sashes containing glass or other transparent
material.
WINDOW DISPLAY AREA — That area of a building in proximity
to the inner surface of a window which is designed or used for the
viewing of the interior and the display of items representative of
any goods or services pertaining to the business therein.
§ 406-5 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-5
397:623
(2) Word usage. Whenever, in describing or referring to any person,
party, matter or thing, any word importing the singular number or
masculine gender is used, the same shall be understood to include
and to apply to several persons or parties, as well as to one person
and to females as well as males and to bodies corporate as well as
individuals and to several matters and things as well as one matter
or thing. The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as
prospectively.
C. Maintenance of exterior of the premises. The premises shall be kept
free of litter (including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
discarded, windblown, deposited, dropped or strewn paper, wrappings,
cardboard, bottles, cans, boxes and broken glass) and of all nuisances
and hazards to the safety of tenants, occupants, pedestrians and other
persons having access to the premises, and free of unsanitary
conditions; and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and
abated. The word "hazards" shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
(1) Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse and debris of any
description.
(2) Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and other natural growth
which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage, are or may be dangerous to persons in the vicinity thereof.
Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(3) Overhangings. Loose, overhanging and projecting objects and
accumulations of ice and snow, which by reason of location above
ground level, constitute dangers to persons in the vicinity thereof.
(4) Ground surface and unsanitary conditions. Holes, excavations,
breaks, projections, obstructions and excretion of pets or other
animals on paths, sidewalks, walks, driveways, parking lots and
parking areas and other parts of the exterior of the premises which
are accessible to and used by persons having access to such
premises.
(5) Recurring accumulation of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains
shall be provided and maintained to eliminate recurrent
accumulations of stormwater. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879]
(6) Sources of infestation.
(7) Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally
sound, free from defects and damage and capable of bearing
imposed loads safely.
(8) Chimneys and flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and
flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally
§ 406-5 UNION CODE § 406-5
397:624
sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform,
at all times, the functions for which they were designed and
constructed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and other draft-producing
equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output
of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases.
(9) Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes.
Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall
be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, well painted or
otherwise provided with a protective treatment to prevent
deterioration, and free from defects.
D. Appearance of exterior of the premises and window display areas. The
exterior of the premises shall be maintained so that the appearance
thereof shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the
standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be
adopted by the Township of Union and such that the appearance thereof
shall not constitute a blighting effect upon neighboring properties nor
an element leading to a progressive deterioration and downgrading of
neighboring properties with an accompanying diminution of property
values, including the following:
(1) Landscaping. Where exposed to public view, the landscaping of
premises shall be maintained in an orderly state with lawns and
bushes trimmed and free from becoming overgrown, littered and
unsightly where such would constitute a blighting effect,
depreciating adjoining and nearby property. Open areas shall be
graded evenly to eliminate holes, depressions, gullies, mounds,
accumulations of debris or other unsightly or unsafe conditions.
(2) Signs and billboards.
(a) All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance201 and regulated by the
Building Code202 or other regulations or as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair. Any
sign or billboard which has weathered excessively or faded or
the paint on which has excessively peeled or cracked shall,
with the supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into
a state of good repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical
signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith.
(b) All rooftop signs and rooftop billboards now in existence,
whether under nonconforming uses or otherwise, shall be
removed no later than five years from the date of the adoption
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Land Development, Art. XVII, Signs.
202. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 237, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 406-5 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-5
397:625
of this amendment to the Code of the Township of Union.
[Added 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. 4158]
(3) Windows and window display areas. All windows exposed to public
view shall be kept clean and free of marks and foreign substances.
Except when necessary in the course of changing displays, no
storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted in
window display areas ordinarily exposed to public view, unless such
areas are first screened by drapes, venetian blinds or other means
of making the windows translucent. All screening of interiors shall
be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state
of repair.
(4) Repair and painting of exteriors of buildings. All storefronts and the
exteriors of all buildings shall be kept in good repair, painted where
required or otherwise provided with protective treatment sufficient
to prevent deterioration and shall not constitute a safety hazard or
nuisance.
(5) Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its
accompanying structural members, which extend over any street,
sidewalk or other portion of the premises, shall be maintained in
good repair and shall be so maintained as to not constitute a
nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event that any such awning or
marquee is not properly maintained in accordance with the
foregoing, it shall, together with its supporting members, be
removed forthwith. In the event that any such awning or marquee
is made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, said materials,
where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good
condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering,
discoloration, ripping, tearing or other deterioration. Nothing
herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment of an
awning, marquee or its accompanying structural members on
streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
(6) Scaffolding. No temporary painting scaffold or other temporary
equipment used for construction, repair or maintenance, shall be
permitted to remain in place beyond a period of six months after
erection of placement thereof without permission of the Public
Officer.
(7) Fences. Barbed wire fences may only be used for the purpose of
protecting the area enclosed, and in the event of use of such
fencing, the lowest point of said barbed wiring thereof must be at
least eight feet from ground level.203
(8) Landscaping, curbing and sidewalks. [Added 5-12-1987 by Ord.
No. 3907]
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 406-5 UNION CODE § 406-5
397:626
(a) The owner or occupant shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the area abutting such property between the
street property line and pavement or roadway, including
landscape ground cover, construction of curbing and/or
sidewalk, reconstruction and/or replacement of defective or
hazardous curb and sidewalk. The aforementioned area shall
not be paved by the owner or occupant unless specifically
authorized by the Public Officer in writing.
(b) Sidewalk and curbing shall be cast-in-place concrete or
Belgian block conforming to current Township specifications.
The use of wood, precast concrete, rocks or any material other
than cast-in-place concrete or Belgian block is specifically
prohibited.
(c) The Public Officer could, at the request of the Township
Committee or through his own initiative, direct the
construction of curbing or its reconstruction, as required.
E. Window displays in BB and BC Districts. In the Business BB and BC
Districts, goods and materials on sale shall be displayed in the window
display portion of said establishments either on mannequins or display
dummies or loosely along the floor of the window area in stacks not to
exceed one foot above the clear portion of the window.204 [Added
6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 4205; amended 1-24-1995 by Ord. No.
4370]
F. Structural soundness and general maintenance, exterior. The exterior
of every building shall be maintained in good repair, and all exterior
surfaces thereof shall kept painted or otherwise provided with a
protective treatment where necessary for purposes of preservation and
appearance. All exterior surfaces thereof shall be maintained free from
broken glass, loose shingles or siding, crumbling masonry, excessively
peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance to the end that the building itself may be
preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties
and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences.
G. General sanitation and safety.
(1) Floors shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition
capable of safely bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at
all times in a condition so as to be free of hazards.
(2) Bathroom and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced
with water-resistant material and shall be kept in a dry, clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
204. Editor's Note: Former § 204-5F, regarding interior or exterior signs in the BB and BC
Districts, and former § 204-5G, regarding interior paper signs in the BB and BC Districts,
both added 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 4205, and both of which previously followed this
subsection, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I). For current regulations, see Ch. 170, Art. XVII, Signs.
§ 406-5 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-5
397:627
(3) All portions of any structure shall be kept structurally sound, free
from deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed loads.
(4) In buildings containing not more than four occupancy units, it shall
be the responsibility of each of the occupants and, in buildings
containing more than four occupancy units, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner and operator to furnish such
receptacles as are needed for the proper storage of garbage and
rubbish until removal thereof and to provide for the periodic
removal of all garbage and rubbish from the premises in
accordance with the regulations and ordinances of the Township of
Union.
(5) Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the storage of
accumulated garbage and rubbish unless:
(a) Such garbage is stored in watertight receptacles of metal or
other material approved by the Public Officer and provided
with tight-fitting covers.
(b) Such rubbish is stored in nonleaking receptacles of metal or
other material approved by the Public Officer.
(c) Such storage bins, rooms and areas are of smooth, easily
cleanable construction and are kept in a sanitary condition.
(d) Such areas, if located outside of a building and visible from any
public walk, street or public parking area, are shielded by a
method approved by the Public Officer and constructed in
compliance with the applicable provisions of the Building Code
of the Township.205
(e) Such area is of fireproof construction.
(6) Rubbish and garbage shall be placed or kept on the property within
the building located thereon or not nearer to the street line than
the building line or nearer to the street line than the face of the
building, whichever distance from the street line is the greater,
except during any cleanup week proclaimed by the Township
Committee.
(7) Inflammable or combustible liquids or other materials shall not be
stored on the premises, unless they are of a type approved for
storage by regulation of the Fire Department and then only in such
quantities and in such fireproof storage containers as may be
prescribed by applicable Fire Department regulations.
(8) Every occupant of a single-occupancy unit in a building comprising
a single-occupancy unit shall be responsible for the extermination
of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises;
205. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 237, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 406-5 UNION CODE § 406-5
397:628
§ 406-6. Administration.
and each occupant of an occupancy unit in any building which
has more than one occupancy unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his occupancy unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision of this section,
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner or operator
to maintain any such building in a reasonably pestproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner and operator.
Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the occupancy units
in any building or in the common parts of any building containing
two or more occupancy units, extermination thereof shall be the
responsibility of the owner and operator.
H. Utilities and facilities.
(1) Every building shall be provided with electric service, where
required, in accordance with the standards of the National
Electrical Code, as amended from time to time.
(2) Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided
with permanently installed and operating artificial lighting fixtures
with switches and wallplates so located and maintained that there
is no danger of electrical shock from a simultaneous contact with a
water supply fixture.
(3) Maximum fuse sizes as specified by the National Electrical Code, as
amended from time to time, shall be posted conspicuously on the
inside cover of all fuse boxes, and no fuse shall be installed therein
in excess of the stated maximum. Owners and operators shall not
be held responsible for violations in fuse sizes where the correct
maximum size is stated and the fuse box is located within any part
of the building which is the exclusive possession of an occupant or
occupants, other than the owner.
I. Duties and responsibilities of occupants.
(1) Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition on the premises
which constitutes a violation of this article, the occupant shall
report the same to the Public Officer responsible for enforcement
of this article.
(2) All parts of the premises under the control of an occupant shall be
kept in a clean, sanitary and safe condition by the occupant, and
the occupant shall refrain from performing any acts which would
render other parts of the premises unclean, unsanitary or unsafe,
or which would prevent the owner or operator from performing any
duty required hereunder.
A. Public Officer. The Public Officer shall be appointed by the Township
Committee annually, and he shall exercise the powers prescribed by
this article. He may appoint or designate such other municipal officers
§ 406-5 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-6
397:629
or employees and assistants as may be required to perform such of his
functions and to exercise such powers under this article as he deems
necessary for the enforcement of this article, including the making of
inspections and the holding of hearings.
B. Inspection of premises. All premises within the Township covered by
this article shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the Public
Officer to determine the condition thereof in order that he may perform
his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the persons occupying
the same and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Public Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine
and survey at all reasonable times all such premises; provided,
however, that such entries are made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. The owner,
operator and persons occupying the same shall give the Public Officer
free access to the same at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection. Every person occupying such premises shall give the owner
and operator thereof access to that portion of the premises occupied by
or in the possession of such person at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs, alterations or corrections as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with
any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
C. Determination of unfitness for use or occupancy. For the purposes of
this article, the Public Officer may determine that a building is unfit for
human habitation, use or occupancy, if he finds that conditions exist in
such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of
persons occupying or using the same or neighboring buildings or to
other residents of the Township. Such conditions may include the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitation facilities; dilapidation;
deterioration; disrepair; structural defects; uncleanliness; or failure to
comply with the standards established by § 406-5 of this article.
D. Charges and hearing. Whenever a petition is filed with the Public
Officer by a public authority (as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4) or by at
least five residents of the Township charging that any building is unfit
for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to
the Public Officer (on his own motion) that any building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public Officer (or his
designated agent) at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor
more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; and that the
owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony
§ 406-6 UNION CODE § 406-6
397:630
at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of
evidence prevailing in the courts of the State of New Jersey shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Public Officer.
E. Findings of fact and order. If, after the notice and hearing provided for
in Subsection D hereof, the Public Officer determines that the building
under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
(1) The repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be made
by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth
in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or to have said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the time
specified in the order, that the owner remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in said order of
removal.
F. Failure of owner to comply with order to repair or vacate. If the owner
fails to comply with an order requiring him to repair, alter or improve
or, at his option, to vacate and close the building, the Public Officer may
cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be
vacated and closed and may cause to be posted on the main entrance of
any building so closed a placard with the following words: "This
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or
occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
G. Failure of owner to comply with order to remove or demolish. If the
owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the building,
the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
H. Lien of municipality.
(1) The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert
witnesses fees, search fees and advertising charges, incurred in the
course of any proceeding taken under this article determined in
favor of the Township; and the cost of any such repairs, alterations
or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, if any, undertaken pursuant to Subsections F and G
hereof, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after
deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials
derived from such building or from any contract for removal or
demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred.
§ 406-6 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-6
397:631
(2) If the building is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited
against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds
of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any contract
for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such
credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such
credits, a detailed statement (herein called the municipal lien
certificate) of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be
filed by the Public Officer with the Municipal Tax Assessor of the
Township, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded by the
Public Officer to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the
credits exceed such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited
with the Clerk of the Superior Court by the Public Officer, shall be
secured in such manner as may be directed by such court and shall
be disbursed according to the order of judgment of the court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of
such court; provided, however, that nothing contained in this
article shall be construed to limit or impair in any way the power of
the Township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any
owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the
filing of the municipal lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the
amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien
certificate.
I. Certificate of necessity.
(1) Who may apply. Where any owner, operator or occupant is required
to make repairs or otherwise improve his property and is unable to
comply with this article without having a right of access to the
premises through or across adjoining premises not owned by him
or under his control, and where right to access has been refused
such owner, operator or occupant required to make such repair, or
where the owner or person empowered to grant such access cannot
be found or located, then upon the filing of an affidavit by such
owner, operator or occupant with the Public Officer, setting forth
the facts and applying for a certificate of necessity, the Public
Officer shall serve written notice of a hearing on said application
upon the applicant for such certificate and upon the owner or
person empowered to grant such access. Said notice of hearing
shall state the matters to be considered at said hearing and shall be
served in the manner prescribed for the service of complaints and
orders by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7, except that the Public Officer shall not
be required to record or lodge a copy of such notice with the county
recording officer of the County of Union. At least 10 days' notice of
such hearing shall be given where the address of the owner or
person empowered to grant such access is known. If such address
is unknown or cannot be ascertained by the Public Officer in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, at least 30 days' notice thereof
§ 406-6 UNION CODE § 406-6
397:632
shall be given, calculated from the date of the first newspaper
publication thereof.
(2) Hearing. On the day fixed for hearing, the Public Officer shall
provide opportunity for the owner or person empowered to grant
such access to state why such access should not be granted.
(3) Conditions for issuance of certificate. If the Public Officer
determines that such access is necessary to accomplish or
complete repairs or improvements necessary for compliance with
this article, then the Public Officer shall issue a certificate of
necessity granting and ordering access and setting forth therein
the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply, such
conditions as shall be necessary to protect adjoining property,
reasonable time limits during which certificate shall operate,
precautions to be taken to avoid damage and, where the Public
Officer deems proper, that a bond be procured at the expense of the
person seeking such access to secure such adjoining property
owner against damage to persons or property arising out of such
right of access. The amount set for the bond shall take into
consideration the extent, nature and duration of the repairs and
improvements, the proximity thereof to the premises over which
access has been sought and the potential risk of damage thereto.
Said bond, if required, shall be filed with the Public Officer.
(4) Refusal to comply with certificate. Any refusal to comply with a
certificate issued hereunder, or any interference with the purpose
for which a certificate is issued, shall be a violation of this article
and, in addition, to the penalties provided hereunder, the Public
Officer may, upon affidavit, setting forth the facts, apply to the
Judge of the Township for a warrant authorizing access and, if the
Judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in said affidavit, he
shall authorize the issuance of a warrant permitting access.
J. Service, oaths, rules and regulations.
(1) Complaints, orders and certificates of necessity issued by the
Public Officer pursuant to this article shall be served and recorded
or lodged for record in the manner prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7.
(2) The Public Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the
purposes and provisions of this article, including but not limited to
the following, in addition to others herein granted, to administer
oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence and to
make and adopt such written rules and regulations as he may deem
necessary and the Township Committee approves, by resolution,
for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article;
provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in
conflict with the provisions of this article nor in anywise alter,
amend, add to or supersede any of the provisions hereof. The Public
§ 406-6 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-6
397:633
§ 406-7. Nonapplicability.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this article, the provisions thereof
shall not apply to any land located in an industrial zone and existing in its
natural state.
§ 406-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3963; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998;
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 406-9. Service of orders.
The service of orders for the correction of violations of this article shall
be made upon the owner, occupant or other persons responsible for the
conditions, either by delivering a copy of the same to such person, or by
delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the
premises, or by sending it by mail to the owner, occupant or operator.
§ 406-9.1. Time limitations for construction, demolition and
landscaping noises. [Added 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 4884]
Officer shall file a certified copy of all such rules and regulations in
his office and in the office of the Township Clerk.
K. Annual review of article provisions and operations. The Public Officer
shall, in the month of December of each year, review with the Health
Officer, Construction Code Official, Township Engineer and Township
Attorney the procedure and operation of this article and report to the
Township Committee on or before January 1:
(1) Any recommended amendments, additions or modifications of the
provisions of this article consonant with the field experience of the
personnel charged with enforcement.
(2) A summary of the enforcement experiences, indicating number of
violations abated, number of cases processed in the Municipal
Court, number of inspections made and such other and further
pertinent information as will provide the Township Committee with
an annual account of the maintenance of the standards required by
this article.
(3) Any further recommendations as to how this article and the
procedures and operations thereunder may be improved.
§ 406-6 UNION CODE § 406-9.1
397:634
A. Construction and demolition activity, power tools, landscaping, snow
removal and yard maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work,
when performed or used in all nonresidential zones or property, shall
not be operated between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday
through Saturday. Work on Sunday is prohibited.
B. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with
a muffler.
§ 406-9.1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-9.1
397:635

ARTICLE II
Residential Dwellings and Lots
[Adopted 7-22-1975 by Ord. No. 3002 (Ch. 204, Art. II of the 1986
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 406-10. Findings.
It is hereby found and determined that, by reason of lack of maintenance
and resulting progressive deterioration, the condition of certain properties
has the effect of creating blighting conditions and that, if the same are not
curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and
will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds
to correct and eliminate the same. Timely regulations and restrictions as
indicated in this article will prevent the creation of blighting conditions and
the maintenance of neighborhood and property values. The enhancement of
neighborhoods and the public health, safety and welfare would be protected
and fostered.
§ 406-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the conditions of
maintenance of dwelling units and to fix certain responsibilities and duties
upon owners; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of
such dwellings and to fix penalties for the violation of this article. This
article is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public
interest, and it is intended that the same shall be liberally construed to
effectuate the purposes herein stated.
§ 406-12. Compliance.
Every dwelling used for human habitation, garages or other outbuildings
shall comply with the provisions of this article, whether or not such dwelling
or other structure shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before
or after enactment of this article and irrespective of any permits or licenses
which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of said dwelling
or other structure, or for the construction or repair of the same. It is the
purpose of this article to establish minimum standards for such dwellings,
and this article does not replace or modify standards otherwise established
for the construction, repair, alteration or use of any said dwellings or other
structures.
§ 406-13. Prevailing standards.
In any case where the provisions of this article impose a higher standard
than that set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or under any
law of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall
prevail; but if the provisions of this article impose a lower standard than any
§ 406-10 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-13
397:637
such ordinance or law, then and in that event, the higher standard contained
in any other such ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 406-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING — A building or structure or part thereof containing one or
more dwelling units.
§ 406-15. Condition of structure.
Every foundation, floor, wall, building, door, window, roof or other part of
a building shall be kept in good repair and capable of the use intended
by its design, and any exterior part or parts thereof subject to corrosion
or deterioration shall be kept well painted or otherwise provided with a
protective treatment sufficient to prevent deterioration.
§ 406-16. Orders of Public Officer.
The Public Officer, as herein designated, may order the owner to paint the
exterior walls of any such dwelling, when such walls have so deteriorated
as to warrant the need for repainting in order to prevent aggravated
deterioration of such exterior wall.
§ 406-17. Condition of lot and use of self-storage units or PODS®.
[Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 5088]
A. All lots and premises, with or without buildings thereon, designed for
residential purposes shall be clean and free from garbage, rubbish and
debris, as well as unsightly natural growth, and from any and all
conditions which might result in a hazard to safety. All grass, hedges
and shrubbery shall be kept trimmed and shall not be permitted to
become overgrown and unsightly. All fences surrounding vacant or
occupied lands herein described shall be kept in good repair.
B. Storage trailer or PODS®.
(1) Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
STORAGE TRAILER or PODS (Portable on Demand Storage) —
A receptacle or container that is suitable for the depositing of
household furniture, clothing and similar materials for the purpose
of storage of same by the owner of property in the Township of
Union.
(2) Prohibitions and allowances.
(a) All storage trailers or PODS® are prohibited from being placed
on any property within the Township of Union, except as
otherwise set forth herein.
§ 406-13 UNION CODE § 406-17
397:638
§ 406-18. Responsibility of owner.
(b) A single storage container or PODS® of 1,200 cubic feet or
less (exclusive of sheds) shall be permitted on a lot in the
Township of Union on a temporary basis as set forth hereafter.
It shall be located in i) the rear yard of the lot; ii) in the
driveway of the lot; or iii) where it cannot be viewed from the
street or public right-of-way. As it relates to ii), in the event that
the Township of Union determines that it is not reasonably
possible to place the container at least 10 feet from the lot line,
the owner with the approval of the Township of Union may
place the container in the driveway closer than 10 feet from
the lot line so long as the container does not obstruct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow or view.
(3) Permit and fees.
(a) No storage container or PODS® shall be placed on any lot until
a permit is obtained from the Superintendent of Public Works
or his/her designee. An application for the permit must be
submitted to the Superintendent of Public Works or designee
for a permit, which application shall:
[1] Identify the owner of the lot and/or the tenant(s), if
applicable;
[2] The address on which the storage container is to be
placed;
[3] The size of the storage container or PODS® in cubic feet;
[4] The exact proposed location on the lot where the storage
container or PODS® will be placed, including the
approximate number of feet that the container will be
located from the property line;
[5] The reason for the storage container or PODS®, and the
length of time that the storage container or PODS® will
need to be on the lot.
(b) All applications for a permit must include a fee of $30. The fee,
together with a complete application, must be delivered to the
Department of Public Works for approval.
(c) The permit will be valid for a period of 60 days and can be
renewed for one additional period of 60 days for an additional
fee of $50. Under no circumstances shall trailers/PODS®
remain on a lot in excess of 120 days from issuance of initial
permit.
A. The owner or occupant shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
area abutting such property between the street property line and
§ 406-17 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-18
397:639
§ 406-19. Designation of Public Officer.
The Construction Code Official of the Township of Union is hereby
designated as the Public Officer to exercise the powers prescribed by
this article. He may appoint or designate such other public officials or
employees of the Township to perform such duties as may be necessary
for the enforcement of this article, including the making of inspections and
holding hearings.
§ 406-20. Inspections.
The Public Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make or cause to
be made inspections to determine the conditions set forth in §§ 406-11,
406-12, 406-13 and 406-14 hereof, in order that he may perform his duty of
safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the
general public.
§ 406-21. Determinations of Public Officer.
For the purpose of this article, the Public Officer may determine that a
building or the surrounding property or vacant land, as herein described, is
injurious to the health and safety of the occupants thereof, or of neighboring
buildings of other residents of the Township; such conditions may include,
but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, dilapidation, disrepair,
uncleanliness; or conditions deleterious to the well-being of the general
public with reference to vacant land not properly maintained as required by
this article.
§ 406-22. Filing of petition.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the Township
or it appears to the Public Officer on his own motion that any building
is in a state of dilapidation, disrepair or uncleanliness; or the exterior is
in need of painting; or conditions exist which are deleterious to the wellbeing
of the general public with reference to vacant or occupied land not
pavement or roadway, including landscape ground cover, construction
of curbing and/or sidewalk and reconstruction and/or replacement of
defective or hazardous curb and sidewalk. The aforementioned area
shall not be paved by the owner or occupant unless specifically
authorized by the Public Officer in writing.
B. Sidewalk and curbing shall be cast-in-place concrete or Belgian block
conforming to current Township specifications. The use of wood,
precast concrete, rocks or any material other then cast-in-place
concrete or Belgian block is specifically prohibited.
C. The Public Officer could, at the request of the Township Committee or
through his own initiative, direct the construction of curbing or its
reconstruction as required.
§ 406-18 UNION CODE § 406-22
397:640
properly maintained as required by this article, the Public Officer shall,
if his preliminary investigation discloses the above, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of the premises in question a complaint stating the
charges and the basis therefor and containing a notice that a hearing will
be held before the Public Officer or his designated agent at a place then
fixed, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said
complaint and that the owner of the premises in question shall be given
the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by
counsel and give testimony concerning the charges. The rules of evidence
of the State of New Jersey shall not be controlling in hearings before the
Public Officer. The Public Officer may determine the necessity for a hearing.
§ 406-23. Enforcement.
A. If, after the notice and hearing provided for herein, the Public Officer
determines that the building is in a state of dilapidation, disrepair or
uncleanliness, or the exterior thereof is in need of painting, or
conditions deleterious to the well-being of the general public with
reference to vacant land not properly maintained as required by this
article, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof an order requiring the correction of the aforesaid deficiencies,
and if the owner fails to make the correction directed in said order,
within the time set forth therein, then and in that event, said owner
shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
B. At the option of the owner, in lieu of making the required corrections,
said owner may cause the premises to be vacated and closed within the
time set forth in said order.
C. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish said
building within a reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or
at the option of the owner to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed, in which latter event the Public Officer may
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
E. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and bids therefor in accordance with the New Jersey
Public Contracts Law.
§ 406-22 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-24
397:641
§ 406-24. Costs and liability.
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this article, determined in favor of the municipality,
and such costs of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale
of materials derived from such building or from any contract for removal or
demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon
which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished
by the Public Officer, he shall sell the materials of such building. There
shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such
credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits,
a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be
filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of
tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
certified mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Public Officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court and
shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such
court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed
to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 60
days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount
or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 406-25. Powers and authority of Public Officer.
The Public Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise such
powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of this article, including the following, in
addition to others herein granted to administer oaths, affirmations, examine
witnesses and receive evidence, and to make and adopt such written rules
and regulations as he may deem necessary, and that the Township
Committee approves by resolution, for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this article; provided, however, that such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article nor in anywise alter,
amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Public Officer shall
file a certified copy of all such rules and regulations in his office and in the
office of the Township Clerk.
§ 406-24 UNION CODE § 406-26
397:642
§ 406-26. Appeals.
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any act of the Public Officer
may appeal in writing such act of said Public Officer to the governing body
within 20 days of such act of said Public Officer and request a hearing
thereon by said governing body. The governing body shall hold a hearing on
said appeal within 21 days after the filing of the notice of appeal. At said
hearing, the appellant may be represented by counsel. The governing body
is empowered to vacate any finding in whole or in part of said Public Officer.
§ 406-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 406-28. Time limitations for construction, demolition and
landscaping noises. [Added 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 4884]
A. Construction and demolition activity, power tools, landscaping, snow
removal and yard maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work,
when performed or used in a residential zone or property, shall not be
operated or performed between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except that on Sunday, there shall be no
operation before 9:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.
B. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with
a muffler.
§ 406-26 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-28
397:643

ARTICLE III
Vacant Residential Properties During Foreclosure
[Adopted 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 5322]
§ 406-29. Notice of intention to foreclose; correction of violations.
§ 406-30. Notice of foreclosure; abatement of nuisances.
A. A creditor that serves a notice of intention to foreclose on a mortgage
on residential property in the Township pursuant to the Fair
Foreclosure Act, P.L. 1995, c.244 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-53 et seq.), shall serve
the Township Clerk with a copy of the notice at the same time that the
creditor serves the notice on the owner of the property. The creditor
shall include the full name and contact information of a person located
within the State of New Jersey who is authorized to accept service, on
behalf of the creditor, with a copy of the notice served on the Township
Clerk.
B. If the residential property becomes vacant at any time after the creditor
files the notice of intention to foreclose, but prior to vesting of title in
any third party, and the Township determines that the property is in
violation of any applicable state or local housing code, property
maintenance code or any other rule or regulation addressing the
maintenance of property within the Township, the Township shall notify
the creditor of the violation, by providing a copy of the notice to the
person located within the state who is authorized to accept service on
behalf of the creditor, and may require the creditor to correct the
violation.
C. The notice to correct a violation pursuant to this article shall include
with the notice of violation a description of the conditions that gave rise
to the violation and shall provide a period of not less than 30 days from
the creditor's receipt of the notice for the creditor to remedy the
violation. If the creditor fails to remedy the violation within that time
period, the Township may impose penalties allowed for the violation of
municipal ordinances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
D. For purposes of this article, "creditor" means a federal or statechartered
bank, savings bank, savings and loan association or credit
union, any person required to be licensed under the provisions of the
New Jersey Licensed Lenders Act,206 P.L. 1996, c.157 (N.J.S.A. 17:11C-1
et seq.), and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in the
debt obligation, including but not limited to servicers.
A. Notice requirements.
(1) A creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a mortgage on residential property in the Township
206. Editor's Note: The title of this Act was changed to "New Jersey Consumer Finance
Licensing Act," effective with the effective date of P.L. 2009, c. 53.
§ 406-29 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-30
397:645
shall, within 10 days of serving the summons and complaint, notify
the Township Clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a mortgage has been filed against the subject property.
The notice shall contain the name and contact information for
the representative of the creditor who is responsible for receiving
complaints of property maintenance and code violations, may
contain information about more than one property, and shall be
provided by mail or electronic communication, at the discretion
of the Township Clerk. The Township Clerk shall forward a copy
of the notice to the public officer or shall otherwise provide it to
any other local official responsible for the administration of any
property maintenance or public nuisance code. In the event the
property being foreclosed on is an affordable unit pursuant to
the Fair Housing Act, P.L. 1985, c.222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et al),
then the creditor shall identify that the property is subject to the
Fair Housing Act. The notice shall also include the street address
and lot and block number of the property and the full name and
contact information of an individual located within the state who is
authorized to accept service on behalf of the creditor. The notice
shall be provided to the Township Clerk within 10 days of service of
a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage
against the subject property.
(2) Any creditor that has initiated a foreclosure proceeding on any
residential property which is pending in Superior Court shall
provide to the Township Clerk a listing of all residential properties
in the municipality for which the creditor has foreclosure actions
pending, by street address and lot and block number. The Township
Clerk shall forward a copy of the notice to the public official.
B. If the owner of a residential property vacates or abandons any property
on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if a residential
property becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the creditor's filing
the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage
against the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in the creditor
or any other third party, and the property is found to be a nuisance or in
violation of any applicable state or local code, the local public officer,
Township Clerk or other authorized municipal official shall notify the
creditor, who shall have the responsibility to abate the nuisance or
correct the violation in the same manner and to the same extent as the
title owner of the property, to such standard or specification as may be
required by state law or municipal ordinance. The Township shall
include with the notice of violation a description of the conditions that
gave rise to the violation and shall provide a period of not less than 30
days from the creditor's receipt of the notice for the creditor to remedy
the violation. If the creditor fails to remedy the violation within that
time period, the Township may impose penalties allowed for the
violation of municipal ordinances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
§ 406-30 UNION CODE § 406-30
397:646
C. If the Township expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation on a residential property in situations in which the
creditor was given notice pursuant to the provisions of Subsection B
hereof, but failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violation as
directed, the Township shall have the same recourse against the
creditor as it would have against the title owner of the property,
including but not limited to the recourse provided under Section 23 of
P.L. 2003, c.210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-100), which recourse includes
placement of a lien against the property and against any asset of the
creditor, against any asset of the partner of a creditor, if a partnership,
and against any asset of any owner of a 10% interest or greater if the
creditor is a corporation.
§ 406-30 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-30
397:647

ARTICLE IV
Vacant and Foreclosing Property
[Adopted 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. 5440]
§ 406-31. Purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter to protect and preserve the public health,
safety and welfare and security and quiet enjoyment of residents and
neighborhoods by:
§ 406-32. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When consistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the
plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CREDITOR — The creditor having a right of foreclosure, including but not
limited to the holder of a mortgage on a property, and any agent, servant
or employee of the creditor, a loan servicing company, or any successor
in interest and/or assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations
under the document granting foreclosure rights.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.
FORECLOSING — The process by which property, placed as security for
a real estate loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower
defaults.
PROPERTY — Any real estate, or portion thereof, located in the Township of
Union, including any improvements thereon.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains one or more
dwelling units used, intended or designed to be occupied for living
purposes.
SECURITY — Measures taken to ensure that the property is inaccessible to
unauthorized persons.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union.
VACANT — With regard to any property, that no portion of the property is
legally occupied. A property shall not be deemed "vacant," for purposes of
this chapter where:
A. Requiring all property owners, including lenders, trustees and service
companies, to properly maintain vacant and/or foreclosing properties;
and
B. Regulating the maintenance of vacant and/or foreclosing properties in
order to prevent blighted and unsecured properties.
There is a building on the property containing multiple units, if any of
the units are legally occupied;
A.
§ 406-31 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-32
397:649
§ 406-33. Registration of vacant properties; designation of
responsible individual.
The legal occupant has temporarily left the property for vacation or
other purposes for a period not exceeding 180 days, possessing both
the intent to return and the legal right to return, such as a residential
property owner or tenant who resides in another municipality or state
for a portion of the year; or
B.
The building is under construction with current valid construction
permits, and work is being performed on the property on a regular
basis.
C.
A. All owners of vacant property must register such vacant properties with
the Construction Code Official or his designee within 14 days of such
property becoming vacant. The registration must be renewed annually
as set forth below for as long as the property remains vacant.
B. Owners of vacant properties shall designate an individual or property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property. The individual or property management company
responsible for the security and maintenance of the property shall have
an office located within 25 miles of the property.
C. The registration required by this section must contain the following
information:
(1) The owner's name, telephone number, and mailing address. The
mailing address may not be a post office box.
(2) The street address and Tax Map designation (lot and block) of the
property.
(3) Whether the property is residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use.
(4) The name, telephone number, and mailing address of an individual
or property management company responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property. The mailing address may not be a post
office box.
(5) Certification that the property was inspected as required by this
chapter.
(6) Proof of utility (gas, electric, water) connections or disconnections.
(7) Proof of insurance meeting the requirements of § 36-6C of this
chapter.
D. The owner shall have a continuing duty to notify the Township of any
changes to the information contained in the registration.
E. The Construction Code Official or his designee may promulgate forms
on which the information in the registration must be provided.
§ 406-32 UNION CODE § 406-33
397:650
§ 406-34. Registration of foreclosing properties; designation of
responsible individual.
F. The owner must notify the Construction Code Official or his designee if,
at any time subsequent to registration as a vacant property, the
property is no longer vacant and provide proof that the property is no
longer vacant.
A. A creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage on property in this Township, including but not limited to
residential property, shall, within 10 days of serving the summons and
complaint, file a registration with the Construction Code Official or his
designee. The registration must be renewed as set forth below until
title to the property has been transferred to a new owner or the
foreclosure action is dismissed. A creditor who takes title to a vacant
property shall then be required to register as an owner of such vacant
property and to renew such registration for as long as the property
remains vacant.
B. If the property is vacant, the creditor must designate an individual or
property management company responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property. The individual or property management
company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property
shall have an office located within 25 miles of the property.
C. The registration shall contain the following information:
(1) The creditor's name, telephone number, and mailing address. The
mailing address may not be a post office box.
(2) The street address and Tax Map designation (lot and block) of the
property for which foreclosure has been sought.
(3) Whether the property is residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use.
(4) The name, telephone number, and mailing address of a designated
representative of the creditor who is responsible for receiving
complaints of property maintenance and code violations for that
property. The mailing address may not be a post office box.
(5) If the property is vacant, the name, telephone number, and mailing
address of an individual or property management company
responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. The
mailing address may not be a post office box.
(6) If the property is vacant, certification that the property was
inspected as required by this chapter.
(7) If the property is vacant, proof of utility (gas, electric, water)
connections or disconnections.
(8) If the property is vacant, proof of insurance meeting the
requirements of § 36-6C of this chapter.
§ 406-33 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-34
397:651
§ 406-35. Registration fees.
§ 406-36. Maintenance requirements.
D. The creditor shall have a continuing duty to notify the Township of any
changes to the information contained in the registration.
E. The Construction Code Official or his designee may promulgate forms
on which the information in the registration must be provided.
F. Once the foreclosure action has terminated, either through dismissal or
transfer of title, the creditor must provide proof of such termination,
sale, transfer or occupancy to the enforcement authority within 30 days
of sale, transfer or occupancy.
A. The initial registration fee shall be $600 and must accompany the
registration form. The initial registration shall be valid for the
remainder of the calendar year in which the property is registered.
Renewals for subsequent calendar years shall run from January 1 to
December 31, and payment of the renewal registration fee shall be due
by January 15 of the relevant year. The fee for the first annual renewal
shall be $1,500; the fee for the second annual renewal shall be $3,000;
and the fee for the third and subsequent renewals shall be $5,000.
Registration fees and renewal fees will not be prorated or refunded.
B. No governmental agency shall be required to pay the annual or renewal
registration fee.
A. Properties subject to the requirements of this chapter must be
maintained in accordance with all the applicable federal, state and local
laws, rules and regulations. The owner, creditor, local individual or local
property management company, as appropriate, must inspect the
property twice a month for the duration of the vacancy or foreclosure as
appropriate.
B. In addition to and not in lieu of meeting all other applicable federal,
state, and local laws, rules, and regulations:
(1) Properties subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be kept
free of accumulated snow and ice, weeds, dry brush, dead
vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, unregistered
vehicles, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices
(except those required by law), and discarded personal items,
including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items giving the
appearance that the property is vacant.
(2) Properties subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be
maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings. In the
event that any graffiti, tagging, or similar markings are placed on
the property, it/they shall either be removed or painted over with an
exterior-grade paint matching the color of the portion of the
§ 406-34 UNION CODE § 406-36
397:652
structure where the graffiti, tagging, or similar marking was
placed.
(3) Front yards, rear yards, and side yards of properties subject to the
requirements of this chapter shall be landscaped and maintained to
neighborhood standards. Landscaping and maintenance shall
include, but is not limited to, care of grass, mulch, decorative rock,
artificial turf/sod specifically designed for residential or
commercial installation, or other ground cover, bushes, shrubs,
hedges, trees, or similar plantings, removal or repair of gravel,
broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting,
mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material, in addition to
regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of
required vegetation and removal of all trimmings.
(4) Any pool, spa, or other standing body of water shall either be kept
in working order so the water remains clear and free of growth,
pollutants, and debris and does not become a harborage for vermin
or insects, or drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with
pools or spas must comply with the security fencing requirements
of the Township.
C. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire and maintain liability
insurance covering injury or damage to any person or any property in
not less than $300,000 for residential buildings and $1,000,000 for
nonresidential buildings or property.
D. The property owner shall be responsible for property maintenance.
However, if the owner of a property vacates or abandons any property
on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if a property is
or becomes vacant at the time of or at any point subsequent to the
creditor's filing the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage against the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in
the creditor or any other third party, and the property is found to be a
nuisance or in violation of any applicable state or local code, the
enforcement authority shall notify the creditor, which shall have the
responsibility to abate the nuisance or correct the violation in the same
manner and to the same extent as the title owner of the property, to
such standard or specification as may be required by state law or
Township ordinance. The enforcement authority shall include a
description of the conditions that gave rise to the violation with the
notice of violation and shall provide a period of no more than 30 days
for the creditor to remedy the violation and, if the violation presents an
imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, shall provide a
period of no more than 10 days for the creditor to remedy the violation.
If the creditor fails to remedy the violation within that time period, the
Township may impose the penalties allowed for the violation of
municipal ordinances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 against the creditor
to the same extent as they could be imposed against the owner of the
property.
§ 406-36 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 406-36
397:653
§ 406-37. Inspections.
The enforcement authority shall have the authority to inspect properties
subject to this article for compliance and to issue summonses for any
violations.
§ 406-38. Enforcement.
Enforcement authority shall be vested in the Building Department, the
Construction Code Official and his respective inspectors. The Union Police
Department, the Department of Public Works and the Health Officer and his
respective inspectors shall also have enforcement authority with respect to
this article.
§ 406-39. Violations and penalties.
§ 406-40. Township's authority to abate and impose lien.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Township from taking action
to abate a nuisance or correct a violation where the owner or creditor,
as applicable, has failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violation
on a vacant property or a property in foreclosure after notice and the
opportunity to abate or correct. In such situations, the Township may
impose a lien against the property for costs to correct the violation or abate
the nuisance. Such lien shall hereafter form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as such taxes to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as such taxes.
§ 406-41. Governmental entities exempt.
No governmental entity shall be required to register under this chapter.
However, nothing contained herein shall be construed as granting
exemption from property maintenance or other obligations imposed by any
other statute, regulation, or ordinance.
E. Adherence to this chapter does not relieve the owner or creditor of
obligations set forth in any other statute, regulation, ordinance, or
other source of authority or obligation.
A. Violation of any of the terms of this article shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $100 nor greater than $2,000 per occurrence in
addition to any registration fee or renewal fee that may be due and
owing. Each subsequent occurrence shall result in an increased penalty.
B. Failure to abate a nuisance or correct a violation of any statute,
regulation, or ordinance regulating the construction, maintenance,
health, or security of a property shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in the applicable statute, regulation, or ordinance for the specific
violation.
§ 406-36 UNION CODE § 406-41
397:654
Chapter 415
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Department — See Ch. 121.
Amusements; adult entertainment — See Ch.
164.
Damaging of buildings and fixtures — See Ch.
198.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 216.
Golf — See Ch. 302.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 397.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
§ 415-1. Use restricted to residents and guests.
The use of all recreational facilities under the control of the Township
of Union in the County of Union shall be restricted to residents of the
Township of Union and guests of said residents as hereinafter provided.
§ 415-2. Guest to be accompanied by resident.
No guest shall use any of said facilities, unless he shall be accompanied by
a resident of said Township of Union.
§ 415-3. Proof of residency.
All residents using any of the recreational facilities of said Township shall be
required, on demand of the Recreation Superintendent or the person then
in charge of said facility, to furnish proof of residency.
§ 415-4. Mutilation or destruction of property.207 [Amended
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
There shall be no mutilation of destruction of any Township-owned property
located in any recreational facility.
§ 415-5. Promulgation of regulations. [Amended 5-28-1974 by Ord.
No. 2882]
Authority is hereby given to the Superintendent of Recreation to
promulgate rules and regulations for the operation of Township recreational
facilities, including the designation of hours during which individual
recreational facilities shall be available for use.
§ 415-6. Gambling prohibited.
Gambling of any kind shall be prohibited in all recreational facilities.
207. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 198, Buildings and Fixtures, Damaging of, and Ch. 313,
Graffiti.
§ 406-41 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 415-7
397:655
§ 415-7. Rough behavior; disorderly conduct.
There will be no rough behavior or disorderly conduct of any kind which
may endanger the safety, health or morals of persons using any of the
recreational facilities of said Township.
§ 415-8. Refuse.
All refuse shall be deposited in containers provided for that purpose.
§ 415-9. Individual and organizational permits. [Amended
5-28-1974 by Ord. No. 2882; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 5239]
Authority is hereby given to the Superintendent of Recreation to issue
both individual and organizational permits for the use of the recreational
facilities of the Township, which said permits shall designate the type of
use, the location, the date and the times within which the permit shall
be in force. The provisions of this chapter pertaining to residency shall
not be applicable in those instances in which the use of any recreational
facilities has been authorized by a permit issued by the Superintendent to
an organization or group of people, which said permit authorizes said use
by more than 12 persons.
A. Any organization, group or entity running a program that is not
sponsored by the Union Recreation Department must provide a
certificate of insurance in the amount of $500,000 naming the Township
of Union as an additional insured prior to the issuance of said permit.
B. Any organization, group or entity running a program that is not
sponsored by the Union Recreation Department is responsible for
cleaning up after its game, practice or activity, and said debris must be
deposited in bags or cans at the field or the facility.
C. All scheduled softball games sponsored by the Union Recreation
Department have priority over picnic permits.
D. All permits issued to the Union Board of Education have priority over
any issued field permit.
E. Any organization, group or entity running a program must pay, prior to
the issuance of a permit a permit fee as follows: $200 per day, $100 per
1/2 day (up to four hours) or $25 per one hour, along with a
maintenance bond in the amount of $200. Any request for a fee waiver
shall be made to the Township Committee. If the organization, group or
entity is a Union-based program, meaning the majority of participants
are Union residents, prior to the issuance of a permit, the fee shall be
$100 per day or $50 per 1/2 day (up to four hours). Any request for a fee
waiver shall be made to the Township Committee. [Amended
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 5311; 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 5339]
§ 415-7 UNION CODE § 415-9
397:656
§ 415-10. Fees for recreation programs. [Added 1-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 5361]
Category Fees
Camps, clinics, programs and
workshops
Camps and clinics, daily rate Up to $100
Programs and workshops, daily
rate
Up to $250
Leagues (adult 18+, child 2 to 17)
Adult: in-town individual Up to $75
Adult: out-of-town individual Up to $100
Adult: in-town team Up to $1,000
Adult: out-of-town team Up to $1,050
Child: in-town individual Up to $75
Maintenance fees
Weekend tournament/multihour
rental
$250/day/employee
Key deposits $25 to $100
§ 415-11. Violations and penalties; eviction from property.
[Amended 5-28-1974 by Ord. No. 2882; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of any permit
issued pursuant thereto or disturbing or interfering with any person or
group occupying any area or participating in any activity pursuant to a
permit shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section; and, further,
that any such person so violating any of the provisions of this chapter may
be summarily evicted from any recreational facility in the Township of Union
in the County of Union.
F. If a field becomes unusable for any reason, the permit holder will be
notified. Any use of the field after the permit holder is notified that the
field is unusable will result in a revocation of the permit.
G. The permit must be in the permit holder's possession when utilizing the
field or facility.
§ 415-9 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 415-11
397:657
Chapter 416
SPORTS LIGHTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Recreation — See Ch. 121.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 397.
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 415.
§ 416-1. Lighting.
The light intensity from sports lights, whether on public or private property,
shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle along any property line or 0.3 footcandle
at a residential property line during the hours from 4:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m. Light intensity from sports lights after 10:00 p.m. as measured at a
residential property line shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle. The objective of
these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light
shall shine into windows or onto streets and driveways in such manner as
to interfere with or detract from a resident's quality of life. To achieve these
requirements, the intensity of such light sources shall be controlled with
light shielding or lower-wattage bulbs, or both.
§ 416-2. Enforcement.
Violation of this chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer
or his or her designee.
§ 416-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to one or more of following: imprisonment in the county jail, or in any other
place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any
term not exceeding 90 days, or by a fine not exceeding $1,250, or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on
the effective date of this section.
Chapter 419
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 373.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Noise — See Ch. 585.
§ 415-11 UNION CODE § 416-3
419:658
ARTICLE I
Registration and Licensing
[Adopted 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 4946]
§ 419-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following
meaning:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner of this article. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow, any room
or rooms in a rooming/boarding house or other dwelling unit, consisting of
one or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor in a building, whether
designed with or without housekeeping facilities for dwelling purposes
and notwithstanding whether the apartment be designed for residence, for
office or the operation of any industry or business or for any other type
of independent use. Each unit shall contain no more than one kitchen or
cooking facility.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, including
any room or rooms in a room/boarding house, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more persons,
including but not limited to the owner thereof or any of his servants,
agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services, furnishings,
furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with use or
occupancy thereof.
LICENSE — The license issued by the Township Clerk or designee attesting
that the rental unit has been properly registered in accordance with this
article.
LICENSEE — The person to whom the license is issued pursuant to this
article. The term "licensee" includes within its definition the term agent,
where applicable.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership, association or trust who owns, operates, exercises
control over or is in charge of a rental facility.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — A portion of a rental facility, dwelling, commercial
unit or dwelling unit shall be considered owner-occupied if the owner
makes his primary residence therein. A person may have only one primary
residence in the Township.
§ 419-1 RENTAL PROPERTY § 419-1
419:659
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof
consisting of less than three dwelling units and has sleeping facilities for
less than 25 occupants, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to
be a place where living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or
unfurnished.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is available by lease, rental or
otherwise, to persons other than the owner. Rental unit shall not include
that portion of a rental facility or dwelling unit that is owner-occupied.
RENT or RENTED — Occupied by any person or persons other than the
owner, regardless or whether there is a written or oral agreement and
regardless of whether the owner receives consideration for the occupancy.
TENANCY — Occupancy of the unit by one or more tenants.
TENANT — Occupant in a unit other than the owner.
§ 419-2. Registration.
All rental units, as defined in § 419-1, except for any building or buildings
or structure comprising more than 20 dwelling units or apartments, shall
hereafter be registered with the Township Clerk or designee of the
Township of Union, on forms which shall be provided for that purpose,
and which shall be obtained from the Township Clerk or designee. Such
registration shall occur or an annual basis as provided herein.
§ 419-3. Registration and licensing; term; initial registration
provisions.
Each rental unit shall be registered initially, yearly and with each change
of occupancy. The license term shall commence on January 1, 2007, and
shall be valid for a calendar year, at which time it shall expire and a new
registration shall be required. All rental units must file an initial registration
which shall be submitted on or before August 15, 2006.
§ 419-4. Registration forms; filing; contests.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units shall be registered and licensed as provided herein.
Every owner shall file with the Township Clerk or designee of the Township
of Union a registration form for each unit contained within a building or
structure, which shall include the following information:
A. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises
and the record owner or owners of the rental business, if not the same
persons. In the case of a partnership, the name and addresses of all
general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals where such individual may be
reached both during the day and evening hours.
§ 419-1 UNION CODE § 419-4
419:660
§ 419-5. Registration form; amendments; filling.
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this article
shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in
B. If the address of any record owner is not located in Union or in Union
County, the name and address of a person who resides in Union County
and who is authorized to accept notices from a tenant and to issue
receipts therefor and to accept service of process on behalf of the
record owner.
C. The name and address of the agent of the premises, if any.
D. The name and address, including the dwelling unit number, of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by the
owner or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any.
E. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent or the owner, if domiciled in Union
County, who may be reached or contacted at any time in the event of
emergency affecting the premises or any unit of dwelling space therein,
including such emergencies as the future of any essential service or
system, and who has the authority to make emergency decisions
concerning the building and any repair thereto or expenditure in
connection therewith.
F. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises.
G. If fuel oil is used to heat the building, the name and address of the fuel
oil dealer servicing the building and the grade of the fuel oil used.
H. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of sleeping
rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the requirement
of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan, which shall become
part of the application and which shall be attached to the registration
form when filled by the Township Clerk or designee.
I. The names, age and gender of each tenant who is to occupy the
dwelling unit.
J. Such other information as may be prescribed by the Township of Union.
K. The Township Clerk or designee shall index and file the registration
forms. In doing so, The Township Clerk or designee shall follow the
mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1, as amended, so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration
requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the
property being registered, and will also satisfy the registration
requirements of this article. The owner shall post the certificate of
inspection or license.
§ 419-4 RENTAL PROPERTY § 419-5
419:661
the information to be included thereon. No fee required for the filling of an
amendment, except where the ownership of the premises is changed.
§ 419-6. Periodic inspections.
§ 419-7. Access for inspections; repairs.
A. Each rental unit shall be inspected at least once a year.
B. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Township of Union, and
inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly
authorized and appointed person, persons or agency of the Township of
Union shall not be used as a valid substitute.
C. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining zoning
ordinance compliance, and to the extent applicable, to determine if the
property complies with the Property Maintenance Code, BOCA
Maintenance Code and Housing Code and/or Uniform Fire Safety Act.
D. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection, such property shall not
thereafter be registered, nor shall a license issue, and the owner of the
property or his agent shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall any
tenant occupy the property, until the necessary corrections have been
made so as to bring the property and rental unit into compliance with
the applicable code, and the property is thereafter subsequently
inspected, registered and licensed. In the event that the property is
occupied when such conditions are discovered, all such corrections
shall be made within 30 days, and, if not made within that time period,
the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article, and, every day
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation, subject to the penalty provisions of § 419-16 of this article.
The owner, however, shall be permitted to apply for extension of time to
make repairs or corrections so as to comply with this article, for good
cause shown, provided that such extension shall not exceed 30 days.
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and rooming/
boarding houses in order that they may promote the purposes of this
article to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses and of the
general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses at all
reasonable times. The owner or occupant of every rental facility, rental
unit and rooming/boarding house shall give the inspecting officer free
access to the rental facility, rental unit and rooming/boarding house at
all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections, examinations
and surveys.
§ 419-5 UNION CODE § 419-7
419:662
§ 419-8. Prohibitions on occupancy.
No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit
occupancy of any rental unit within the Township of Union, which is not
registered and licensed in accordance with this article.
§ 419-9. License.
Upon the filing of a completed registration form and payment of the
prescribed fee and a satisfactory inspection, the owner shall be entitled to
the issuance of a license commencing on the date of issuance and expiring
on December 31 of the calendar year. A registration form shall be required
for each rental unit, and license shall issue to the owner for each rental unit,
if more than one rental unit is contained in the property.
§ 419-10. Fees.
At the time of the filling of the registration form, and prior to the issuance
of a license, the owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in accordance
with the following:
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental unit
and rooming/boarding house access to any part of such rental facility,
rental unit and rooming/boarding house at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alternations, as are necessary, to
effect compliance with the provisions of this article or any lawful order
issued pursuant thereto.
C. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this article, an inspecting officer shall conduct an inspection
as hereinbefore provided.
A. An annual registration fee as follows:
(1) $50 per unit.
B. A reinspection fee as follows:
(1) First reinspection, no charge.
(2) Second reinspection, $25 per unit.
(3) Any additional reinspection, $50 per unit.
C. If the owner of the property is a senior citizen who resides in a unit of
the properly and rents out the remaining unit and would otherwise
qualify under the State of New Jersey property tax deduction under
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, there shall be no fee.
D. If the owner of the property is registered as 501(c)3 corps, and thus
considered tax exempt by the IRS, or have similar tax exempt status
from the State of New Jersey and file annual returns if they are
incorporated, there shall be no fee.
§ 419-7 RENTAL PROPERTY § 419-10
419:663
§ 419-11. Providing registration form to occupants and tenants.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the registration form required by this article. This particular
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guesthouse registered with
the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the registration certificate in conspicuous place within the rental
unit(s).
§ 419-12. Maximum number of occupants; posting.
§ 419-13. Taxes and other municipal charges; payment precondition
for registration and license.
No rental unit may be registered and no license shall issue for a property
containing a rental unit unless all municipal taxes, water and sewer charges
and any other municipal assessments are paid on a current basis.
§ 419-14. Occupant(s) standards.
E. If any fee is not paid within 30 days of its due date, a late fee surcharge
of $30 will be assessed, a month, up to 90 days. A failure to pay the
initial fee and any late fee shall be deemed a violation of this article.
F. A failure to pay any fee as required by this article shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
A. The maximum number of occupants, as determined by the Construction
Code Official, shall be posted in each rental unit. It shall be unlawful for
any person, including the owner, agent, tenant or registered tenant, to
allow a greater number of persons than the posted maximum number of
occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight the rental unit for a period
exceeding 29 days. Any person violating this provision shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of § 419-16 of this article.
B. Only those occupant's whose names are on file with the Township of
Union, as required in this article, may reside in the licensed premises. It
shall be unlawful for any other person to reside in said premises, and
any owner, agent, tenant or registered tenant allowing a nonregistered
party to reside in said premises shall be in violation of this section and
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 419-16 of this article.
A. Occupants. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the
Township Clerk, as provided in this article, may reside in the licensed
premises. It shall be unlawful for any other person to reside in said
premises, and this provision may be enforced against the landlord,
tenant or other person residing in said premises.
B. Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a manner
which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the
§ 419-10 UNION CODE § 419-14
419:664
§ 419-15. Revocation of license; procedure.
surrounding properties and property owners or the public in general,
such that it shall constitute a nuisance, as defined in the ordinances of
the Township of Union.
C. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities and
the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Township of Union and with all
applicable state and federal laws.
D. Penalties. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 419-16 of
this article.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner
may be subject to the revocation or suspension of the license issued
hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this article at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection B herein.
(3) Continuously renting the unit or units to tenants who are convicted
of a violation of the township's Noise Ordinance.208
(4) Continuously permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this article.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
B. Procedure; written complaint; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a license may
be filed by any one or more of the following: Director of Public
Safety, Chief of Police, Construction Code Official, Housing
Inspector, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or any other persons or
office authorized to file such a complaint. Such complaint shall be
in writing and filed with the Township Clerk or designee. The
complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to apprise the
licensee of the charges so as to permit the licensee to present a
defense. The individual(s) filling the complaint may do so on the
basis of information and belief, and need not rely on personal
information.
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 585, Noise.
§ 419-14 RENTAL PROPERTY § 419-15
419:665
§ 419-16. Violations and penalties.
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Township Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Township Committee, and a
date for a hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be sooner
than 10 nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Township Clerk or
designee shall forward a copy of the complaint and a notice, as to
the date of the hearing, to the licensee and the agent, if any, at the
address indicated on the registration form. Service upon the agent
shall be sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Township Committee, unless, in its discretion, the Township
Committee determines that the matter should be heard by a
hearing officer, who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. If the matter is referred to a hearing officer, such
officer shall transmit his findings of fact and conclusions of law to
the Township Committee within 30 days of the conclusion of the
hearing. The Township Committee shall then review the matter and
may accept, reject or modify the recommendations of the hearing
officer based on the record before such hearing officer. In the event
that the matter is not referred to a hearing officer and is heard by
the Township Committee, then the Township Committee shall
render a decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing.
Following the hearing, a decision shall be rendered dismissing the
complaint, revoking or suspending the license or determining that
the license shall not be renewed or reissued for one or more
subsequent license years.
(4) A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The Township Attorney or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
C. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental license by
demonstrating that the owner has taken appropriate action and has
made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving
rise to the revocation proceeding, including but not limited to the
institution of legal action against the tenant(s), occupant(s) or guests
for recovery of the premises, eviction of the tenant(s) or otherwise.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of no less
than $100 and no more than $1,250, by imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
§ 419-15 UNION CODE § 419-16
419:666
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service, as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting
the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 419-16 RENTAL PROPERTY § 419-16
419:667
Chapter 421
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of occupancy for rental
property — See Ch. 221, Art. I.
§ 421-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for habitation as defined by the
statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of New
Jersey, County of Union and Township of Union, and occupied or unoccupied
and offered for rent.
BASE RENT — Rental period for the housing space exclusive of capital
improvement surcharges, hardship surcharges or any other surcharge
which may be allowable under this chapter.
DWELLING — Includes any building or structure or trailer, or land used
as a trailer park, rented or offered for rent, to one or more tenants or
family units. Exempt from this chapter are motels, hotels and similar type
buildings and housing units of two units or less, and all buildings which are
presently subject to rent control or rent stabilization by the governments
of the United States or the State of New Jersey. Housing units newly
constructed or rented for the first time to any tenant are likewise exempt
and the initial rent may be determined by the landlord.
HOUSING SPACE — Includes that portion of a dwelling, rented or offered
for rent, for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit,
together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements, connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property.
JUST CAUSE — Action on the part of the landlord in refusing to let, rent,
rerent or rerent to a tenant, or basis for dispossess for any one or more of
the following:
Failure on the part of the tenant to pay rent due and owing under the
lease, whether the same be oral or written.
A.
Disorderly or disturbing noises or conduct on the part of the tenant
that destroys the peace and tranquility of the landlord, other tenants or
other persons living in or about the neighborhood.
B.
Intentional or persistent neglect, damage or injury by the tenant to the
property of the landlord.
C.
§ 419-16 UNION CODE § 421-1
419:668
§ 421-2. Establishment of rents. [Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No.
4297]
§ 421-3. Rental increase to be void.
Any rental increase at a time of other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease shall be void. Any rental increase in excess
of that authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be void. No charge,
except those specifically authorized by this chapter, shall be allowed in
connection with any rental.
§ 421-4. Landlords seeking increases.
Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall notify the tenant no less
than 30 days prior to the proposed increase by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service, provided that the landlord obtains the
tenant's signature acknowledging receipt of said notice, of the calculations
Constant violation by the tenant of the rules and regulations of the
landlord, if signed by the tenant or incorporated in the lease, with a
copy being given to the tenant.
D.
Substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the lease agreement
by the tenant.
E.
F. The owner seeks to occupy premises himself.
The owner seeks to close the premises down without permitting any
further occupancy.
G.
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this
chapter is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of
this chapter. At the expiration of a lease, or at the termination of the
lease of a periodic tenant, no landlord may request or receive an
increase in rent of more than 4% over and above the base rent paid by
said tenant during the leasehold period. For a periodic tenant whose
lease terms shall be less than one year, said tenant shall not suffer or be
caused to pay any rent increase in any calendar year which exceeds the
aforementioned 4% for the calendar year prior thereto. The effective
date of any lease, regardless of the date of the instrument shall be the
date of taking possession.
B. Where the total number of dwelling units exceed 500 units, the
following shall apply: [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 4893]
(1) The permitted rent increase in this section shall be 8.0%.
(2) For those units rented after the adoption of this subsection, no rent
control shall apply provided that the landlord sets forth in a
conspicuous manner that rent control of the Township of Union
does not apply to this unit.
§ 421-1 RENTAL PROPERTY § 421-4
419:669
involved in computing the increase, the allowable percentage increase and
the allowable rental increase.
§ 421-5. Tax surcharges by reason of increase in property tax.
§ 421-6. Capital improvements.
A. A landlord shall not be entitled to nor receive any tax surcharge by
reason of increase in municipal property taxes.
B. In the event that the landlord is successful in the prosecution of a tax
appeal for the reduction of municipal taxes, the tenants shall be entitled
to and receive from the landlord an allowance or refund of 50% of said
tax reduction after deducting the expenses incurred by the landlord in
prosecuting said appeal. The landlord shall serve notice within 50 days
after final determination and judgment of said tax appeal upon all those
tenants who were tenants in said premises at the time the tax appeal
was filed. The notice to tenants shall set forth in detail the amount
constituting the judgment reducing the municipal taxes; the reduction
in dollars and cents; the particular expenses incurred by the landlord in
prosecution of the tax appeal; and the calculation showing the
apportionment and the particular amount due to each tenant as a
refund or allowance. The refund or allowance shall be paid in lump sum
or in six monthly installments, beginning 60 days after the final
determination or judgment of the tax appeal.
A. An improvement shall be an improvement which is depreciable
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder and allowed depreciable
expense by the Internal Revenue Service.
B. "Capital improvement" means capital which is expended by a landlord
in the nature of investment for the improvement of the dwelling made
with the expectation of its useful existence for an indefinite period into
the future in which will inure in a significant degree to the benefit of the
tenants thereof and which is not required to be provided by contractual
obligations between the landlord and tenant or by state and local law.
C. "Capital improvement" means capital which is expended by landlord in
the nature of an investment for the improvement of the dwelling made
with the expectation of its useful existence for an indefinite period into
the future, which service is not previously provided to the tenant.
D. "Capital improvement" means capital which is expended by the landlord
in the nature of an investment for the improvement of the dwelling
made with the expectation of its useful existence for an indefinite
period into the future, which investment does not simply replace the
existing facility but in fact improves the facility by the use of improved
or better material as the provision of upgraded or improved facility. A
capital improvement surcharge shall be limited to the difference
§ 421-4 UNION CODE § 421-6
419:670
between the cost of the improved facility and the cost of simply
replacing the existing facility.
E. Useful life.
(1) The useful life of the capital improvements shall be determined by
the depreciable life of the improvement as set forth in the Internal
Revenue Code and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(2) The useful life of the capital improvement shall be determined by
the Rent Leveling Board after hearing testimony as to the
depreciable life of the items, the useful life of the items and any
guaranties on the items. The depreciable period used for the
calculation of any capital improvement surcharge shall not be less
than the longer of the aforementioned items.
(3) The useful life of the capital improvement shall be determined by
the actual useful life of the improvement without reference to
artificial schedules of depreciation.
(4) The landlord shall file a completed application, on whatever forms
the Board may specify, a minimum of 30 days in advance of a
proposed hearing, with the Rent Board Secretary. The Board
Secretary shall schedule said matter for hearing as soon as
practicable, but not less than 30 days nor more than 65 days from
the date of the filing of a completed application. The landlord shall
notify all affected tenants of the proposed hearing date by personal
service, or certified mail, at least 30 days in advance of the
proposed hearing date. The landlord shall promptly file proof of
service with the Rent Board Secretary upon completion of services.
(5) The landlord shall supply the following information to the Rent
Board at the time of filing the application and shall serve the same
upon all affected tenants, together with the meeting notice:
(a) Total cost of the improvement.
(b) Total square footage of the rental premises.
(c) Square footage occupied by the individual tenant.
(d) Projected useful life of the improvement and depreciable life of
the improvement for Internal Revenue Service.
(e) Cost of improvement per square foot on a monthly basis.
(f) Projected monthly cost to tenant of capital improvement
surcharge.
(6) In addition, the applicant shall supply the following information
with his application to the Rent Board and shall notify each tenant
that this information is available for review, for at least 30 days
prior to the hearing, at a designated place on the rental premises,
§ 421-6 RENTAL PROPERTY § 421-6
419:671
at least five days per week between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., as well
as a minimum of one evening per week for at least three hours.
(a) Invoices showing the total cost of the improvement.
(b) Copies of proof of payment (canceled checks, etc.).
(c) Proof of competitive bids for the work.
(d) Copies of any and all building permits, final inspection reports
and any and all other records of inspection of the improvement.
(e) A copy of the contract awarded for the improvement.
(f) Copies of any guaranties associated with the improvements.
(g) The cost of simple replacement of the facility.
(7) Upon completion of a hearing, the Rent Board may award a capital
improvement surcharge. The Board shall determine the total costs
of the increase, but no interest shall be awarded in the event that
the cost of the improvement is financed. The Board shall consider
the useful life of the improvements, the depreciable life of the
improvement, to determine the total square footage of the rental
property, as well as the portion allocable to each tenant. The Board
shall determine the total cost of the improved facility, as well as the
cost of replacing the previously existing facility, and shall calculate
the difference in cost between the two. The difference may be
allocated among the affected tenants as a capital improvement
surcharge.
(8) The capital improvement surcharge, if approved by the Board, shall
be paid on a monthly basis, with the total cost of the improvement
allocated proportionately in accordance with the relationship that
the square footage occupied by the tenant bears to the total square
footage of the premises, allocated over the useful life of the
improvement as found by the Board.
Sample Calculation
Factors Amount
Cost of improvement $6,000
Useful life 5 years
Percent of space occupied by tenant 25%
Cost per year $1,200
25% to tenant $300
Per month/60 months $25
(9) In no event shall the monthly payment for a capital improvement
surcharge exceed 10% of the current base rent.
§ 421-6 UNION CODE § 421-6
419:672
§ 421-7. Hardship rent increase.
(10)No capital improvement surcharge shall be collected, unless the
same has been approved by the Rent Board. No capital
improvement surcharge shall be included in base rent for the
purpose of calculating yearly rental increases.
(11) Any improvement which merely improves the appearance of the
property, but does not extend or enhance the useful life of the
premises, such as improved landscaping, shall not qualify as a
capital improvement under the terms of this chapter.
(12) Anything in the foregoing sections notwithstanding, the useful life
of capital improvements, if allowed by the Board, shall not be less
than the following schedule:
Capital Improvement Years
Masonry, brickwork, paving 25
Boilers or new heating systems, plumbing,
pumps or components, plumbing or heating
systems
25
Storm windows 25
Roofs 20
Electrical work, including the installation of
smoke detectors and air conditioners
25
Trucks and automobiles, tractors, lawn mowers
and motorized ground maintenance equipment
5
Office equipment and furnishings 15
Stoves and refrigerators 20
Dumpsters and component parts 25
Insulation and vinyl peaks or siding 40
A. In the event that a landlord's annual residential operating expenses, as
hereinafter defined, exceeds 60% of his gross annual residential income
as hereinafter defined, then the landlord may submit to the Rent
Leveling Board an application for a hardship rental increase. No
landlord may apply for additional hardship relief while he is collecting a
prior hardship award.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "gross annual residential
income" is defined as all annual income derived directly or indirectly
from the operation of the landlord's property, including but not limited
to all residential rents received, all earnings from commissions from
vending machines, laundry equipment and supplies, deductions from
security deposits, late fees, key charges, finder's fees, parking fees,
garage fees, pool fees, income from rebates, capital improvement
income derived from any moneys collected from this property in excess
§ 421-6 RENTAL PROPERTY § 421-7
419:673
of those moneys required to pay expenses on this property, including
but not limited to interest on bank accounts, money market
investments, certificates of deposit and net proceeds of refinancing.
The landlord, as part of his application, shall indicate any and all bank
accounts in which rent proceeds are deposited, including the name of
the bank, name of the account, number of the account, type of account
and disbursement of any funds which are not expended to pay operating
expenses on the premises. The Rent Leveling Board may request and
the landlord shall supply documentation supporting the gross annual
income as dated in the landlord's application. In any case, where rental
units are occupied, in whole or in part, rent free, the full rental value
shall be considered the legal rent therefor for the purposes of setting
forth the gross annual residential income.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "annual residential operating
expenses" is defined as all reasonable, necessary and valid expenses (as
determined by the Rent Leveling Board) incurred and paid by a landlord
for the rental property for which a hardship increase is requested,
excluding therefrom, however, depreciation, mortgage interest and
amortization, expenses associated with hardship applications, which
expenses shall be separately itemized, expenses associated with the
refinancing of any mortgage affecting the premises, legal fees except
those fees for summary dispossess actions or for lease preparation,
which fees may be included as expenses, interest on any other loan in
connection with the premises, expenditures which may qualify as
capital improvements and including but not limited to expenses for
supplies, administrative costs, management fees limited to 5% of gross
rental, heating fuel, electricity, water supply, sewerage charges,
garbage disposal, gas, building services, security, grounds
maintenance, repairs (other than reimbursed repairs), painting and
decorating, real estate taxes, other taxes, permit fees, insurance, wages
and recreational amenities. Only annual, residential operating
expenses, which are reasonable, ordinary and necessary, shall be
allowed. Extraordinary or onetime expenses shall not be considered as
part of hardship expenses, except that capital expenditures which
previously have been amortized as part of a hardship application shall
continue to be considered as annual residential operating expenses
until said capital expenditures are fully amortized. Any capital
expenditure which has not been amortized as part of a hardship
application, regardless of when it was incurred, shall not be considered
as an operating expense for purposes of a hardship application. With
the exception of the foregoing capital expenditures, only ordinary
residential operating expenses incurred in the twelve-month period
ending with the last day of the month immediately prior to the filing of
the hardship application shall be considered.
D. Where nonresidential income is received in connection with the
property, the landlord shall, in addition to the above, furnish the Rent
Leveling Board with the income and expenses related to said
§ 421-7 UNION CODE § 421-7
419:674
nonresidential uses for the purposes of determining the effect thereof
on the hardship application of the landlord.
E. The landlord shall supply complete income and operating expense
figures for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the
application, which figure shall be compiled in three one-year
compilations. These figures shall be certified by a professional certified
public accountant licensed in the State of New Jersey, except that in the
case of rental property with less than 10 units, the figures may be
certified by a sole proprietor, partner if a partnership or a corporate
officer if a corporation, to be a true and accurate summary of the
landlord's books and records.
F. A public hearing on said application shall be scheduled to be held not
earlier than 60 days of the date of receipt of a completed application, at
which time the Rent Leveling Board and landlord and the tenants and/
or their respective agents or representatives shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. Hardship surcharges shall, except as
specifically provided herein, be collectible for a period of 12 months
beginning with the date of notice of said surcharge in conformity with
applicable state law. Charges for hardships shall not be considered
additions to the base rent for purposes of computing rental increases
pursuant to § 421-2 hereof. No hardship surcharge currently in effect
shall be collected for a period of more than 12 consecutive months.
Anything to the foregoing notwithstanding, no hardship award shall
exceed 10% of the tenants' current base rent, the Board shall prorate
the award over a period exceeding 12 months, effectuating a full
hardship award but insuring that a single monthly payment shall not
exceed 10% of the current base rent.
G. The landlord shall notify each tenant of the subject property by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, of the date, time
and place of the public hearing and of the substance of the landlord's
application at least 30 days prior to the hearing and provide proof of
service to the Rent Leveling Board.
H. Notice of hearings.
(1) In addition to the provisions in Subsection F above, notice of the
time, date and place of the hearing shall be given by the landlord,
at his expense, in the form of a public notice published in two
newspapers circulating within the municipality. Said notice shall
appear at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Upon
submission of an application, the applicant shall be required to
establish an escrow account in a sum equal to $20 per apartment
unit in the affected premises, with the Township of Union.
(2) Upon receipt of an application for relief, the Board shall forthwith
send a copy thereof to any professional experts retained to assist
the Board in processing of said application.
§ 421-7 RENTAL PROPERTY § 421-7
419:675
§ 421-8. Rent Leveling Board. [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No.
3977]
(3) The applicant shall forthwith deposit such funds in the escrow
account maintained by the Tax Collector of the Township of Union.
The professional experts shall submit vouchers for all reasonable
and necessary fees for the professional services rendered, which
fees shall be paid from the escrow account in the manner
prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:5-16 through 40:5-18.
(4) The professional expert shall, at the time of submission of any such
voucher, forward a copy of the same to the applicant. In the event
that the applicant questions the reasonableness of any such
voucher the applicant shall, not later than five days after receipt of
a copy of said voucher, make written protest of such voucher to the
Board. In no event shall the Board authorize the payment of any
voucher submitted pursuant to this section sooner than 10 days
from its submission.
(5) Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account upon
completion of the application shall be returned to the applicant as
soon as is practicably possible.
(6) Should additional funds be required after the original funds are
exhausted and should such funds be deemed necessary in the
judgment of the Board, then such funds shall be paid by the
applicant to the Tax Collector of the Township of Union and placed
in the escrow account.
(7) The Board shall take no formal action on any application, unless
and until all escrow funds have been deposited with the Tax
Collector of the Township of Union.
I. The Rent Leveling Board shall either grant or deny the application no
later than the next subsequent meeting.
J. If a landlord has been in violation of the chapter, then the tenant shall
have a remedy to receive a refund for any overcharge retroactive to two
years from the date of the complaint.
K. The tenant shall be immuned against eviction notices or other
harassment by the landlord while the Board is reviewing the complaint
by the tenant.
A. There is hereby created a Rent Leveling Board within the Township of
Union. Said Board shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be
a landlord, two of whom shall be tenants and the remaining four of
whom shall be not either a tenant or a landlord of residential real
estate. The members of said Board shall be appointed by the Township
Committee, and the terms of office shall be for a period of three years;
however, the members of the Board first appointed hereunder shall
have terms as follows:
§ 421-7 UNION CODE § 421-8
419:676
§ 421-9. Authority of Board.
The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter, including
but not limited to the following:
§ 421-10. Quorum at meetings.
A quorum for the purpose of conducting a meeting or acting upon matters
before the Board shall require the attendance of a majority of the
membership of the Board.
§ 421-11. Appeal of findings.
Both the landlord and tenant may appeal the findings of the Board to the
proper courts in accordance with the rules pertaining to administrative
appeals. The findings and rulings of said court shall be final.
(1) Three for three years each, one landlord, one tenant and one
nonlandlord nontenant.
(2) Two for two years each, one tenant and one nonlandlord tenant.
(3) Two for one year only, two nonlandlord nontenant.
B. In addition to the above members of said Rent Leveling Board, the
Township Committee is authorized to appoint one alternate for each of
the categories identified as "tenant" and not to be either a tenant or a
landlord, in order that there will be an alternate for the "tenant"
category and for what constitutes the public category, which said
alternates shall serve in the absence of their respective category
member or members. The term of office of each of said alternates shall
be for a period of one year from the date of appointment.
A. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, which rules and
regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or
amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its
discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the Township Clerk.
B. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help
them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental as herein provided.
D. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants for reduced
rental as herein provided.
E. To subpoena any and all records, documentary evidence, witness
testimony and any and all other information necessary to the rendering
of a decision by the Board.
§ 421-8 RENTAL PROPERTY § 421-12
419:677
§ 421-12. Tenants aggrieved by noncompliance.
A tenant who is aggrieved by the failure of a landlord to comply with the
terms of the chapter may file for a hearing with the Board.
§ 421-13. Considerations of Board.
For the purposes of considering the reasonableness of the rents being
charged on an appeal by the landlord or the tenant, the Board shall take
into consideration whether the landlord has maintained the same standards
of service, maintenance, health and safety conditions, furniture, furnishing
and equipment in and for the rented housing space and dwelling as the
landlord provided at the date the tenancy was entered into or as required by
the current health, safety and housing laws and regulations. The Board may
reduce the base rent of any tenant, in the event that the landlord reduces
the standards of services, maintenance, health and safety conditions,
furniture, furnishings and equipment which were provided at the outset of
the tenancy.
§ 421-14. Rents authorized by landlord.
No landlord shall, after the effective date of this chapter, charge any rents
in excess of what he was receiving from the effective date of this chapter,
except for increases as authorized by this chapter.
§ 421-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998209]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the willful filing with the Rent Leveling Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section. A violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be considered a
separate violation as to each leasehold.
§ 421-16. Purpose of legislation.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the Township of Union
and its inhabitants, shall be liberally constructed to effectuate the purposes
thereof.
§ 421-17. Exclusions. [Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5402;
amended 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 5418]
A. The rent control provisions of Chapter 421 shall no longer apply to the
Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation Area subject to the
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 421-12 UNION CODE § 421-17
419:678
Chapter 424
RETAIL OR WHOLESALES PRACTICES, INTERFERENCE
WITH
§ 424-1. Prohibitions.
No person shall purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct any
retail or wholesale business operation, function or activity, nor shall any
person purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct any retail or
wholesale business owner, employee, agent or personnel acting in the
terms and conditions of this § 421-17. For purposes of this section, the
phrase "Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation Area" is defined
as the property commonly known as "Block 405, Lots 19 and 57" on
the Tax Map of the Township of Union that has been designated as an
area in need of rehabilitation pursuant to the "Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law," P.L. 1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.).
B. The exclusion of the Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation
Area from the rent control provisions is explicitly limited by and
conditioned upon the following:
(1) Capital improvements made or caused to be made by the landlord
into the Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation Area in an
amount at least equal to $5,000 per unit;
(2) The capital improvements shall be made to the Crossroads Garden
Apartments Rehabilitation Area within 10 years of the effective
date of this section;
(3) The exclusion from the rent control provisions in this § 421-17 shall
not apply to any current tenants who have been residents of the
Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation Area for at least 10
years as of the effective date of this section, and such long-term
residents shall remain subject to the protections and administrative
relief of Chapter 421 for so long as they remain tenants within the
Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation Area; and
(4) The landlord shall provide notice of the passage of this section and
the exclusion of the Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation
Area from the provisions of Chapter 421 of the Code of the
Township of Union, including the terms and conditions thereunder,
to all residents within the Chapter 421 of the Code of the Township
of Union within 30 days of the effective date of this section.
C. In the event the conditions of § 421-17B are not satisfied, the exclusion
granted in this § 421-17 shall terminate automatically and the full
provisions of Chapter 421 shall be reinstated and applied to the
Crossroads Garden Apartments Rehabilitation Area with no further
action of the Township or the Rent Leveling Board.
§ 421-17 RENTAL PROPERTY § 424-1
419:679
furtherance of the interests of that business with the intent to prevent,
undermine or otherwise obstruct the lawful retail or wholesale practices
of the business. This section does not apply to conduct considered lawful
competitive economic practices.
§ 424-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the
county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 428
SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 173.
Christmas trees — See Ch. 228.
Hawkers, peddlers and itinerant
vendors — See Ch. 317.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 324.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Outdoor displays — See Ch. 390, Art. II.
§ 424-1 UNION CODE § 424-2
428:680
ARTICLE I
Going-Out-of-Business, Fire and Other Sales
[Adopted 3-8-1960 by Ord. No. 1904 (Ch. 221, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 428-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Word usage. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. Words defined. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CLERK — The Township Clerk of the Township of Union in the County
of Union.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — A sale held out in such
a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will
offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOODS — Includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT, ADVERTISING — Any and
all means of conveying, to the public, notice of sale or notice of
intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, letter,
newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, written
or printed notice, printed display, billboard display or poster, whether
in or away from the business location, radio announcement and any and
all other means, oral or written.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as
to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting
the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon
disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and
resume business at a new location in the Township or will then continue
business from other existing locations in the Township.
SALE — Shall not be limited to the sale or an offer to sell, to the public,
goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and description on
hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth
by advertising, on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to
the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance,
conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such
sale. It shall also include any sale advertised to be an adjustment
sale, creditor's sale, executor's sale, administrator's sale, insolvent sale,
insurance salvage sale, mortgage sale, assignee's sale, adjuster's sale,
§ 428-1 SALES § 428-1
428:681
§ 428-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to publish, announce or conduct any sale
of the type or kind herein defined without first obtaining a license therefor
in compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 428-3. Application for license.
A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a
written application to the Township Clerk, setting forth and containing the
following information:
§ 428-4. Fee. [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997; 9-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 4745]
Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the Township Clerk
with his application a license fee of $125.
receiver's sale, loss-of-lease sale, wholesaler's closeout sale, creditor's
committee sale, forced-out-of business sale, removal sale and any and
all sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the
public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the
business will cease and be discontinued.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township
of Union in the County of Union.
A. The true names and addresses of the owners of the goods to be the
object of the sale.
B. The true name and address of the person from whom the owner
purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor and, if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition.
C. A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
D. The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
E. The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
F. A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods
thereby, and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.
G. The means to be employed in advertising said sale, together with the
proposed content of any advertisement.
H. A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at said sale as
disclosed by the applicant's records. Said inventory shall be attached to
and become part of the application.
§ 428-1 UNION CODE § 428-5
428:682
§ 428-5. Duration of sale. [Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4351]
The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a
period of not more than 90 consecutive days following the issuance thereof.
Subject license may not be renewed.
§ 428-6. Type of sale limited by license.
The license shall authorize only the type of sale described in the application
at the location named therein.
§ 428-7. Sale of goods described in inventory.
The license shall authorize only the sale of the goods described in the
inventory attached to the application.
§ 428-8. Surrender of other licenses.
Upon being issued a license hereunder for a going-out-of-business sale, the
licensee shall surrender to the Township Clerk all other business licenses
he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the
application for a license under this article.
§ 428-9. Nontransferability.
Any license provided for herein shall not be assignable or transferable.
§ 428-10. Restrictions.
A licensee hereunder shall:
A. Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the license sale to
the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application
for license.
B. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading
advertising.
C. Conduct the license sale in strict conformity with any advertising or
holding out incident thereto.
D. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory
submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to
inspecting officials upon request.
E. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the
filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction
clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about
the place of sale, apprising the public of the status of all such goods.
F. Display the license in a prominent place on the window of the premises
where the sale is to be held so that it is clearly visible from the exterior
of said premises.
§ 428-5 SALES § 428-10
428:683
§ 428-11. Unlawful sale.
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any such sale or to
list on the inventory required by § 428-3 any stock which is not the stock of
the store or other place, the business of which is to be closed out by such
sale for which a license has been granted, to replenish or add to such stock
for the purpose of disposal at such sale, or to fail, neglect or refuse to keep
accurate and true records of the initial stock, stock sold and stock on hand.
§ 428-12. Revocation of license.
A license or renewal thereof issued pursuant to this article may be revoked
by the Township Committee, after notice and hearing, for any of the
following reasons:
§ 428-13. Notice of hearing for revocation.
Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his
last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 428-14. Suspension for probable cause.
A license may be suspended for not more than five days by the Township
Committee upon probable cause being shown that the license should be
revoked.
G. Suitable books and records shall be kept at the place of sale and shall
be made available for inspection by the Township Committee or its
authorized representative.
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application.
B. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made as to the
inventory, stock sold or stock on hand.
C. Any violation of this article.
D. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.
E. Conducting the business licensed under this article in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
§ 428-10 UNION CODE § 428-15
428:684
§ 428-15. Investigations.
The Township Committee shall hold such hearings and make such
investigation as may be necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of
this article.
§ 428-16. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition
to the provisions of other applicable licensing ordinances of the Township.
Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises,
businesses or other practices than is imposed by any other licensing
ordinance of the Township of Union, then this article shall control.
§ 428-17. Noneligibility.
Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or
described in the application for a license hereunder for a period of at least
six months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a
license.
§ 428-18. Heirs, devisees and legatees right to licenses.
Upon the death of a person doing business in this Township his or her heirs,
devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply any time for a license
hereunder.
§ 428-19. Granting of license restricted.
Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location
stated in the application, within one year last past from the date of such
application, shall not be granted a license.
§ 428-20. License limited to single place of business.
Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one
place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or
branch specified in the application, and no other store or branch shall
advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way
participating in the license sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting
the license sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is
cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
§ 428-21. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 428-15 SALES § 428-21
428:685
§ 428-22. Personal property tax to be paid.
No license authorized under this article shall be issued unless personal
property taxes are paid to the date of the application for said license.
§ 428-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-26-1970 by Ord. No.
2599; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998210]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section. Each day that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
D. Persons conducting a sale of the type regulated herein on the effective
date of this article, unless such sale is continued for a period of more
than 30 days from and after such effective date, in which event, such
person, at the lapse of the said thirty-day period, shall comply with the
provisions of this article.
E. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who
publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its
false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the
provisions of this article have not been complied with.
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 428-21 UNION CODE § 428-23
428:686
ARTICLE II
Garage and House Sales; Flea Markets
[Adopted 10-25-1977 by Ord. No. 3241 (Ch. 221, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 428-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLEA MARKET — A sale of items of tangible personal property wherein on
one location there are multiple vendors who have paid a fee for the privilege
of occupying the space allotted to each such vendor for the purpose of
displaying personal property.[Amended 8-28-1979 by Ord. No. 3401;
7-27-1982 by Ord. No. 3585]
GARAGE SALE — Includes but shall not be limited to lawn sales, rummage
sales and any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is
advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made
aware of said sale.[Amended 8-28-1979 by Ord. No. 3401; 4-9-1985 by
Ord. No. 3777]
HOUSE SALE — Includes the sale caused by the removal of the householder
from the premises whereby said householder intends to sell, by lot or in
bulk, a portion or the entire contents of the personal property located within
said household.[Added 4-9-1985 by Ord. No. 3777]
§ 428-25. Flea market restrictions. [Amended 8-28-1979 by Ord. No.
3401]
No person, firm or corporation may conduct a flea market, other than a
bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational or cultural organization,
organized not for profit and having either an office or a place of operation
within the Township of Union and being able to establish that it is such type
of nonprofit organization, subject, however, to the following requirements:
A. Each organization authorized to conduct a flea market in accordance
with this section shall file an application with the Township Clerk at
least 60 days prior to the date of the commencement of such flea
market sale.
B. Such application shall set forth the following:
(1) Name of organization conducting said sale.
(2) Name and address of owner of the property upon which said flea
market sale is to be conducted.
(3) Written consent of owner, if applicant is other than owner.
(4) Street address or tax map reference of location at which said flea
market sale is to be conducted.
§ 428-24 SALES § 428-25
428:687
§ 428-26. Garage and house sales. [Amended 4-9-1985 by Ord. No.
3777]
Any person may conduct a garage sale or house sale as herein defined under
the following terms and conditions:
(5) Number of days of sale.
(6) Date, if any, of prior sales within three years prior to date of
application.
(7) Whether or not sale will be held indoors or outdoors.
(8) Date or dates of sale.
(9) Address of office or other place of operation within the Township of
Union.
C. (Reserved)211
D. No more than two permits to any one such organization shall be
authorized in any one calendar year.
E. Such flea market sales shall be limited to two consecutive calendar days
and shall be conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. Three consecutive hours of operation shall constitute one calendar
day. Permittees shall be allowed a maximum of two rain dates; provided,
however, that after three consecutive hours of operation, a sale
interrupted by rain shall not entitle the permittee to a rain date.
F. The permit for the conducting of such sale must be prominently
displayed upon the premises upon which the sale is conducted
throughout the entire period of the sale.
A. An application shall be filed with the Township Clerk prior to the date of
the commencement of such garage sale. Such application shall set forth
the following information:
(1) Name of person applying for permit.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the property on which said sale
is to be conducted.
(3) Written consent of the owner of the property upon which the sale is
to be conducted if the applicant is not the owner.
(4) Location at which the sale is to be conducted, giving the street
address or tax atlas reference.
(5) Date of sale.
211. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which provided a fee for conducting a flea market, as
amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997, was repealed 1-22-1991 by Ord. No. 4130.
§ 428-25 UNION CODE § 428-26
428:688
(6) Date of any past sale within a three-year period, preceding the date
of the proposed sale.
(7) General description of the type of goods to be sold, including a
written statement as to whether or not any of the merchandise to
be sold was purchased by the applicant for the purpose of resale,
resale of such purchased goods being hereby prohibited.
(8) Whether or not the sale will be held indoors or outdoors.
B. Upon the filing of the aforesaid application, and the same being
reviewed by the Township Clerk and found complete and accompanied
by a permit fee of $7, the Township Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a
permit for the garage sale or house sale applied for, which said permit
shall be subject to compliance with the following restrictions:
[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997; 7-11-1989 by Ord. No.
4040; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
(1) Hours of sale shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. only.
(2) Garage sales shall be authorized only for the day applied for on the
application with the following day being authorized as a rain date,
excluding Sunday.
(3) House sales shall be authorized for two consecutive or
nonconsecutive days, provided that the second day is not scheduled
for more than 10 days subsequent to the first day.
(4) No items of merchandise may be displayed beyond 10 feet from the
face of a garage connected to the dwelling house. Merchandise
may be displayed in a driveway, not, however, beyond the front line
of the dwelling house, and merchandise may likewise be displayed
in the rear yard of said premises for a depth of 10 feet from the rear
wall of said dwelling house.
(5) The permit authorized under this article must be prominently
displayed on the premises upon which the sale is being conducted.
(6) Only two permits per calendar year may be issued to any one
applicant or for any one location. [Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord.
No. 4300]
(7) Sunday sales are prohibited, except in the case of persons having
philosophical religious convictions which are in conflict with this
provision. In such cases, such persons may conduct garage sales on
Sundays, in place of the Sabbath Day observed by such persons.
[Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 4394]
(8) No signs advertising said sale are authorized, nor may the same be
posted anywhere within the Township or anywhere on the premises
upon which the sale shall be held; provided, however, that the
permit issued pursuant to this article shall constitute a sign which
shall be posted on the front wall of the dwelling house or garage.
§ 428-26 SALES § 428-26
428:689
§ 428-27. Conclusion of sale; use of Township premises prohibited.
[Amended 8-28-1979 by Ord. No. 3401]
§ 428-28. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to affect the following:
(9) Any sale of any item of merchandise at any garage sale or house
sale must comply with all appropriate provisions of the law with
reference to any such sales, including but not limited to N.J.S.A.
26:10-1 et seq.
(10)No more than two garage sales shall be authorized at any one time
on the same street. [Added 11-25-1986 by Ord. No. 3882]
(11) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the permit fee shall be waived for
senior citizens of the Township of Union, aged 62 and over, upon
proof of age and residency. [Added 2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 4132]
(12) Said fees shall also be waived for disabled and handicapped
persons of the Township of Union. "Handicapped persons" shall be
defined as those persons who qualify under New Jersey motor
vehicle statutes. "Disabled persons" shall be defined as those
persons who qualify under federal, state, county or local laws and
regulations. [Added 2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 4132]
(13) Said fees shall be waived for all veterans. [Added 9-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 4745]
A. Immediately upon the conclusion of any sale authorized by this article,
the permittee shall be obliged, within 24 hours after the conclusion of
said sale, to clean the outside of said premises and remove all unsold
merchandise therefrom and restore the same to the condition in which
it existed prior to said sale.
B. Garage sales and flea markets as defined herein and authorized by this
article are prohibited upon Township-owned premises, not otherwise
leased to third parties by the Township.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. The selling or advertising for sale of an item or items of personal
property, which are specifically described in the advertisement and
which separate items do not exceed five in number and which are not
displayed outside the premises.
§ 428-26 UNION CODE § 428-29
428:690
§ 428-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998212]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 428-29 SALES § 428-29
428:691
Chapter 432
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sales — See Ch. 428.
§ 432-1. Findings and declarations.
The Township Committee finds and declares that the health, safety, and
welfare of its citizens will be enhanced by requiring certain secondhand
dealers to be licensed and to require said dealers to maintain records.
§ 432-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTO PARTS — Any part or equipment that is used in the manufacturing or
repair of an automobile including, but not limited to, auto body parts, radio/
stereo equipment, compact disc players, cellular phones, speakers, tires,
rims, and chrome fixtures.
ELECTRONIC DEVICE — Electronic equipment including, but not limited
to, VCRs, televisions, computers, video games, pagers, beepers, cellular
phones, telephones, typewriters, fax machines and audio/stereo equipment.
This shall also include, but not be limited to, the parts for building or
upgrading electronic equipment.
JEWELRY — Any ornament or decorative piece made from gold, silver,
precious stones, semiprecious stones or gems or any ornament or
decorative piece containing gold, silver, precious stones, semiprecious
stones or gems including, but not limited to, necklaces, watches, rings,
(bracelets, earrings and cufflinks.
MERCHANT/DEALER — Any person(s), partnership or corporation who
advertises, purchases or sells, offers to purchase or sell or attempts to
purchase or sell used personal property including, but not limited to, used
jewelry, used auto parts or used electronic devices to any other person,
partnership or corporation.
METAL — Any of a class of elementary substances or an alloy thereof
including, but not limited to, gold, silver, copper and aluminum.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — The sale or purchase of any used personal
property including, but not limited to, used jewelry, used auto parts, used
electronic devices and used metals.
§ 428-29 UNION CODE § 432-2
428:692
USED ITEM — Any used personal property including, but not limited to,
jewelry, electronic devices, auto parts and metals sold from one party or
parties to a second party or parties.
§ 432-3. Licensing; application and application fee; bond
requirements; expiration date.
§ 432-4. Application process; approval or denial; return of
application fee; appeals process.
A. License requirement. No person or persons shall engage in the
regulated activity without first having obtained a license from the
Township Clerk. The license shall bear a number issued by the
Township Clerk and shall be clearly displayed within the licensed l
premises. The license shall also be available for inspection at any time
by Township officials.
B. Application and license fee. An application to engage in the regulated
activity must be completed and submitted to the Township Clerk for
review and approval. The application shall be submitted along with an
annual license fee of $150.
C. Bond requirement. Each licensee shall submit, in addition to the initial
application and application fee, a bond to the Township Clerk executed
by the applicant as principal, from a surety company authorized to
conduct business under the laws of the state of New Jersey. The bond
shall be in the penal sum of $10,000 for the purpose of securing
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and for the protection of
any person who purchases a used item which is determined to be stolen
or sold deceptively or fraudulently by a court of law of the state of New
Jersey.
D. Expiration date. Each license shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which it is issued.
A. Application process. Upon demand, the Township Clerk shall make
available to a merchant an application for the purposes of maintaining,
keeping and operating such business within the Township. No permit
shall be issued unless such application is completed, executed and all
requirements contained therein are fully met and delivered to the
Police Director or his designee. Upon receipt of an application, fee and
bond surety, the Police Director or his designee shall conduct an
investigation into the applicant's moral character and business
responsibility as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the
public welfare. Upon the completion of the investigation and within a
reasonable amount of time, the Police Director or his designee shall
return the application, or a copy thereof with any recommendations, to
the Township Clerk.
B. Approval or denial. The Police Director or his designee, after engaging
in the necessary investigation, shall make a recommendation to the
§ 432-2 SALES § 432-4
428:693
§ 432-5. Accurate accounts and records; inspections authorized.
Township Committee as to whether the application should be approved
or denied. The grounds for denial of an application shall be clearly
stated and may include, but not be limited to, with respect to the owner
or owners of the premises, if a natural person or persons, including
partners of a partnership, that he, she or they are 21 years of age
or older, citizens of the United States and residents of the state of
New Jersey, and never convicted, in this state or elsewhere, of a crime
involving moral turpitude involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation; and, if a corporation, that all officers and members
of the board of directors, and every stockholder holding 10% or more
of the stock of the corporation, directly or indirectly having a beneficial
interest therein, have the same qualifications as set forth in this
subsection for an applicant who is a natural person. The chief license
inspector, upon the recommendation of the police chief, shall approve
or deny the license accordingly. If such application is denied, the chief
license inspector shall set down in writing his or her findings and
conclusions and deliver a copy of same to applicant upon demand.
C. Return of application fee. If the application for license is denied, 75% of
the fees shall be returned to the applicant. The balance of the
application fee will be kept by the Township to offset the costs of the
investigation.
D. Appeals process. Any person aggrieved by such denial may appeal to
the Township Committee within 30 days of the date of denial of the
application. The Township Committee, at its own discretion, may affirm,
reverse or modify the decision of the Police Director or his designee.
A. Submission to the Police Department of transaction forms; time limit
prescribed. Each licensed dealer operating in the city shall deliver to
the Police Director or his designee a description of all items purchased,
received or sold, as well as the identities of those who sold or bought
the items from him or her. A valid government-issued picture ID will be
required to complete the transaction and shall be photocopied and the
photocopy shall be attached to the record of sale. The dealer shall file
this description on consecutively numbered transaction forms
prescribed and provided by the Police Director. The prescribed
transaction form must be filed within 72 hours after the purchase, sale
or receipt of any item. A copy of the transaction form is to be kept on
the subject premises at all times during operating hours and available
for review and inspection by any city official.
B. Records book. All licensees shall keep an accurate log of accounts of all
sales made. The logs shall be open to inspection by any Township
official. This log shall be kept on the subject premises at all times
during operating hours. This log shall also include sales tax collected
for each transaction.
§ 432-4 UNION CODE § 432-6
428:694
§ 432-6. Restrictions.
§ 432-7. Sale or purchase by minors.
No merchant or dealer shall sell, purchase or receive any used item, goods,
article or thing from any minor unless the minor has expressed written
parental consent to make such transaction. In the event that written
consent be provided, the merchant or dealer must keep written consent on
file for potential inspection by the proper Township official.
§ 432-8. Exemptions.
Used car lots, properly licensed by the state of New Jersey, shall be
excluded from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 432-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $500 nor more than $1,250 or imprisonment in the county;
jail or in any place provided by the city for the detention of prisoners for any
term not exceeding 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 434
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
602.
A. No dealer shall melt, change the form of or dispose of any used items
purchased or received within five days from the date the notification is
made to the Chief of Police and the chief license inspector, and all such
items shall remain on the premises where the purchase was made for at
least five days from the date of notification of the Chief of Police and the
chief license inspector.
B. Each dealer must require two forms of identification from the person
with whom he or she is transacting business, one of which must be a
valid government-issued picture ID. The type of identification must be
noted on the transaction form presented to the Police Director or his
designee along with a photocopy of the ID presented.
C. Each dealer shall photograph each seller of merchandise and shall
identify the photograph by name, date of sale, item purchased, amount
paid. The photograph shall be retained for a period of two years and
shall be subject to inspection by any Township official.
§ 432-6 SALES § 432-9
428:695

ARTICLE I
Use of Public Sewers
[Adopted 12-13-1977 by Ord. No. 3251 (Ch. 226, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 434-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the meanings of terms used herein
shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The measure of the organic matter
present in the sewage as determined by the dichromatic reflux method and
expressed in milligrams per liter [parts per million (ppm)].
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine expressed in milligrams
per liter, or parts per million by weight, which will complete the normal
reactions with all chemicals and materials in the sewage leaving an excess
of 0.1 milligram per liter (0.1 part per million by weight), after 30 minutes'
contact time at room temperature of approximately 70° F.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state which will separate
by gravity from wastewater through treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of "floatable oil" if it is
properly pretreated in such a manner that the discharged wastewater does
not interfere with the wastewater facilities.
GREASE or FATS — Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
HEAVY METALS — The electronegative metals with a density greater than
five grams per cubic centimeter, including but not limited to lead,
chromium, mercury, nickel and zinc, plus the nonmetallic element arsenic.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
JOINT MEETING — The municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union and
the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926, as
supplemented, in the matter of an outlet sewer and treatment plant for said
municipalities and, when the context requires, shall mean the Executive
Director or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
JOINT SEWER — Includes the joint outlet or trunk sewer constructed by
the several municipalities under a contract dated March 15, 1901; the
supplementary joint trunk sewer and sewage disposal plant constructed
under a contract between the member municipalities, dated June 1, 1926,
§ 434-1 SALES § 434-1
428:697
and contract, dated March 9, 1931; or shall mean any trunk sewer
theretofore or thereafter constructed and maintained by the Joint Meeting.
MAJOR INDUSTRY — An industrial user of municipal or Joint Meeting
wastewater facilities that:
NJDEP — The State of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
or successor agency.
NONSTATIONARY SOURCE — Any mobile vehicle, piece of equipment or
appurtenance thereof that is utilized in the discharge of waste or
wastewater to any sewer or natural outlet. The term includes, but is not
limited to, tank trucks and dump trucks, as well as associated equipment
and appurtenances. Fixed permanent or semipermanent equipment is
excluded from the category of nonstationary source, and is regulated
elsewhere in this article.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, society, association,
corporation (public or private) or group, including heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns.
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS — That portion of the total extractable
grease or fats, which is not retained on an activated alumina absorption
column after elutriating with hexane.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT — Treatment given to waste by other than residential
users prior to its direct or indirect discharge to municipal or Joint Meeting
wastewater facilities to remove illegal and/or undesirable waste
constituents, or to reduce the strength of waste prior to discharge to
publicly owned wastewater facilities.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground-, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
A. Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per workday.
Has in its waste toxic substances injurious to the treatment process or
sewer system.
B.
Is found by USEPA, NJDEP, Joint Meeting or municipality to have a
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on municipal or Joint Meeting wastewater
facilities or upon the quality of effluent from these wastewater facilities
C.
D. Has a detrimental effect upon human health or welfare.
§ 434-1 UNION CODE § 434-1
428:698
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period, of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
USEPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or successor
agency.
§ 434-2. Connections with joint sewers.
A. Connections or building sewers shall, wherever possible, be made to
local sewers and not to Joint Meeting main lines or trunk sewers. No
municipality or person shall make any direct connection with the joint
sewer or alter or repair any connection with the joint sewer without
having first obtained a written permit from the Joint Meeting and from
the Township of Union.
B. Each permit to connect with the joint sewer, if and when issued, will
require that the applicant for such permit agree that it or he will
carefully make the connection with the joint sewer in the manner
prescribed by the rules and regulations of the Joint Meeting; that it or
he will indemnify and save harmless the Joint Meeting from all
accidents and damages caused by any negligence in protecting his work
or any imperfect or inadequate work done by virtue of such permit; that
it or he will faithfully comply with the ordinances of the municipality
and that he will replace and restore the sidewalk, pavement or street
surface over any opening he may have made, the work to be subject to
the inspection and approval of the Joint Meeting.
C. Connections with the joint sewer shall be made only by a plumber
licensed in the municipality where the connection is to be made or by
some other person duly authorized by the Joint Meeting. Connections
shall be made with suitable materials approved by the Joint Meeting. All
work included in the construction of connections with the joint sewer,
or relating thereto, shall be done to the satisfaction of the Joint
Meeting, and the person or persons doing said work shall accept as
final all decisions of the Joint Meeting as to the fitness of all materials
furnished or work done and shall immediately replace all work rejected.
D. Connections shall be such as to provide flexibility and watertight joints.
A manhole shall be provided, if required. Connections shall include a
cast-iron hub set and sealed in the main sewer. No connections shall be
covered until inspected by the Joint Meeting. No top connections will be
permitted.
§ 434-1 SALES § 434-3
428:699
§ 434-3. Use of public sewers. [Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No.
4354]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater (except as set forth below), roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
A. Direct or indirect discharges of groundwater to the Joint Meeting
Wastewater Treatment Facilities shall only be permitted under the
following circumstances:
(1) The proposed discharger or applicant has filed an application for
and has been issued a nondomestic wastewater discharge permit
("permit") by the Joint Meeting.
(2) For long-term, continuous discharges, the Township of Union
(hereinafter referred to as the "municipality"), at the election of the
municipality, the proposed discharger or applicant ("municipality/
applicant") will be required to identify and eliminate two gallons of
infiltration/inflow to the Joint Meeting Wastewater Treatment
Facilities for each gallon of groundwater to be delivered into the
Joint Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities on a daily average
over the life of the remediation project discharge (two-to-one
offset).
(a) The location(s) of the remedial work to be performed by the
municipality/applicant shall be identified by the use of the
Phase III Sewer System Evaluation Report, prepared by Hazen
and Sawyer, dated August 1983, and as supplemented, which
was previously distributed by the Joint Meeting to each
member municipality in the Joint Meeting service area, or such
other report as may be available in the case of nonmember
municipalities.
(b) The remedial work to be performed by the municipality/
applicant shall be completed within a time period that shall not
exceed 1/2 of the time frame of the remediation project
discharge estimated by the proposed discharger or applicant
and approved by the municipality and the Joint Meeting. In the
event that extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances occur that
will affect the ability of the municipality/applicant to meet the
time period previously agreed upon by the parties for
completion of the infiltration/inflow remedial work, the
municipality/applicant may seek an extension of the time
period through the filing of a written request, not less than 60
days before a previously defined and agreed upon milestone,
fully describing the extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances
and specifying the additional time necessary to complete the
remedial work as a result thereof. Such requests for extensions
§ 434-3 UNION CODE § 434-3
428:700
will be considered by the Joint Meeting on a case-by-case basis,
and an extension of time shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(c) An applicant may not discharge groundwater to the Joint
Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities until it has obtained
a permit and an agreement is reached between the Joint
Meeting and the municipality and/or the applicant upon the
terms of the remediation work to be performed to satisfy the
two-to-one offset policy set forth in this regulation.
(d) At intervals to be mutually agreed upon by the municipality/
applicant and the Joint Meeting, the municipality/applicant
shall be required to demonstrate, in written progress reports,
to the satisfaction of the Joint Meeting, that the municipality/
applicant is making definable progress in performing the
remedial work so as to be able to complete the work within the
time frame established in accordance with Subsection A(2)(b)
above.
(e) The Engineer of the municipality where the remedial work has
been performed will be required to submit to Joint Meeting a
certification stating that the remedial work has been
completed, and such certification must be submitted within
one week of the date of the completion of the work.
(f) After the time that the location(s) of the remedial work is
identified by the municipality and agreed to by the Joint
Meeting, but prior to the initiation of the remedial work, the
municipality/applicant will be required to submit proof to the
Joint Meeting that a performance bond in the amount of 100%
of the value of the remedial work and naming the Joint Meeting
as a co-obligee has been issued to ensure that such work is
completely performed.
(3) Short-term, batch discharges.
(a) For short-term, batch discharges, the municipality/applicant
will be required to identify and eliminate two gallons of
infiltration/inflow into the Joint Meeting Wastewater Treatment
Facilities for each gallon of groundwater to be delivered to the
Joint Meeting Treatment Works on a daily average over the life
of the remediation project discharge (two-to-one offset); or
(b) The material to be discharged from the site of the remediation
project may be delivered in tanker vehicles to the Joint
Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities in Elizabeth, New
Jersey, for direct discharge at a rate of $0.03 per gallon, for
example, $150 per five-thousand-gallon trailer, to compensate
the Joint Meeting for the costs to sample, monitor and process
the discharge. The use of this option will be at the reasonable
discretion of the Joint Meeting in order to avoid the arrival of a
§ 434-3 SALES § 434-3
428:701
number of trailers that will adversely impact the performance
of treatment operations by the Joint Meeting.
(4) In the event the two-to-one offset option is selected with respect to
short-term, batch discharges, then the following procedures shall
apply:
(a) The location(s) of the remedial work to be performed by the
municipality/applicant shall be identified by the municipality
and agreed to by the Joint Meeting through the use of the
Phase III Sewer System Evaluation Report, prepared by Hazen
and Sawyer, dated August 1983, and as supplemented, which
was previously distributed by the Joint Meeting to each
member municipality in the Joint Meeting service area, or such
other report as may be available in the case of nonmember
municipalities.
(b) The remedial work to be performed by the municipality/
applicant shall be completed within a time period that shall not
exceed 1/2 of the time frame of the remediation project
discharge estimated by the proposed discharger or applicant
and approved by the municipality and Joint Meeting. In the
event that extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances occur that
will affect the ability of the municipality/applicant to meet the
time period previously agreed upon by the parties for
completion of the infiltration/inflow remedial work, the
municipality/applicant may seek an extension of the time
period through the filing of a written request, not less than 60
days before a previously defined and agreed upon milestone,
fully describing the extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances
and specifying the additional time necessary to complete the
remedial work as a result thereof. Such requests for extensions
will be considered by the Joint Meeting on a case-by-case basis,
and an extension of time shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(c) An applicant may not discharge groundwater to the Joint
Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities until it has obtained
a permit and an agreement is reached between the Joint
Meeting and the municipality and/or the applicant upon the
terms of the remediation work to be performed to satisfy the
two-to-one offset policy set forth in this regulation should this
option be selected with respect to a short-term, batch
discharge.
(d) At intervals to be mutually agreed upon by the municipality/
applicant and the Joint Meeting, the municipality/applicant
shall be required to demonstrate, in written progress reports,
to the satisfaction of the Joint Meeting, that the municipality/
applicant is making definable progress in performing the
remedial work so as to be able to complete the work within the
§ 434-3 UNION CODE § 434-3
428:702
§ 434-4. Restaurants and food establishments. [Added 2-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 4763]
A restaurant shall be defined as an establishment in which food is permitted
to be consumed on site. Food establishments shall hereinafter be defined as
those in which food is prepared but sold for off-site consumption.
time frame established in accordance with Subsection A(4)(b)
above.
(e) The Engineer of the municipality where the remedial work has
been performed will be required to submit to the Joint Meeting
a certification stating that the remedial work has been
completed, and such certification must be submitted within
one week of the date of the completion of the work.
(f) After the time that the location(s) of the remedial work is
identified by the municipality and agreed to by the Joint
Meeting, but prior to the initiation of the remedial work, the
municipality/applicant will be required to submit proof to the
Joint Meeting that a performance bond in the amount of 100%
of the value of the remedial work and naming the Joint Meeting
as a co-obligee has been issued to ensure that such work is
completely performed.
(5) The groundwater to be discharged to the Joint Meeting Wastewater
Treatment Facilities pursuant to a permit will be, at all times,
subject to analyses by the Joint Meeting, at the sole cost of the
applicant, to ensure that the proposed discharge shall meet the
quality limits as set forth in these Sewer Use Rules and
Regulations. At any time during the period of the discharge of
groundwater to the Joint Meeting, a failure by the applicant to meet
such quality limits shall be the basis for a revocation of the permit
and a discontinuation of the discharge and/or such enforcement
measures as are authorized by law to be taken by the Joint Meeting.
(6) The proposed discharger or applicant shall be obligated to institute
pretreatment measures prior to the direct or indirect discharge of
groundwater to the Joint Meeting in the event that the
groundwater fails to meet the parameters for acceptance of the
discharge set forth in the Sewer Use Rules and Regulations.
(7) Credits for future discharges of groundwater through the removal
of infiltration/inflow pursuant to the above provisions may be
accumulated or banked; however, such credits may only be
transferred in accordance with ownership of the site identified as
the source of groundwater at the time of the performance of the
remediation work.
§ 434-3 SALES § 434-5
428:703
§ 434-5. Grease interceptor required. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No.
4763]
Every food establishment, new or existing, whether retail or wholesale, that
generates any amount of grease shall have a grease interceptor installed
downstream of the fixture used to wash its multiuse utensils and equipment.
Such fixture shall be a mechanical dishwasher or multicompartment sink.
§ 434-6. Generators of large amounts of grease. [Added 2-25-2003
by Ord. No. 4763]
A. The person or firm installing the grease interceptor shall first obtain a
permit from the Township of Union, Building Department.
B. The grease interceptor shall not be installed closer than 10 feet to the
utensil washing fixture it serves, without permission from the Township
of Union, Building Department. The grease interceptor is to be installed
as far away from the mechanical dishwasher as reasonably possible.
C. Grease shall be allowed to congeal overnight, and the grease
interceptor interior shall be inspected as soon as the establishment is
opened the following business day to determine the thickness of the
layer of grease. These inspections shall be conducted daily. If and when
the grease layer reaches a thickness of one inch or rises to within one
inch of the outlet baffle, it shall be removed from the interceptor, and
placed into an approved exterior grease container. Small grease
generators not requiring an exterior grease container shall be
permitted to place the accumulation into a small plastic bag and
dispose of the grease in a garbage receptacle. The grease shall be
removed from the interceptor at frequent enough intervals to prevent
grease in excess of the Joint Meeting of Essex and Union County limit of
100 ml/l from entering the Township of Union sanitary system and to
prevent waste back-up within the establishment or elsewhere.
D. Proprietors must inspect grease interceptors daily and maintain
inspection records. The records must be posted near the grease
interceptor visible to the Township inspector and must include the date
of inspection, name of the employee who performed the inspection, and
the thickness of the grease at the time of inspection.213
A. Restaurants with a seating capacity of 50 or more patrons, restaurants
and takeout food establishments as well as all food establishments with
deep fryers shall provide an exterior grease container and shall have
the waste grease and cooking oils placed therein for collection by a firm
or person qualified to remove it. The container used shall not be less
than 55 gallons and shall be equipped with a bung and a funnel. A
commercial grease container, in lieu of a drum, may be used to contain
liquid waste between collections. The funnel shall be used for pouring
213. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 434-5 UNION CODE § 434-6
428:704
§ 434-7. Enforcement of grease interceptor requirements. [Added
2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 4763]
For the purpose of this article, the Health Officer, all registered
Environmental Health Specialists, the Superintendent of Public Works and
his designee shall be designated as enforcing officers. The enforcing officers
shall be authorized to designate as many subcode officials as deemed
reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose of §§ 434-4 through
434-9. The enforcing officer or his designee is authorized to act as a law
enforcement officer solely with respect to the enforcement of the provisions
of §§ 434-4 through 434-9 by being empowered to issue summonses for any
violations of this §§ 434-4 through 434-9 in accordance with rules governing
the courts of the State of New Jersey. In addition to the Superintendent
of Public Works and/or his designee, all law enforcement officers shall be
empowered to enforce the provisions of this §§ 434-4 through 434-9.
§ 434-8. Violations and penalties for grease interceptor
requirements. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 4763215]
Any person who violates, fails or neglects to comply with any provision of
§§ 434-4 through 434-6 or code established herein or notice issued pursuant
thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,250 for each violation. Each day that a violation
continues beyond a given deadline shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense and additional penalties may be imposed, including 90 days'
imprisonment or 90 days' community service, or both fines and penalties, at
the discretion of the Municipal Judge.
the grease and oils into the drum, and the drum and surrounding area
shall be kept neat and clean.
B. Restaurants and fast-food establishments with a seating capacity of
greater than or equal to 100 shall provide a one-thousand-gallon
exterior in-ground grease interceptor, gravity fed to the interceptor and
from the interceptor to the sanitary system maintained by the
municipality. The owner or occupant of said establishment shall engage,
under contract, a person, firm or corporation to monitor and remove the
grease at timely intervals.
C. Proprietors must inspect grease interceptors daily and maintain
inspection records. The records must be posted inside the
establishment and must include the date of inspection, employee's
name who performed the inspection, and the thickness of the grease at
the time of inspection. Disposal records must be maintained at the site
and available for inspection by Township officials. The records must list
the date when grease was removed from the interceptor, name of the
company hired to remove the grease, the volume of grease removed,
and where it was disposed.214
214. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 434-6 SALES § 434-9
428:705
§ 434-9. When effective; grease interceptor requirements. [Added
2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 4763]
This amendment (§§ 434-4 through 434-8) shall take effect immediately
upon its passage and publication as required by law.
§ 434-10. Industries; access to industries.
As a precondition for the right to discharge waste in any form into the
sewers and wastewater facilities of the municipality or the Joint Meeting, all
industrial users shall provide immediate access to their facilities at any time
during which there is a discharge to the wastewater facilities. Access shall
also be provided for the purpose of checking the quality of the discharge,
taking samples and making tests of the discharge, or for the purpose of
permitting the enforcement of this article and shall be made available to
the municipality, Joint Meeting, NJDEP and USEPA. All users shall provide
access to property and premises for inspection to determine if there are any
violations of the terms or provisions of this article.
§ 434-11. Information concerning waste discharge.
As a precondition for the right to discharge waste in any form into the
sewers and wastewater facilities of the municipality or the Joint Meeting,
all persons subject to this article shall be required to provide information to
the municipality, Joint Meeting, NJDEP or USEPA, as needed, to determine
compliance with this article. This information may include:
§ 434-12. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater,
to which reference is made in this article, shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
A. Wastewater discharge rate and volume over a specified time period.
B. Chemical analysis of wastewater.
C. Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specified liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
E. A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
G. Details of systems designed to prevent and/or control the loss of spilled
materials to the sanitary sewer (i.e., spill prevention plan).
H. Any other information required by the municipality or Joint Meeting.
§ 434-9 UNION CODE § 434-12
428:706
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, or other methods or procedure that may be acceptable
to the governmental authority requiring the measurements, tests or
analyses. Sampling method, location, time, duration and frequency shall be
determined on an individual basis by the governmental authority requiring
the sampling.
§ 434-13. Compliance with written rules and regulations.
All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements
of the written rules and regulations of the municipality and Joint Meeting,
which regulations shall become effective upon the filing of certified copies
in the office of the City Clerk after the effective date of this article.
§ 434-14. Discharges to natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any wastewater or other polluting material
into any natural outlet within the municipality, except where suitable
treatment has been provided and where an NPDES permit has been
obtained from the appropriate governmental authority where required.
§ 434-15. Injuring or tampering with facilities.
No person shall maliciously, intentionally or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment that is part of the wastewater facilities of the municipality or
Joint Meeting.
§ 434-16. Violations and penalties; termination of rights; civil
actions.
A. Violations of any of the provisions of this article or any permit issued
under the authority of this article may result in the termination of the
permit or termination of the authority to discharge to the public
wastewater facilities.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine
not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section. Each and every day during which a violation of any provision of
this article exists shall constitute a separate violation. Notwithstanding
the aforesaid provisions, all violators shall be liable in a civil action for
damages for any expense, loss or damage suffered by the municipality
or Joint Meeting as a result of said violation or violations. [Amended
10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998216]
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 434-12 SALES § 434-16
428:707

ARTICLE II
Industrial Cost Recovery Charges
[Adopted 12-13-1977 by Ord. No. 3252 (Ch. 226, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 434-17. Municipalities constituting Joint Meeting.
"Joint Meeting" shall mean the municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union and
the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926, as
amended and supplemented, in the matter of a joint outlet and trunk sewer
and treatment plant for the sewage emanating from said municipalities.
§ 434-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to impose an industrial cost recovery charge,
as hereinafter defined, on all industrial users of the Joint Meeting system,
and to provide for the collection of said charges.
§ 434-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGE — The recovery from industrial
users of the treatment works or the federal grant portion of the cost of
construction of the treatment works, allocable to the treatment of waste
contributed by such users, as defined in the federal statutes and
regulations. The portion allocable to each such user shall be payable in
equal annual installments in the sum of 1/30 of said portion for a period of
30 years, after which said payments shall cease and come to an end.
§ 434-20. Charge assessed; basis for determination; reports.
A. An annual minimum industrial cost recovery charge shall be assessed
against all industrial waste contributors discharging industrial wastes
into the system in the sum of $100, unless said industrial waste
contributor is subject to a greater charge under the terms of this
article.
B. The annual industrial cost recovery charge shall be a fixed cost per
million gallons of flow, a fixed cost per pound for suspended solids and/
or a fixed cost per pound of biochemical oxygen demand, as shown
following:
(1) Flow: $240 per 1,000,000 gallons.
§ 434-17 SALES § 434-20
428:709
§ 434-21. Monitoring facilities.
The Joint Meeting, at its option, may require an industry to install metering
and monitoring facilities at the expense of the industry involved, for the
purpose of obtaining representative samples of an industry's wastewater
contribution to the Joint Meeting system.
§ 434-22. Access for purposes of monitoring and sampling.
§ 434-23. Exemptions from cost recovery charges.
Industries whose sole flow consists of the discharge from sanitary
conveniences are exempt from industrial cost recovery charges upon
satisfactorily demonstrating to the Joint Meeting that they qualify as a
nonprocess dry industry.
(2) Biochemical oxygen demand: $85 per pound of biochemical oxygen
demand.
(3) Suspended solids: $75 per pound of suspended solids.
C. Industries which on any day exceed a flow of 2,000 gallons or 20 pounds
per day of five-day biochemical oxygen demand or 20 pounds per day of
suspended solids shall, on a quarterly basis, report said flow, five-day
biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids concentration to the
Joint Meeting for the purposes of determining the annual cost recovery
charge for said industry. Said reports shall be filed on January 1, April 1,
July 1 and October 1 of each year. The Joint Meeting shall establish
uniform regulations for sampling and analyses.
D. The Joint Meeting, at its option, may elect to sample and analyze the
contribution from any industry to verify the quarterly reports
submitted.
E. All tests shall be performed in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater at the
time tests are made.
A. Entry and access to all industrial facilities for the purposes of
monitoring and sampling an industry's discharge shall be granted by
the industry to the authorized representatives of the Joint Meeting or its
duly authorized agents.
B. The Joint Meeting may monitor and sample an industry or industries
without prior warning for the purpose of determining the contributions
of flow, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids, so that it
may compute any industry's share of the industrial cost recovery
charge.
C. Entry to premises and monitoring referred to herein shall be as
provided in the Federal Water Pollution Act of 1972.
§ 434-20 UNION CODE § 434-24
428:710
§ 434-24. Charges for subsequent new users.
New industrial users which commence operations after the start of the
industrial cost recovery system shall also be subject to industrial cost
recovery charges, reduced by the ratio of the capacity used, multiplied by
the ratio of its period of use remaining, to the total cost recovery period of
30 years.
§ 434-25. Discontinuance of use.
Discontinuance by an industry of its use of the treatment works shall relieve
said industry of further industrial cost recovery charges, unless use thereof
is thereafter resumed. The remaining industries shall not be required to
assume the portion of the industrial cost recovery charge unrecovered due
to said discontinuance.
§ 434-26. Appeal of charges.
Appeal from the industrial cost recovery charge involving the
reasonableness of the allocations and cost recovery assessments to be made
in writing by an industry affected, by notice to the Executive Director of
the Joint Meeting, by sending said notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The Joint Meeting shall give said industry notice of a hearing on
said appeal at least 10 days before the date thereof. The Joint Meeting shall
determine said appeal within 90 days after the date of said hearing. Notice
of said determination shall be forwarded to said industry by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
§ 434-27. Adjustment of charges when facilities are expanded.
In the event that the sewage collection system or the treatment works of the
Joint Meeting are expanded in the future, the respective industrial users'
share for such expansion shall be subject to a cost recovery charge for
the cost of said expansion, to be calculated both as herein provided and
as provided in the Water Pollution Act of 1972. The total industrial cost
recovery charge shall thereupon be adjusted for each industrial user.
§ 434-28. Quarterly payments; when due and payable.
All industrial cost recovery charges shall become due and payable on the
first day of February, May, August and November of each year on a quarterannual
basis and shall be paid to the Township of Union. The annual charge
to each industrial user shall be determined by the Joint Meeting. Said
Township of Union shall remit said sums collected to the Joint Meeting
within 30 days after they become due and payable.
§ 434-29. Initial payment.
The industrial cost recovery charges provided for herein shall become due
and payable from and after the first day of January following the completion
by the Joint Meeting of the secondary treatment plant.
§ 434-24 SALES § 434-30
428:711
§ 434-30. What constitutes treatment works.
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, it is the
intention of this article that any reference to "treatment works," "treatment
system" or "treatment plant" shall be construed to refer to a public sewage
treatment plant and shall mean any structure or structures by means of
which domestic or industrial wastes are subject to any artificial process
in order to remove or so alter constituents as to render the wastes less
offensive or dangerous to the public health, comfort or property of any of
the inhabitants of this state before the discharge of the plant effluent into
any waters of this state.
§ 434-31. Authority of Joint Meeting regarding applications and
inspections.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article and the rules
and regulations of the Joint Meeting relating thereto, the joint meeting
operating said public sewage treatment plant shall:
§ 434-32. Civil action for relief; violations and penalties.
A. Require that any person, corporation or municipality, desiring to make
any sewage connection or discharge or continue to discharge sewage
which includes or consists of industrial wastes into such public sewage
treatment plant, make application therefor in writing on forms provided
by said Joint Meeting.
B. Adopt rules and regulations setting forth the information required to be
stated in the application therefor, in order to provide full information as
to the quantity, character and composition of any sewage which may be
discharged into the public sewage treatment plant, and establishing
requirements and procedures for prompt amendment of said
application in the event of significant changes in the quantity, character
or composition of such sewage.
C. Make or cause to be made inspection of the discharging facilities of any
person, corporation or municipality who may be discharging sewage or
permitting sewage to be discharged into sewerage systems under the
jurisdiction of the Joint Meeting.
A. If any person, corporation or municipality violates any of the provisions
of this article or rules and regulations promulgated by the Joint
Meeting, the Joint Meeting may institute a civil action in the Superior
Court for injunctive relief to prohibit or prevent such violations, and the
court may proceed in the action in a summary manner.
B. In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this article, said
violator shall be subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:11-55.
§ 434-30 UNION CODE § 434-32
428:712
ARTICLE III
Sewer System User Charges
[Adopted 12-13-1977 by Ord. No. 3253 (Ch. 226, Art. III of the 1986
Code)]
§ 434-33. Municipalities constituting Joint Meeting.
"Joint Meeting" shall mean the municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union
and the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926,
as amended, and supplemented, in the matter of a joint trunk and outlet
sewer and treatment plant for the sewage wastewater emanating from said
municipalities.
§ 434-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to impose an annual user charge, as
hereinafter defined, on all domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional
and governmental users of the sewer system of the Township of Union,
which sewage, contributed to and flowing therein, is collected and treated
by said Joint Meeting.
§ 434-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
USER CHARGE — The charge levied upon all users of the treatment works
for the annual cost of operation and maintenance (including replacements)
of such trunk lines and such works, all as defined in the federal rules and
regulations.
§ 434-36. User charges and assessments. [Amended 4-10-1979 by
Ord. No. 3367]
A. Residential, commercial and industrial. [Last amended 2-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 5562]
(1) All residential users shall be charged at a uniform rate for domestic
waste contributed to said system. The charge of the
aforementioned use shall be billed annually on or about April 1, and
shall be based on the amount of water consumed in gallons as read
on the water meter during the previous calendar year at a rate of
$3 per hundred cubic feet (equivalent to $4.01 per 1,000 gallons),
with a minimum annual charge of $50.
(2) All commercial, industrial (excluding Joint-Meeting-defined
industrial users charged under Subsection C herein), institutional
§ 434-33 SALES § 434-36
428:713
and government users, shall be charged at a uniform rate for
domestic waste contributed to said system. The charge for these
users shall be billed annually on or about April 1, and shall be
based on the aggregate of the amount of water consumed in gallons
as read of the water meter during the previous calendar year at the
rate of $3 per hundred cubic feet (equivalent to $4.01 per 1,000
gallons), with a minimum annual charge of $50.
B. "Domestic use or waste" is hereby defined to be domestic wastewater
from sanitary conveniences.
C. Basis for determination; cost of sampling.
(1) User charges for industrial waste shall be charged industrial waste
contributors who discharge industrial waste into the system. User
charges for industrial waste shall be based upon the flow,
suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand of the waste as
determined by the Joint Meeting. Sampling and measurement shall
be accomplished by each industrial discharger at its own expense,
and the results thereof shall be monitored by the Joint Meeting
staff. Where deemed necessary by the Joint Meeting, permanent
measurement and sampling facilities shall be installed by the
industrial user at its own expense.
(2) The rate of charges shall be determined annually by resolution of
the Joint Meeting. For the first year of operation of the secondary
treatment facilities, the Joint Meeting shall make an estimate of the
rate of charges based upon the results of an industrial cost
recovery, heavy metals survey, and shall embody the estimated first
year of operation charges in a resolution to be adopted.
(3) User charges for industrial waste shall be assessed only where
sampling and testing show that industrial waste from a particular
industrial waste contributor exceeds 2,000 gallons per day, or
where the suspended solids contribution exceeds 50 pounds per
day, or where the biochemical oxygen demand contribution exceeds
50 pounds per day.
(4) User charges for industrial waste shall include payment for
operational costs of the Township of Union Sewer Utility, which
include but are not limited to the operation and maintenance of the
Township of Union Sanitary System. Payment for said costs is
identified by the Township of Union as administrative costs and is
computed by developing a percentage from dividing industrial
waste flow by total system flow, applying the developed percentage
from to the total administrative charge and apportioning that
amount to the industrial user charge as a percentage of its Joint
Meeting flow. [Added 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4309; amended
5-23-1995 by Ord. No. 4388]
§ 434-36 UNION CODE § 434-36
428:714
§ 434-37. Assessment against owner of property; when payable;
interest. [Amended 4-10-1979 by Ord. No. 3367]
(5) User charges for industrial users shall include an assessment equal
to 25% of the sum of the regular Joint Meeting charges as
described in Subsections C(1) and (2) of this chapter, plus the
industrial user administrative charge as described in Subsection
C(4) of this chapter. The purpose of the assessment is for the
payment of costs associated with but not limited to Joint Meeting
capital improvement assessments and other such assessments and
for purpose of the funding of Township capital and emergency
improvements and rate stabilization. [Added 4-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 4710]
D. The cost of sampling and testing by the Joint Meeting, as referred to in
Subsection C herein, shall be assessed against each industrial waste
contributor on the basis of the actual cost thereof.
E. "Industrial waste" is hereby defined to be nondomestic wastewater flow
resulting from industrial processing and manufacturing and including
cooling water discharge.
F. Where an industry has both domestic wastes and industrial wastes and
said wastes are commingled and so discharged into the sewer system,
the industrial waste charge as set forth in Subsection C(1) shall apply.
Any industry may, at its option and at its own cost and expense,
separate its industrial waste from its domestic waste and provide
separate connections to the municipal sewer system for each such type
of waste. If any industry exercises this option of separation of wastes as
herein set forth, the schedule as set forth in Subsection A of this section
shall be applicable to its domestic waste flow, and the rates set forth in
Subsection C(1) and (2) shall be applicable to its industrial waste flow
and use.
G. The user charge assessed against the Township of Union shall be
determined annually by resolution of Joint Meeting and shall be based
upon actual usage for the preceding year. For the first year of operation
of the system, said charge shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
operation thereof which shall be set forth in the resolution to be
adopted by Joint Meeting.
A. All charges established and provided for herein shall be assessed
against the owners of the property from which said sewage or
wastewater emanates, respectively, and shall be collected annually by
the Collector of Taxes of the Township of Union.
B. Such charges shall draw the same interest from the time they become
due, as taxes upon real estate in the municipality, and shall be a lien
upon the premises until paid, and the municipality shall have the same
remedies for the collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties,
as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 434-36 SALES § 434-37
428:715
§ 434-38. Number and classification of users determined.
For the purpose of determining said user charges, the number and
classification of all users of said sewage system shall be made by the
Township of Union. Said determination shall be subject to audit, review and
redetermination by the Joint Meeting.
§ 434-39. User charges; when due and payable. [Amended
4-10-1979 by Ord. No. 3367]
The user charges provided for herein shall be due and payable on the first
day of September 1979 and annually thereafter on the first day of July.
§ 434-40. Intent.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article and the Federal Water
Pollution Act of 1972, requiring the imposition of user charges as defined
herein, as set forth in said Act and as provided for in the rules and
regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency and without intending
to interfere with or contravene the provisions and requirements of the
imposition of said user charges as herein and therein defined, it is the
express intention of the Township of Union to adhere to and comply with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:63-116 providing for annual expenses, estimated
and apportioned, and additional expenses, if necessary, in order that the
Joint Meeting may thereby be enabled to continue and perform its normal
functions.
C. All sums collected under the terms of this article shall be applied by the
Collector of Taxes to and paid over by him to the Township's municipal
sewer utility for the purpose of paying the assessment of Joint Meeting
and other operating costs of said utility.
§ 434-37 UNION CODE § 434-40
428:716
ARTICLE IV
Self-Liquidating Municipal Public Utility
[Adopted 12-26-1978 by Ord. No. 3351 (Ch. 226, Art. IV of the 1986
Code)]
§ 434-41. Sewer system operation.
The municipal sewer system consisting of main sewers, sewers, lateral
sewers, sewage treatment or disposal plants, sewage receptacles, pumping
stations and any and all improvements, erections, works, establishments
and fixtures to provide proper sewerage and drainage for the Township of
Union and controlled and managed by said Township, whether owned or
controlled by it, is hereby created and established as a municipal public
utility for all of the purposes of the Local Bond Law of New Jersey and
the Local Budget Law of New Jersey. Said municipal public utility is hereby
found and determined to be a utility, enterprise or purpose authorized to be
undertaken by the Township and from which it may receive rates, rentals
or other charges for or in connection with or the use of services of such
municipal public utility which shall be held, used and applied in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Bond Law and the Local Budget Law and
any other applicable laws.
§ 434-41 SALES § 434-41
428:717

ARTICLE V
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 3813 (Ch. 226, Art. V of the 1986
Code)]
§ 434-42. Adoption of standards.
The Rules and Regulations of the Joint Meeting adopted on December 20,
1984, and as the same are modified from time to time, are hereby adopted
as if fully set forth herein as rules and regulations governing the municipal
sewer facilities as well as the Joint Meeting facilities.
§ 434-43. Enforcement.
A. Service of notice; hearing; legal action.
(1) Whenever the Joint Meeting finds that any person (as defined in
said rules and regulations) has violated or is violating this article or
any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the
Joint Meeting may serve upon such person a written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to
exceed 30 days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. If the
violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the Joint Meeting
may order any person who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to show cause before the Joint Meeting and Township of
Union why service should not be terminated. A notice shall be
served on the offending party, specifying the time and place of a
hearing to be held by the Joint Meeting and Township of Union
regarding the violation, and directing the offending party to show
cause before the Joint Meeting and Township of Union why an
order should not be made directing the termination of service. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the
hearing.
(2) The Joint Meeting and Township of Union may itself conduct the
hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members
or any officer or employee to:
(a) Issue in the name of the Joint Meeting and Township of Union
notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any
matter involved in any such hearings.
(b) Take the evidence.
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts/records and other evidence, together with
recommendations, to the Joint Meeting and Township of Union
for action thereof.
§ 434-42 SALES § 434-43
428:719
(3) At any public hearing, testimony taken before the Joint Meeting
and Township of Union or any person designated by it must be
under oath and recorded either by the hearing officer in a summary
manner or stenographically. In the latter case, the transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public upon
payment of the usual charges therefore. After the Joint Meeting
and Township of Union have reviewed the evidence, they may issue
an order to the party responsible for the discharge directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated and such further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate.
(4) Any discharge in violation of the substantive provisions of this
article or an order of the Joint Meeting shall be considered grounds
for legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes
or other wastes into the treatment facilities contrary to the
substantive provisions of this article or any order of the Joint
Meeting, the Executive Director of the Joint Meeting shall
commence an action for injunctive relief and appropriate legal
damages in the Superior Court of the respective county.
B. Suspension of service.
(1) The Joint Meeting and/or Township of Union may suspend the
wastewater treatment service, and/or the nondomestic wastewater
discharge permit, when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the Joint Meeting and/or Township of Union, in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons or to the environment, causes interference with
the publicly owned treatment works or causes the Joint Meeting
and/or Township of Union to violate any condition of its New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit.
(2) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service, and/or the nondomestic wastewater domestic permit, shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a
failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Joint Meeting and/or Township of Union shall take such
steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
publicly owned treatment works system or endangerment to any
individuals. The Joint Meeting and/or Township of Union shall
reinstate the nondomestic wastewater discharge permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted
by the discharger describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be
submitted to the Joint Meeting and/or Township of Union within 15
days of the date of occurrence.
§ 434-43 UNION CODE § 434-44
428:720
§ 434-44. Violations and penalties; recovery of costs.217
Any person who is found to have violated an order of the Joint Meeting
and/or Township of Union or who willfully or negligently fails to comply
with any provision of this article and the orders, rules and regulations
issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not
to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof, for each offense. Each day
on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Joint
Meeting and Township of Union may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by
appropriate suit at law against the person(s) found to have violated this
article or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder. In addition,
also, to the penalties previously provided herein, the Joint Meeting and its
tributary municipalities may recover reasonable costs expended to rectify
damages to its treatment facilities and tributary sewers as well as to rectify
treatment process problems caused as a result of violations of this article.
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 434-44 SALES § 434-44
428:721

ARTICLE VI
Sanitary Sewer Connection Charges
[Adopted 1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3952 (Ch. 226, Art. VI of the 1986
Code)]
§ 434-45. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall be deemed to have the
meanings herein specified:
PERSON — Any individual, company, firm, partnership, association, society
or corporation.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewerage system of the
Township of Union which transmits sewerage to the truck, interceptor or
treatment facilities of the Joint Meeting of Essex and Union County.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The sanitary sewer line running from the
building to the main (sanitary sewer system) in the street.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 434-46. Connection to sewer required.
Any building used in whole or part as a dwelling or which requires or
uses sanitary sewerage disposal and which is within 200 feet or such
other reasonable distance from the sanitary sewer system as determined
by the administrative authority, now or hereafter, shall be connected to the
sanitary sewer system:
§ 434-47. Connection fee.
Hereafter, before any building service connection is connected to the
sanitary sewer system by any owner of property or his agents, said owner
shall make application to the Plumbing Subcode Official on applications
furnished for that purpose and pay the Township a connection charge of
$150 per equivalent dwelling unit.
A. Existing buildings: within 180 days after adoption of this article.
B. New buildings: prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. Buildings on a street in which a sanitary sewer system is hereafter
constructed: within 180 days after completion of the construction of
said system.
A. When a developer is commencing construction on a new development
or section of a development, the connection fees for the entire section
or development, if not sectionalized, shall be posted prior to the
construction of the sanitary sewer extension or issuance of the first
building permit, whichever occurs first.
B. Determination of fee.
§ 434-45 SALES § 434-47
428:723
§ 434-48. Compliance required.
Said connection to the sewer system shall comply with the rules, regulations
and ordinances of the Township of Union, either now existing or hereafter
adopted.
§ 434-49. Responsibility for connection costs.
Service connections shall be made at the expense of the person wishing
to connect to the sanitary sewer system. The cost of required permits, i.e.,
plumbing, road opening, etc., and restoration associated with installation
of the service connections shall be borne by the person connecting to the
sanitary sewer system.
§ 434-50. Violations and penalties.
(1) The connection fee provided for in this article is based upon the
flow from a four-inch diameter individual residential service
connection and the flows generated by the same. Where a
connection is to serve more than one residential unit, the
connection charge shall apply to each equivalent dwelling unit
tributary to the connection.
(2) When larger connections are required as for commercial or
industrial uses, the connection fee shall increase based upon the
available capacity of the connection in accordance with the
following table:
Size of Connection
(inches)
Capacity at V
(velocity) = 2 feet
per second
(gallons per
minute) Equivalent Factor
4 (minimum) 78.33 1
5 322.39 1.56
6 176.24 2.25
8 313.32 4.00
10 489.56 6.25
12 704.97 9.00
Example: An eight-inch connection would result in a connection
fee four times that of a four-inch connection.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law to
hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding $1,250
as such court in its discretion may impose; or, if the party so convicted
be a natural person, such person may be imprisoned for such term not
§ 434-47 UNION CODE § 434-50
428:724
exceeding 90 days or be subject to community service for not more than
90 days or be fined a sum not exceeding $1,250, or any combination
thereof, as such court in its discretion may impose. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.218
B. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof,
where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist
or be suffered, allowed or permitted to exist and any architect, builder,
developer, contractor, agent, person or corporation engaged in
connection therewith and who assists in the commission of any such
violation shall each be guilty of a separate violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, specified above.
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 434-50 SALES § 434-50
428:725
Chapter 436
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 434-50 UNION CODE § 434-50
436:726
ARTICLE I
Residency and Loitering
[Adopted 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 4947]
§ 436-1. Findings and declarations.
The Township Committee finds and declares that the health, safety and
welfare of children will be enhanced by prohibiting registered sex offenders
from residing or loitering within the township within 2,500 feet of any
school, park, playground, recreation area, day-care facility or school bus
stop located within the Township of Union or adjacent municipality.
§ 436-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Whether on foot or in a motor vehicle, a person who wanders
or remains idle in essentially one location, sits, lounges, loafs, walks about
aimlessly or repeatedly frequents the same location or repeatedly circles in
a motor vehicle.
PROHIBITED AREA — The area within 2,500 feet from the real property
upon which any school, park, playground, recreation area, day-care facility
or school bus stop is located within the Township of Union.
PROHIBITED AREA MAP — A map approved and adopted pursuant to this
article depicting the prohibited area.
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER — Any person over the age of 18 who is
required to register pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., the New Jersey Sex
Offender Registration and Notification Statute ("Megan's Law").
SCHOOL BUS STOP — Any area designated by the school district within the
Township as a school bus stop where children regularly congregate for the
purpose of boarding and disembarking from a school bus.
§ 436-3. Adoption of Prohibited Area Map.
The Prohibited Area Map prepared by the Township Engineer and adopted
by the Township Committee by a resolution and as may be amended from
time to time by resolution, depicting the location and areas within the
Township of property which comprises all schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, day-care facilities and school bus stops, and all areas
within 2,500 feet from such properties, shall be kept on file with the
Township Clerk and shall serve as an official finding and record of the
prohibited area.
§ 436-4. Residency and loitering prohibited.
A registered sex offender shall not reside or loiter within a prohibited area.
§ 436-5. Exceptions.
§ 436-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 436-5
436:727
§ 436-6. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township of Union Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall cause a copy of this article and the Prohibited
Area Map to be provided to each registered sex offender who has registered
under Megan's Law and who is residing within the Township.
§ 436-7. Defenses.
It shall be no defense to a prosecution for a violation of this article that the
actor was unaware that the prohibited conduct occurred within a prohibited
area, nor shall it be a defense to a prosecution under this article that
no juveniles were present within any prohibited area at the time of the
offense. To the extent that a registered sex offender has not registered
under Megan's Law, it shall not be a defense to a prosecution under this
article that the registered sex offender was not provided with a copy of this
article or the prohibited area map.
§ 436-8. Use of Prohibited Area Map.
In a prosecution under this article, a true copy of the Prohibited Area
Map shall, upon proper authentication, be admissible and shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the location and boundaries of the prohibited area.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the prosecution from
introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish any
element of this offense; nor shall this section be construed to preclude the
use or admissibility of any map or diagram other than one which has been
approved by the Township Committee, provided that the map or diagram is
otherwise admissible pursuant to the applicable rules of evidence.
§ 436-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction of a first offense, be punished by a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,250 and/or by imprisonment or community service not
exceeding 90 days.
A. Any person who is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile
facility or other correctional institution or facility which is located
within a prohibited area.
B. Any person who established a residence within a prohibited area prior
to the effective date of this article.
C. The prohibited area is established or expanded subsequent to the
effective date of this article to encompass a registered sex offender's
existing residence.
§ 436-5 UNION CODE § 436-10
436:728
§ 436-10. Repeat offender.
Any person who is convicted of violating this article within one year of the
date of a previous violation of this article shall be sentenced to an additional
fine of $1,250, which fine shall be calculated separately from the fine set
forth in § 436-9 imposed for violation of this article.
§ 436-10 SEX OFFENDERS § 436-10
436:729
Chapter 437
(RESERVED)
Chapter 439
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 439-1. Definitions.
As used or referred to in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PUBLIC AREA — Municipal, county, state and federal buildings, public
parks, playgrounds, public parking areas and all means of ingress and
egress pertaining thereto.
PUBLIC STREET — Any and all municipal, county and state streets,
avenues, roads and highways within the Township of Union and embraces
the entire right-of-way thereof, including all installations and facilities
therein.
SHOPPING CART — All carts, baskets or containers equipped with wheels
and propelled by human power normally used or intended to be used for the
carting or carrying of merchandise, goods and chattels.
§ 439-2. Identification cards required.
The owner or owners of shopping carts used or intended for use for the
carting or carrying of merchandise, goods or chattels shall affix a
permanent identification to each such shopping cart, indicating the name
and address of the owner thereof.
§ 439-3. Abandonment unlawful.
No person shall leave or abandon or suffer or permit to be left or abandoned
any shopping cart, either owned by him or in his possession, custody or
control, in or upon any public street or public area.
§ 439-4. Responsibility of owner.
Any owner or merchant who permits a shopping cart to be taken out of the
store premises and fails to maintain such control thereof as will accomplish
its return promptly and without the same being left in or upon any public
street or public area shall be held responsible for leaving, suffering and
permitting such shopping cart to be left in such area, if the shopping cart
should be left in any public street or public area.
§ 439-5. Impoundment; redemption.
The Police Department of the Township of Union shall remove or cause to be
removed any shopping cart found unattended or abandoned upon any public
§ 436-10 UNION CODE § 439-5
439:730
street or public area and shall take or cause the same to be taken to any
premises within the Township of Union designated by the Police Department
where the same shall be held until redeemed, sold or destroyed. Within
five days after the removal of the shopping cart, the Police Department
shall, by ordinary mail, notify the owner thereof at the address indicated on
the identification tag that the impounded shopping cart may be redeemed
within 10 days of the date of its taking, said date to be set forth in such
notice, upon the payment of the sum of $10 and thereafter at any time prior
to sale upon the payment of the sum hereinafter fixed. Failure to give such
notice shall not in any way subject the Police Department or the Township
of Union to any liability. The owners of shopping carts are hereby instructed
to make inquiry at police headquarters respecting the whereabouts of any
missing shopping carts and are not to depend on receipt of any notice from
the Police Department. If such shopping cart is unclaimed or unredeemed
for a period of 10 days from the time of its taking, the Police Department
shall give at least five days public notice in a newspaper authorized to
accept legal publications of the Township of Union, fixing a place, date, time
and terms of public sale to the highest bidder of such shopping carts. one
of the terms of such sale shall be that no shopping cart shall be sold for less
than the amount required to be paid for the redemption of such shopping
cart computed in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
§ 439-6. Sale of unredeemed carts.
If the shopping cart is not redeemed within 10 days of its taking, there shall
be added to the sum of $10 the additional sum of $2 for each day such
shopping cart remains impounded beyond the first 10 days, and the total
shall be the amount required to redeem the shopping cart. Such amount
may be paid by the owner of the shopping cart at any time prior to the sale
of such shopping cart, and upon such payment, the shopping cart shall not
be sold and shall be returned to the owner.
§ 439-7. Destruction.
In the event any shopping cart shall remain unredeemed and unsold at
public sale, the Police Department may dismantle, destroy or otherwise
dispose thereof.
§ 439-8. Nonliability.
Any public sale or other disposition of any shopping cart shall be without
liability on the part of the Township of Union, the Police Department and
their agents and employees.
§ 439-9. Payments turned over to Treasurer.
Immediately after a shopping cart is redeemed or sold, the Chief of Police
shall pay over to the Treasurer of the Township the amount received for
redemption or sale, costs and expenses of the article redeemed or sold,
together with an itemized statement thereof.
§ 439-5 SHOPPING CARTS § 439-10
439:731
§ 439-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998219]
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter or any of the provisions
thereof shall be punished by one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section. The penalty
herein fixed shall be in addition to any fees for redemption or costs of public
sale chargeable as hereinabove set forth.
§ 439-11. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent or prohibit the leaving of shopping
carts on the outside premises of a market or store, if the same are placed
in an area designated therefor and so as not to constitute an obstruction
or hazard to pedestrians and operators of motor vehicles. The owner or
operator of any store making use of shopping carts as herein defined shall
not be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter, if such owner or
operator has constructed and maintains a cart corral or other device which
makes it impossible to roll such shopping cart off the premises upon which
said store is located.
Chapter 443
SITE IMPROVEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 203.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Landscaping — See Ch. 339.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Soil removal — See Ch. 456.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
§ 443-1. Legislative intent.
The Township Committee hereby declares its intent to regulate the
modification and/or improvements of any site within the Township of Union.
The Township Engineer is therefore directed to determine whether changes
to a site will be covered under this chapter and to promulgate rules and
regulations to provide that site modifications and improvements are in
conformance with approved plans and have no adverse impacts upon other
properties.
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 439-10 UNION CODE § 443-2
443:732
§ 443-2. Permit required.
Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or
improvement to any existing structure, proposed structure or to any lands
situated within the Township, which includes but is not limited to the
installation or modification of any stormwater and sanitary facility, grading
change, paving, curbing, area lighting, landscaping and signage, a site
improvement permit shall be obtained from the Township Engineer.
§ 443-3. Permit waiver.
The Township Engineer is hereby empowered to waive the requirements
outlined under this chapter if, in his opinion, the construction, modification
or improvement being proposed is de minimus.
§ 443-4. Engineer authorized to promulgate rules.
The Township Engineer is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to implement the legislative intent of this chapter.
§ 443-5. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. [Amended 4-25-1994
by Ord. No. 4310]
A certificate of occupancy will not be issued by the Building Department
until a certificate of site occupancy is received by the Building Department
from the Township Engineer.
§ 443-6. Application procedure.
Application for a site improvement permit must be made at the Department
of Engineering. Upon review of a completed application, the Township
Engineer will, within seven days, either approve or deny said permit. If said
permit is approved, work may then, and only then, commence. If said permit
is denied, the Township Engineer will supply supporting information and list
all deficiencies.
§ 443-7. Fees.
The following fees will cover the costs incurred for plan review, periodic site
inspection, final site inspection and the issuance of the final site inspection
approval form by the Township Engineer to the Building Department.
A. Plot grading (swimming pool): $5 each.
B. Plot grading (residential): $50 each.*
C. Commercial/industrial.
(1) Up to 10,000 square feet of lot area: $100.*
(2) Ten thousand square feet of lot area and over: $200.*
§ 443-2 SITE IMPROVEMENTS § 443-7
443:733
§ 443-8. Inspections and tests.
All site improvements and/or modifications shall be inspected during the
time of their occurrence by the Township Engineer or his authorized
representative. A set of approved plans relative to the work being done must
be made available on site for inspection by any authorized Township official.
No underground installation shall be covered or backfilled until inspected
and approved. If backfilling or covering occurs prior to inspection, said
installation must either be uncovered or excavated for inspection or
inspected by some alternate means acceptable to the Township Engineer or
his authorized representative.
§ 443-9. Inspection not acceptance.
Inspection of any work by the Township Engineer or his authorized
representative shall not be considered to be final acceptance or rejection of
the work, but shall only be considered to be a determination of whether or
not the specific work involved was being done in accordance with Township
specifications or other required standards at the time of inspection. Any
damage to such work or other unforeseen circumstances, such as the
effect of the weather, other construction, changing conditions, settlement,
etc., between the time of installation and the time of final inspection by
the Township Engineer or his authorized representative shall be the full
responsibility of the contractor/developer to remedy the condition prior to
acceptance.
§ 443-10. Approval by Township Engineer. [Amended 4-25-1994 by
Ord. No. 4310]
When a final inspection has been completed, the Township Engineer shall
approve the subject site and issue a certificate of site occupancy if required.
§ 443-11. Violations and penalties.
*NOTE: Fees to be waived if a performance guaranty is required
and posted by owner.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not exceeding $1,250 or to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or to community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.220
B. Failure to obtain the proper permit, make satisfactory improvements, as
determined by the Township Engineer, or pay the proper permit fee
shall be considered a violation and shall be punishable under this
chapter.
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 443-7 UNION CODE § 443-11
443:734
Chapter 450
SMOKING; TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
§ 443-11 SITE IMPROVEMENTS § 443-11
443:735

ARTICLE I
Smoking; Carrying Lighted Objects
[Adopted 8-15-1975 by Ord. No. 2980 (Ch. 235 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 450-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 450-2. Smoking in certain areas prohibited.
No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match, or
use any spark, flame or fire-producing device not specifically authorized for
use in such place by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention in any of the
following places:
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. Terms defined. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION — The Fire
Prevention Officer of the Fire Department of the Township of Union.
FIRE INSPECTOR — A member of the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the
Township of Union.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township
of Union.
A. Retail stores.
(1) All retail stores.
(2) Exception for approved areas. The prohibition of Subsection A(1)
above shall not apply to smoking in rest rooms, restaurants,
executive offices or beauty parlor and barbershops in retail stores
when specifically approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, by written order to the person having control of the
premises, upon a finding that such use therein is not dangerous to
life or property.
B. Elevators. Elevators, regardless of capacity, in any public place.
C. Beds.
(1) In beds in hospitals, hotels, dormitories, nursing homes and
rooming- and lodging houses.
§ 450-1 SITE IMPROVEMENTS § 450-2
443:737
§ 450-3. Violation by persons having control.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent, having control of any
premises or place to knowingly permit a violation of this article.
§ 450-4. Authority of Chief of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have the authority to
order "no smoking" signs erected in any place as prescribed by this article,
where, in his opinion, smoking or the carrying of a lighted cigar, cigarette,
pipe or match or any use of any spark, flame or fire-producing device, not
specifically authorized for use in such place, would constitute a menace to
life or property.
§ 450-5. Placarding required.
Every person, or his agent, having control of premises upon which smoking
or the carrying of lighted objects is prohibited by or under the authority
of this article shall conspicuously display upon the premises a sign reading
"No smoking."
(2) Placarding required. A printed notice advising the occupant of the
effect of Subsection C above shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in every sleeping room of the buildings enumerated in Subsection
C(1) above.
D. Public theaters.
(1) During a performance in public theaters, motion-picture houses or
other auditoria used for such purposes.
(2) Exception for approved areas. The prohibition of Subsection D(1)
above shall not apply to smoking rooms and areas and rest rooms
when specifically approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, by written order to the person having control of the
premises, upon a finding that such use therein is not dangerous to
life or property.
E. Public conveyances. Buses and other public conveyances, except
taxicabs.
F. Dance floors. Dance floors of any tavern, restaurant, nightclub, social
club, dance hall or other public place offering facilities for dancing.
G. Other prohibited areas. Areas where conditions are such as to make
smoking a hazard in any areas of warehouses, stores, places of
assembly, industrial plants, institutions, schools, where flammable
liquids are stored, dispensed or used or in open spaces where
combustible materials are stored or handled.
§ 450-2 UNION CODE § 450-6
443:738
§ 450-6. Violation of sign.
No person shall smoke in any properly placarded place nor remove any
placard required to be erected by or under the authority of this article.
§ 450-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 450-6 SITE IMPROVEMENTS § 450-7
443:739

ARTICLE II
Cigarette Vending Machines
[Adopted 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4283 (Ch. 267, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 450-8. Unattended machines prohibited.
No cigarette vending machine shall be placed on any premises, public or
private, within the Township unless the owner or lessee of such a machine
provides, in writing, to the Township for each individual cigarette vending
machine the names and business addresses of a person or persons who shall
serve as attendant and deputy attendant for that machine. More than one
attendant and/or deputy attendant may be appointed in reference to a single
cigarette vending machine, provided that the owner or lessee states the
time periods when each of two or more attendants and/or deputy attendants
for a single cigarette vending machine shall be the attendant or deputy
attendant on duty and thus responsible for compliance with this article.
§ 450-9. Responsibilities of attendant.
The attendant and, in his stead, the deputy attendant shall be responsible
for the penalties and fees which may, upon conviction, be imposed for
violations of this Article II. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the
employer of an attendant from paying penalties imposed under this article,
but payment by the employer shall not be required.
§ 450-10. Qualifications and duties of attendant.
The attendant shall:
A. Be at least 18 years of age or more, as certified by the Township Health
Officer by birth certificate or driver's license only.
B. Be responsible for placing and maintaining the cigarette vending
machine at a site not more than 50 feet from his normal place of
transacting business, which shall include but not be limited to a cash
register, checkout counter, bar or place for the consumption or sale of
liquor, desk, office, bathroom or lounge area.
C. Have a clear unobstructed line of sight between his normal place of
transacting business and the location of the cigarette vending machine.
D. Be responsible to make those cigarette vending machines for which he
is responsible inoperable during any time when the public has access to
said machines but for any reason the attendant or deputy attendants
are not available to attend the machines.
E. Be an employee or agent of the firm, corporation, partnership or entity
having possessory interest, including but not limited to leaseholds, in
the premises where the cigarette vending machine is located.
§ 450-8 SITE IMPROVEMENTS § 450-10
443:741
§ 450-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 4842]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,250, imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, and each violation of any of the
provisions of this article and each day the same is violated shall be deemed
and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
F. Be deemed to be in violation of this article if he permits a person who is
17 years of age or less to purchase a product from a cigarette vending
machines.
§ 450-10 UNION CODE § 450-11
443:742
ARTICLE III
Smoke-Free Buildings
[Adopted 2-8-1994 by Ord. No. 4291 (Ch. 234 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 450-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed by the Township of Union
in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any
person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER — The Township of Union or any person, partnership,
corporation, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity who
employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in
which the public is permitted.
SMOKING — The burning of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains any form of tobacco.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco or any
other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking.
§ 450-13. Prohibition of smoking in public places.
§ 450-14. Enforcement.
The enforcement authorities of this article shall be the Director of Public
Safety, the Health Officer of the Board of Health and their respective
designees.
§ 450-15. Violations and penalties.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all buildings owned, leased or rented by
the Township of Union.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator, manager or other
person who controls any public place to provide smoke-free premises.
C. "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking Symbol"
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross-section) shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at each building entrance
and within each enclosed area where smoking is prohibited by this
article. Such signs shall be posted by the owner, operator, manager or
other person who controls such building or other place.
§ 450-12 SITE IMPROVEMENTS § 450-15
443:743
§ 450-16. Nonretaliation.
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any matter
retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such
employee or applicant exercises any right to a smoke-free place of
employment of public place as set forth in this article.
§ 450-17. Public education.
The Board of Health of the Township of Union shall engage in a continuing
program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article
to those affected by it and to guide supervisors and employees in their
compliance with this article.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to this article to fail
to comply with any of its provisions.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking
is prohibited by the provisions of this article.
C. Any municipal employee found in violation of this article shall be
disciplined in accordance with the provisions of the Township of Union
Policy and Procedures Manual.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
any combination of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250,
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. [Amended 10-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 4842]
§ 450-15 UNION CODE § 450-17
443:744
ARTICLE IV
Building Entrances and Municipal Vehicles
[Adopted 6-23-2015 by Ord. No. 5344]
§ 450-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — Any electric device that can be used to
deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device,
including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe.
This definition shall not include any medically prescribed inhalation devices,
including, but not limited to, inhalers, respirators, or oxygen tanks.
SMOKE or SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke
from or the possession of a lit cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device, cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe.
§ 450-19. Smoking on Township property prohibited.
§ 450-20. Enforcement.
Whenever the health officer or his or her designee or a law enforcement
officer or a city code enforcement officer observes or reasonably believes
that there exists a violation of this article, he or she may issue a summons
and complaint to the violator. The complaint shall be written and served
upon the violator.
§ 450-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be issued a summons
and complaint for a violation. Any person found guilty of violating this
article shall be fined $100 plus court costs, except that any person found
guilty of or pleading guilty to a first violation of this article may be
sentenced to not less than 10 hours of community service.
A. No person shall smoke within 25 feet of an entrance to a city building
whether owned, leased or utilized by the city.
B. No person shall smoke in any vehicle owned or leased by the city.
§ 450-18 SITE IMPROVEMENTS § 450-21
443:745
Chapter 456
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood Control Commissions — See Ch. 64. Land development — See Ch. 170.
§ 456-1. Filing requirements.
Any person or owner desiring to make any excavation or to remove or
to import soil for fill from or to premises in the Township of Union in
the County of Union shall first file with the Township Engineer a map
of the premises showing the proposed contour lines and proposed grades
resulting from such intended removal or importation in relation to the
existing topography of the premises and said proposed contour lines and
proposed grades shall be subject to approval by the Township Engineer of
the Township of Union. No permit for soil removal or importation shall be
issued until such map has been filed and until the contour lines and grades
have been approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 456-2. Sharp declivities, pits or depressions.
In the removal or importation of soil, the owner, applicant or person in
charge shall so conduct operations that there shall be no sharp declivities,
pits, depressions or hills and so that the area shall be properly leveled off,
cleared of debris and graded to conform to the contour lines and grades as
approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 456-3. Top layer of arable soil.
The applicant, owner or person in charge of the removal of soil shall not
take away the top layer of arable soil for a depth of four inches, but such top
layer of arable soil to a depth of four inches shall be set aside for retention
on the premises and shall be respread over the premises when the rest of
the soil has been removed, pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by
the Township Engineer.
§ 456-4. Use of streets for transportation.
In the removal or importation of soil or dirt, the owner, applicant or person
in charge shall make use of only such streets for transportation as are
designated for that purpose by the Township Engineer.
§ 456-5. Fees; deposits.
Before any permit for soil removal, importation, hauling and transporting
shall be issued, the applicant or owner shall file an application for said
permit at least 24 hours prior thereto with the Township Engineer and
§ 450-21 UNION CODE § 456-5
456:746
shall pay for said permit a fee of $5. In addition to the aforementioned
permit fee, the applicant shall deposit the sum of $1 per cubic yard of
material. The minimum deposit shall be $50. Said Township Engineer is
hereby authorized to charge an inspection fee of $1 per day for each day the
aforesaid permit is in effect, said inspection fee shall be deducted from the
deposit. In the event that the removal, importation, hauling or transporting
is not accomplished in accordance with this chapter and other applicable
ordinances and regulations on the subject, or not done in a proper manner
in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the entire deposit shall be forfeited
and used by the Township Engineer to correct deficiencies.
§ 456-6. Permits required.
No excavation shall be made, no soil removed, imported, hauled or
transported unless a permit therefor shall have been first obtained as
provided herein.
§ 456-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998221]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 456-8. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to excavations, soil
removal, importation, hauling or transporting thereof in a quantity of less
than five cubic yards within any three-month period.
Chapter 462
SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of Solid Waste and Recycling — See
Ch. 113, § 113-4.
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves; separation
of leaves from waste; leaf disposal — See Ch.
192.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 523.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 596.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 456-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 456-8
456:747

ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Disposal
[Adopted 8-25-1987 by Ord. No. 3932 (Ch. 157, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 462-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 462-2. Contracts for removal and transport.
The Township Committee is hereby authorized to award a contract for the
removal and transporting of solid waste for a term not exceeding five years
or any part thereof upon competitive bidding to the lowest responsible
bidder who complies with the regulations respecting the bidding and who
furnishes a contractor's surety bond conditioned for the faithful
performance of the obligations of the contract. Said bond shall be for each
year for which the contract is awarded in a sum equal to the quotient
obtained by dividing the amount of the contract by the number of years of
the contract, plus 25% of said quotient. Any contract awarded pursuant to
A. Terms defined. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONTRACTOR — The person, firm or corporation having a contract or
agreement for the collection, removal and/or disposal of solid waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste substances required to be reported
to the Department of Environmental Protection on the special waste
manifest pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-8.
OCCUPANT — The owner, agent, tenant, lessee, caretaker or any other
person in charge of any premises affected by this article, whichever
classification may be appropriate and effective for the enforcement of
this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership or corporation.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The activity related to pickup and
transportation of solid waste from its source of location to a disposal
site.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The storage, treatment utilization,
processing or final disposal of solid waste.
B. Word usage. Singular and plural pronouns may be used
interchangeably, so that either the singular or the plural shall be
inferred, whichever is appropriate. Whenever pronouns are used in any
gender, they shall be deemed to refer to the masculine, feminine or
neuter gender, whichever may be appropriate or applicable, and the
words "and" and "or" may be interpreted to be used interchangeably,
whichever may appear appropriate, it being the intent that the
particular word, gender or pronoun shall be intended which is apt for
the circumstances.
§ 462-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-2
456:749
this section shall in nowise be construed to afford any exclusive privileges
to said contractor with reference to private solid waste contracts in said
municipality.
§ 462-3. Compliance with regulations for collection and disposal.
[Amended 10-22-1991 by Ord. No. 4166]
§ 462-4. Responsibility of occupants of property.
A. The collection and/or disposal and transporting of solid waste shall
comply with all the rules and regulations of the local Health
Department, disposal site and laws of the State of New Jersey,
particularly with the rules of the Bureau of Solid Waste Management of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection relating to
registration, collection, haulage and dumping and the rules and
regulations of the Board of Public Utilities.
B. The municipal service of collection and disposal of solid waste
hereunder shall be limited to curbside collection along public streets
and roads that have been dedicated to and accepted by the Township of
Union. The municipal service of collection and disposal of solid waste
hereunder shall not extend to entry upon private property to remove
solid waste from dumpsters or other containers. There shall be no
reimbursement from municipal funds to those property owners who do
not receive the municipal service of collection and disposal of solid
waste.
A. The occupant of each property in the Township of Union in the County
of Union shall provide suitable receptacles as herein prescribed, in
which the occupant shall place and keep solid waste in not more than
two containers per dwelling unit or each business, commercial or
institutional establishment. The Board of Health may further
promulgate additional regulations with regard to businesses and
commercial or institutional establishments.
B. The occupant of property shall place in each receptacle for solid waste
no more material than it can properly hold without spilling.
C. All receptacles for solid waste shall be so prepared, covered, handled
and set by the occupant or other person that the contents shall be
secure and shall not spill or leak on the sidewalk or elsewhere.
D. No person or occupant of a store or business and no person or occupant
of any other property in a business district shall place any solid waste
on the sidewalk or at the curb before 5:00 p.m. of the day prior to the
scheduled collection. No person or occupant of any residential dwelling
in a residential district shall place any solid waste on the sidewalk or at
the curb before 4:30 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled collection.
[Amended 5-24-1988 by Ord. No. 3970; 2-13-1990 by Ord. No.
4071]
§ 462-2 UNION CODE § 462-4
456:750
§ 462-5. Purpose and intent. [Added 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 4050]
§ 462-6. Permit required. [Added 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 4050]
Any property within the Township from which solid waste is generated as a
result of any construction, alteration, modification, excavation, demolition,
improvement, accident or otherwise may not be placed curbside with other
household solid waste unless a permit is first obtained from the Division of
Solid Waste and Recycling.
§ 462-7. Debris in excess of one thousand pounds. [Added
9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 4050]
E. No solid waste shall be placed in the street for collection.
F. Solid waste shall not be stored at the front of residential, business,
commercial or institutional property. Storage of solid waste shall be
placed in the rear or side yard of property with the greatest area
(square footage) as approved by the Board of Health.
A. The purpose of this amendment is to provide for a system whereby
residents are required to dispose of large amounts [greater than 1,000
pounds] of construction debris at their own expense, if generated from
their property. Construction debris in excess of two bags but less than
1,000 pounds will be collected by the Solid Waste Contractor only if the
permit fee and tonnage surcharge are paid in advance.
B. The intent of this amendment is to include all locations serviced under
the Township's solid waste collection contract. It is intended to prohibit
storage of large quantities of construction debris and to discourage
illegal dumping of the same.
A. In cases where construction debris exceeds 1,000 pounds, the
application must specify the name and address of the applicant, the
name of the contractor removing said debris, the size of the container,
the dumps utilized by the contractor and the approximate cost of said
removal. Debris removal in accordance with this section will be at the
property owner's expense. Property owners must make their own
arrangements with a private garbage contractor to remove said debris.
B. There is hereby established a permit fee of $5 for anyone who wishes to
dispose of materials designated in § 462-6. The fee, together with a
complete application, must be delivered to the Division of Solid Waste
and Recycling.
§ 462-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-8
456:751
§ 462-8. Debris in excess of two bags. [Added 9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
4050 222]
In cases where materials specified in § 462-2 are greater than the current
two-bag limit, but less than 1,000 pounds, a properly completed application
must be submitted to the Division of Solid Waste and Recycling. The
application must specify the name and address of the applicant and an
estimate by the applicant of the tonnage to be picked up. The applicant will
then be issued a sticker with the estimated tonnage specified thereon. Only
that amount which is specified on the permit will be collected. The permit
sticker must be affixed to the material to be collected and made visible to
the collector. At the time of receiving said permit applicant will be assessed
a tonnage surcharge in addition to the permit fee set forth in § 462-7B. The
tonnage surcharge will reflect the actual cost to the Township to dispose of
said material.
§ 462-9. Receptacle specifications; placement for collection.
§ 462-10. Vehicles used for collection or removal.
A. Receptacles for placement at the curb, containing solid waste, shall be
containers of heavy gauge metal, rubber or plastic. Rigid containers
shall be equipped with two carrying handles and a cover and shall be
filled to within no more than two inches of the top and shall not weigh
more than 50 pounds each.
B. Any solid single piece of solid waste may be placed at the curb at any of
the times provided for in this chapter; provided, further, that the single
piece does not weigh more than 50 pounds and is not more than four
feet in length and can be handled by one man.
C. The occupant shall keep all receptacles clean and in a proper condition
for safe handling. Containers with holes or tears may not be used.
D. In buildings in which two or more families reside, each family shall
suitably mark its own receptacles so as to render the receptacles
identifiable.
E. Immediately after receptacles are properly emptied, the contractor
shall return them to the point from which he took them, and the owners
of the receptacles shall remove the same not later than 8:00 p.m. of the
same day; provided, however, that receptacles in a business district
shall be removed from the curb within one hour of the collection.
A. All vehicles used in the removal of solid waste shall be subject to the
approval of the Township of Union.
B. All vehicles used for collection or removal of solid waste shall be
provided with a watertight box, body or container, closed and entirely
covered with suitable covers, adequate to prevent leakage or dripping
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-8 UNION CODE § 462-10
456:752
§ 462-11. Conduct of contractors.
or material being blown from the vehicle. Such vehicle shall be kept
closed at all times, except during the period of emptying or filling, and
shall be kept clean and shall be thoroughly washed inside and outside
between each collection and the next subsequent collection and shall be
disinfected between each collection and the next subsequent collection,
and the contractor shall not permit any such vehicle at any time to
become offensive, either through odor or appearance or for any other
reason.
C. Every vehicle used by the contractor for removal or transportation of
solid waste shall carry at least one shovel and one broom and any other
equipment which may be necessary for keeping the vehicle clean and
for cleaning up the area at which such solid wastes are collected. The
contractor shall carefully clean the area from which solid waste is
collected, and no solid waste or receptacles shall be left by the
contractor on the sidewalk or the curblines or in any area or space from
the place of collection to the vehicle. If any solid waste shall fall from
the vehicle, either during collection or transportation, such articles
shall be immediately gathered and replaced in the vehicle and the place
rendered clean.
D. The name of the contractor and the number of the vehicle, Board of
Public Utilities license number and New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection designation shall be placed on each truck and
be distinctly discernible at all times. The Township shall have the right
to place signs on the contractor's vehicle to promote recycling, cleanup
or beautification of the Township of Union. All vehicles shall be kept in a
neat and sanitary condition and shall receive a thorough washing at the
end of each day's work.
A. The contractor shall report to the Board of Health and to the Township
Committee in writing, within 24 hours, all cases in which it is
impossible, because of freezing or otherwise, to collect and remove
solid waste.
B. No solid waste shall be piled higher than the regular height of the
sideboards of the vehicle.
C. Solid waste can covers may be removed only at the time of collection.
D. Neither the contractor or a licensee or any of their agents, collectors or
employees or any other person shall pick or sort solid waste. The
contents of the containers of solid waste shall be immediately
transferred at the time of collection from the curb or from the premises
without any unnecessary delay or exposure and without any spilling.
E. The contractor and licensees shall see to it that their employees, agents
and collectors shall deport themselves diligently to the performance of
the necessary work and shall refrain from neglect or insolence or any
§ 462-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-11
456:753
§ 462-12. Duties of contractors.
§ 462-13. Equipment subject to inspection.
All equipment used by the contractor and any solid waste disposal site used
by the contractor shall be subject to inspection by the Health Officer or
anyone deputized by him for that purpose at any reasonable time.
§ 462-14. Collection to be prompt and quiet; notification of
schedule.
§ 462-15. Contractor to comply with applicable regulations.
In the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, the contractor shall
comply with all the provisions of this chapter and shall comply with the
provisions of any other chapter or regulation of the Board of Health or of the
improper conduct, and the contractor and licensee shall discharge any
employee failing in these requirements.
A. The contractor shall, on the same day, report to the Health Officer any
dispute that occurs between himself and an occupant with respect to
removal or disposition of solid waste, and the Health Officer shall
thereupon immediately investigate the subject matter and take steps
that may be necessary under the circumstances and give necessary
emergency instructions and thereupon report in writing concerning the
subject to the Township Committee and the Board of Health at their
next subsequent meetings.
B. The contractor shall maintain an office within five miles of the
corporate limits of the Township of Union with a telephone connection
and keep said office open from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily for each day
of collection, except Sunday, to receive and transmit to the operatives of
scavenger service complaints, notices and directions from the Township
or its duly authorized agent and to see that complaints, notices and
directions receive prompt and proper attention.
A. Solid waste shall be collected promptly and punctually at such times as
may be specified in the contract between the municipality and the
contractor, and removal shall be made not earlier than 7:00 a.m. and
not later than 3:30 p.m. Collections at other hours may be authorized by
the Township Administrator. [Amended 12-26-1989 by Ord. No.
4065]
B. Neither the contractor nor any of its employees or agents shall engage
in any loud or unnecessary noises in the collection or removal of solid
waste, and all such collection and removal shall be done quietly.
C. The contractor shall notify occupants of the dates set for collection of
solid waste and shall also notify them when any change in such dates
has been duly authorized.
§ 462-11 UNION CODE § 462-15
456:754
Township Committee and with any county, state or federal law or regulation
which may pertain to the subject matter.
§ 462-16. Vehicle attendants.
With each vehicle used by the contractor for the collection of solid waste,
there shall be at least one attendant or collector or assistant who is able to
understand and speak the English language intelligibly.
§ 462-17. Transfer of contracts.
No contract for the removal of solid waste made between the municipality
and a contractor shall be assignable or interchangeable to or with any other
contractor, except with the written consent of the Township Committee of
the Township of Union in the County of Union. Any transfer of contract
without such consent shall, at the option of the governing body, render
the contract null and void and empower the Township Committee, at its
option, to award the work to some other person, and the contractor shall be
answerable for any loss or damage suffered thereby.
§ 462-18. Instructions resulting in violations.
No person shall give any instructions, directions or commands, the result
of which or compliance with which would involve a violation of any of the
provisions of this article or of any other law or regulation. Any person giving
and any person complying with such instructions, directions or commands
shall be deemed guilty of violating this article.
§ 462-19. Contractors to be registered.
Any contractor engaged by the Township of Union must be registered by the
New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 462-20. Rummaging through solid waste at curb prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pick up, rummage through, disturb
or remove any solid waste or other matter set at the curb for removal;
provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to the contractor
engaged by the Township of Union for the removal of solid waste or to its
agents, servants or employees when said agents, servants or employees are
on duty for said contractor.
§ 462-21. Unauthorized dumping or disposal prohibited. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 5310]
A. The dumping or disposal of solid waste in an unauthorized area or
private trash receptacle within the corporate limits of the Township of
Union is prohibited.
B. The dumping or disposal of solid waste, vegetative waste, and bulky
waste from a commercial establishment or residential property in a
§ 462-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-21
456:755
§ 462-22. Reward. [Added 6-11-1991 by Ord. No. 4144]
Any member of the public who supplies information to the Township of
Union which results in the imposition and collection of a civil penalty in
any action brought pursuant to § 462-21, entitled "Unauthorized dumping or
disposal prohibited," shall be entitled to a reward of 10% of the civil penalty
or $100, whichever is greater.
§ 462-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-26-1988 by Ord. No.
3963; 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 4257]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a minimum penalty of $100 but not
exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days; except that the
minimum penalty imposed for persons convicted of violating § 462-21 shall
be $500 but not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 180 days or a period of community service not exceeding 180
days. In default of the payment of any penalty imposed hereby, the person
so convicted may be imprisoned in the county jail or place of detention
provided by the municipality for any term not exceeding 180 days or be
required to perform community service for a period of 180 days.
Township receptacle within the corporate limits of the Township of
Union is prohibited.
§ 462-21 UNION CODE § 462-23
456:756
ARTICLE II
Uniform Packaging Requirements for Retail Food Establishments
[Adopted 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. 4129223 (Ch. 157, Art. II of the
1986 Code)]
§ 462-24. Findings and purpose.
The Township Committee finds and declares as follows:
A. Solid waste management within the Township of Union is a fundamental
concern of the Township Committee due to the limited landfill space
available, rising costs of waste disposal and impacts on the
environment.
B. Evidence available to the Township Committee indicates that discarded
packaging, especially takeout food service packaging, constitutes a
significant category of waste within the waste stream of the Township
of Union, the single greatest source of litter within the Township and is,
therefore, a necessary focus of any effort to reduce the amount of solid
waste, as well as reducing the economic and environmental cost of
waste management for the citizens of the Township of Union.
C. Single-use, nonrecyclable, nondegradable packaging, and plastic
containers, is considered to be a fundamental cause of problems
associated with municipal waste disposal and litter.
D. Chemical composition and the ability of a substance to degrade are
meaningful and useful criteria to focus upon when establishing a public
policy that is intended to improve the management and disposal of solid
waste, reduce the cumulative impact of litter, encourage composting
and other forms of recycling, minimize the potential for toxic
substances which form if solid waste is burned, reduce the volume of
ash by-products that may be created by the burning of waste plastic
packaging and otherwise anticipate environmental problems that may
be caused by municipal solid waste disposal programs.
E. The economic and environmental problems associated with
nondegradable substances mixed with degradable substances in the
waste stream are so severe that a program to modify the composition of
the solid waste in the waste stream, thereby reducing the
environmental hazards and toxicity associated with solid waste
incineration and encouraging the composting of putrescible
biodegradable wastes and encouraging other forms of recycling of solid
waste substances, is hereby determined to be the policy of the
Township of Union.
F. Certain retail food establishments within the Township of Union are the
points of origin for a significant volume of packaging waste and,
223. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply to retail food transactions
consummated on or after December 31, 1991.
§ 462-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-24
456:757
§ 462-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
therefore, are particularly susceptible to actions which have significant
potential for simplifying the composition of this portion of the Township
of Union's solid waste stream, thereby improving solid waste
management with this Township.
G. The widespread use of plastics, especially polystyrene and polyvinyl
chloride, pose a threat to the environment by posing unnecessary
taking of landfill space and/or, when incinerated, by the possible
introduction of toxic by-products into the atmosphere.
H. The waste stream within the Township of Union is so large and diverse
that any program to establish policies and laws conducive to any waste
management program in lieu of landfilling must identify and set new
policy for those specific sources of waste packaging which originate in
this Township.
I. The use of polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride for food packaging is
problematical because neither of these plastics are readily recyclable;
their abundant commercial use in lieu of other plastics, such as
polyethylene or polypropylene, unnecessarily complicates the chemical
composition of the municipal waste and subtracts from the possible
emergence of viable plastic recycling programs; and if burnt together,
polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride leave a relatively heavier and,
therefore, more expensive ash residue to dispose of, and evidence
indicates that the burning of these products creates dioxin,
hydrochloric acid and/or other toxic chemicals that could be admitted
into the general environment of the Township of Union if incinerated.
J. There are readily available plastic and/or paper product substitutes for
most of the polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride retail food packaging
now being used in the Township of Union, the use of which alternatives
would be environmentally and economically advantageous to the
citizens of the Township of Union.
K. It is in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of all of the citizens
of the Township of Union who live, work or do business in the Township
that the amount of nonrecyclable, nondegradable packaging be
reduced and that the amount of litter on the public streets, parks and
open spaces be reduced.
L. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to, to the maximum extent
practical, eliminate the use of nondegradable packaging originating at
retail food establishments in the Township of Union in order to protect
the air, land and waters of the Township of Union from environmental
contamination and degradation.
§ 462-24 UNION CODE § 462-25
456:758
DEGRADABLE PACKAGING — Packaging made of cellulose-based
substances or other substances which are capable of being readily attached,
decomposed, assimilated and/or otherwise completely oxidized or broken
down into its constituent parts by bacteria, natural biological organisms,
carbonaceous soil material, water or carbon dioxide or, in the alternative,
capable of otherwise degrading when exposed to ultraviolet light or other
natural processes, beginning within a twelve-month period from the date of
manufacture or exposure to the environment.
PACKAGING — All food-related wrappings, including but not limited to
bags, sacks, wrappings, containers, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups or
eating utensils, intended for use within the Township of Union.
RETAIL FOOD VENDOR — All sales outlets, stores, shops, restaurants or
other places of business located within the Township of Union which receive
more than 20% of their revenue through the sale or conveyance of food
directly to the ultimate consumer, which foods are predominantly contained,
wrapped or held in or on packaging. "Retail food vendors" shall include,
but not be limited to, any establishment where food is prepared, mixed,
cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored,
manufactured and sold or offered for sale, including but not limited to
any fixed or mobile restaurant, drive-in, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order
cafe, fast-food outlet, delicatessen, luncheonette, grill, sandwich shop, soda
fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, inn, roadside stand,
takeout prepared food place, industrial feeding establishment, catering
kitchen, grocery store, public food market, food stand or similar place in
which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises
or elsewhere, and any other establishment or operation, including homes,
where food is processed, prepared, stored, served or provided to the public
for charge, provided that said vendor shall derive more than 20% of its
gross revenues from the sale of said food or drink.
§ 462-26. Prohibited packaging.
A. No retail food vendor located and doing business in the Township of
Union shall sell or convey food directly to the ultimate consumer within
the Township of Union unless such food is placed, wrapped or packaged
in degradable packaging at the conclusion of the sales transaction. For
the purpose of this section, conclusion of the sales transaction shall be
the point of time at which the possession of the food product passes
from the retail food vendor to the ultimate consumer, and the
conclusion of the sales transaction need not require the actual payment
of consideration for such food product; provided, however, that
payment is expected from the ultimate consumer prior to the consumer
exiting the premises of the retail food vendor.
B. No retail food vendor located within the Township of Union shall sell,
give or provide eating utensils or food containers to any consumer
within the Township of Union if said eating utensil or food container is
composed of polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride.
§ 462-25 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-27
456:759
§ 462-27. Exemptions; documentation required.
§ 462-28. Enforcement.
For the purpose of this article, the Health Officer and the Recycling
Coordinator shall be designated as the enforcing officers. The enforcing
officers shall be authorized by the Township Committee to designate as
many subcode officials as deemed reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purpose of this article. The enforcing officer or his designee is authorized to
perform as a law enforcement officer solely with respect to the enforcement
of the provisions of this article by being empowered to issue summons for
any violations of this article in accordance with rules governing the courts
of the State of New Jersey. In addition to the Recycling Coordinator and/
or his designee, all law enforcement officers, fire officials, fire inspectors,
health officials and health inspectors shall be empowered to enforce the
provisions of this article.
A. Section 462-26 of this article shall not apply to the following items:
(1) Any product which is prepackaged by the manufacturer and which
is offered for sale by the retail establishment to the public without
any additional preparation by the retail establishment.
(2) Any packaging for uncooked or unprepared meat, poultry or raw
fish offered for sale to the general public in any grocery store or
supermarket, or otherwise.
(3) Any food packaging used by patients at hospitals.
(4) Any product for which a reasonable substitute is not available at a
reasonable cost. [Added 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 4162]
B. In order to be considered for such exemption, the vendor shall provide
the following documentation:
(1) A list of suppliers contacted and statements signed by said
suppliers, listing the items that can be supplied which clearly
indicate that the item or type of packaging has no acceptable
equivalent or substitute; and/or
(2) A statement signed by said retail food vendor indicating that he is
required to purchase food packaging pursuant to a contract
entered into prior to September 12, 1990, and said supplier is
unable to supply an item or type that has an acceptable equivalent.
Said statement shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the
contract in question and shall indicate the expiration date of said
contract.
§ 462-27 UNION CODE § 462-29
456:760
§ 462-29. Administration.
The Recycling Coordinator is authorized to issue and promulgate such rules
and regulations as may be reasonable and necessary to implement and
carry out the provisions of this article.
§ 462-30. Certain purchases by Township prohibited.
§ 462-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 4842]
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each violation and each day a violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation and
shall be punishable as such.
§ 462-32. Supersession by other regulations.
This article shall be void upon the enactment or adoption of any federal
and/or state law or regulation restricting the use of polystyrene, polyvinyl
chloride or degradable packaging. Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of this article prior to the enactment or adoption of any federal
and/or state law or regulation shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
this article.
A. The Township of Union shall not purchase any food packaging which
contains polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride, nor shall it sponsor any
event which utilizes such packaging. All food packaging shall be
degradable as required by this article.
B. The Township Purchasing Division shall be directed to exclusively
advertise for the receipt of bids for degradable plastic materials
whenever said bids are required by the Township of Union.
§ 462-29 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-32
456:761

ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 5132224]
§ 462-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Retail;
wholesale; restaurants; taverns; schools; institutions; including
government; warehouses; construction sites; factories; offices, etc.; but
specifically excludes fairs, parks, concerts, and other outdoor events.
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for recycling.
COVERED ELECTRONIC DEVICE — A subset of electronic waste which
shall include only the following: a computer central processing unit of a
laptop computer or desktop computer, a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray
tube device, a flat panel display or similar video display device with a screen
that is greater than four inches measured diagonally and that contains one
or more circuit boards, including televisions and cell phones.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
below that shall be source-separated for the purpose of recycling. These
materials include:
Designated materials for residential waste generators:
(1) Aluminum, tin, steel.
(2) Corrugated cardboard.
(3) Glass containers.
(4) Grass, brush.
(5) Household batteries.
(6) Leaves.
(7) Mixed paper.
(8) Motor oil.
(9) Motor oil filters.
(10)Newspaper.
(11)Office paper.
A.
224. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Residential Recycling, adopted
12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 3887 (Ch. 210, Art. I of the 1986 Code), as amended, and former
Art. IV, Nonresidential Recycling, adopted 5-10-1988 by Ord. No. 3968 (Ch. 210, Art. II of
the 1986 Code), as amended.
§ 462-33 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-33
456:763
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware including keyboards, modems, printers scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
televisions and cell phones.
(12)Plastic containers (No. 1 and No. 2).
(13)Tires.
(14)Vehicle batteries.
(15)White goods (air conditioners, refrigerators).
(16)Wood.
Source separation and recycling requirements for commercial,
institutional and industrial waste generators:
(1) Aluminum, tin, steel.
(2) Computers and peripherals.
(3) Corrugated cardboard.
(4) Fluorescent bulbs.
(5) Glass containers.
(6) Grass, brush.
(7) Household batteries.
(8) Leaves.
(9) Mixed paper.
(10)Masonry (asphalt, brick, block, concrete).
(11)Motor oil.
(12)Motor oil filters.
(13)Newspaper.
(14)Office paper.
(15)Plastic containers (No. 1 and No. 2).
(16)Tires.
(17)Vehicle batteries.
(18)White goods (air conditioners, refrigerators).
(19)Wood.
B.
§ 462-33 UNION CODE § 462-33
456:764
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings in which five or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or rented
or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes (see N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13a), and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest houses
serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under
Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L.
1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55: 13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to,
among other things, enforce the provisions of this article and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of the Township of Union.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
UNIVERSAL WASTE — A specific hazardous waste stream that has been
designated by Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or those waste
streams identified in the New Jersey Universal Waste Rule (see N.J.A.C.
7:26A-7). Only the following materials may be managed as universal waste:
§ 462-34. Exemption from source separation requirements.
A. Rechargeable batteries and button cell batteries;
Mercury-containing equipment, including thermometers and
thermostats;
B.
C. Pesticides;
D. Fluorescent lamps (light bulbs);
E. Electronic waste; and
F. Oil-based paints and finishes.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the municipality of the Township of Union,
§ 462-33 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-34
456:765
§ 462-35. Collection of recyclable materials.
to separate designated recyclable materials from all solid waste.
Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart
from other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants
of such premises and shall be placed separately at the curb or other
location(s) in a manner and on such days and times as may be
hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by the
(municipality or department within the municipality of the) Township of
Union.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16d, the governing body of a
municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or institutional
premises within its municipal boundaries from the source separation
requirements of the ordinance which requires persons generating
municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to sourceseparate
from the municipal solid waste stream the specified recyclable
materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of
all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an exemption
pursuant to this chapter, a commercial or institutional generator of
solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this purpose. The
form shall include, at a minimum, the following information: the name
of the commercial or institutional entity; the street address location and
lot and block designation; the name, official title and phone number of
the person making application on behalf of the commercial or
institutional entity; the name, address, official contact person and
telephone number of the facility which provides the service of recycling
those designated recyclable materials, and a certification that the
designated recyclable materials will be recycled, and that, at least on
an annual basis, said recycling service provider or commercial/
institutional generator shall provide written documentation to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the total number of tons collected
and recycled for each designated material.
A. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk,
or in the absence of curb and sidewalk as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above anytime after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m.
of the day of collection. After collection, any containers shall be
removed from the curbside by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of
collection.
B. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in accordance with
the Health Code of the municipality of Township of Union.
§ 462-34 UNION CODE § 462-36
456:766
§ 462-36. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
A. The owner of any residential property shall be responsible for
compliance with this article. Citizens are responsible for sourceseparating
mandated items according to this municipal article and
delivering them to the municipal collection system (whether curbside
collection, bulk center or drop-off center). These items must be sourceseparated;
no mandated recyclables are permitted in the garbage put
out for collection; no garbage is permitted in recyclables placed in the
municipality's collection system.
B. For multifamily units, the owner or manager is responsible for the
following:
(1) The property owner/management is responsible for ensuring that a
recycling system is established and that it is operated in
compliance with the requirements of this municipal article. The
property owner/management is responsible for setting up and
maintaining the recycling system. The property owner/
management is responsible for receiving and responding to
warnings, notices of violation, and penalty assessments and for
correcting violations. The property owner/management will be
expected to correct violations promptly and to make necessary
direct contacts with residents.
(2) Drop-off centers (bulk centers), if in use, must be established and
maintained so that they are conveniently accessible to residents.
Curbside collection may be made available in place of, or in
conjunction with, these drop-off centers. The recycling system must
provide for all designated recyclables in the residential waste
stream. The recycling system may utilize separate containers for
each recyclable material or it may provide for two or more
materials to be placed in one container provided the recycling
hauler can take the materials commingled. Containers must be
clearly marked and the area neatly maintained. Container capacity
must be adequate to hold the amount of materials generated
between pick-ups. It must be clear to an inspector that the system
is being serviced.
(3) It must be clear that the system is being used properly by
employees and tenants. There must not be garbage in the recycling
containers or recyclables in the garbage containers. The property
owner/management is responsible for resolving problems which
may arise from the improper use of containers and for training
employees and tenants to properly understand and use the
recycling system.
(4) Notification and collection rules shall be issued by the management
to new tenants when they arrive and to all residents every three
months. Copies of these notices, or other proof of distribution of the
§ 462-36 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-36
456:767
§ 462-37. Commercial and institutional establishment compliance
requirements.
notices, must be sent to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator at the
time of each mailing or distribution.
(5) The property owner/management is responsible for arranging to
have recyclables picked up and for resolving any problems with the
transporter of recyclables.
(6) The property owner/management must arrange to obtain
documentation in order to report the tonnages of materials
recycled at least once per year or else he/she must arrange to have
the collector provide that documentation directly to the
municipality. Arrangements with recycling companies or with
haulers handling recyclables should include provisions for
obtaining this information. Documentation must be maintained by
the management. When the municipality provides the recyclables
collection service, reporting and proof are not needed.
(7) Single/dual stream recycling: Multifamily locations may opt to
collect their recyclables in a single stream or dual stream (fiber,
commingled) provided the material recovery facility (MRF) that
receives the material has certified that they have the ability to
separate and maximize the capture rate of the designated
recyclables. The Union County Utilities Authority (UCUA) Division
of Solid Waste Management will compile and maintain an updated
list of those facilities.
A. The owner/operator (or in the case of construction the contractor) is
responsible for ensuring that a recycling system is established and that
it is operated in compliance with the requirements of this municipal
article. The owner/operator/contractor is responsible for setting up and
maintaining the recycling system. The owner/operator/contractor is
responsible for receiving and responding to warnings, notices of
violation, and penalty assessments and for correcting violations
promptly.
B. The recycling system must be established and maintained so that it is
conveniently accessible to users. The recycling system must provide for
all designated recyclables in the commercial/institutional waste stream.
The recycling system may utilize separate containers for each
recyclable material or it may provide for two or more materials to be
placed in one container provided the recycling hauler can take the
materials commingled. Containers must be clearly marked and the area
neatly maintained. Container capacity must be adequate to hold the
amount of materials generated between pick-ups. It must be clear to the
inspector that the system is being serviced.
C. The owner/operator/contractor must ensure that the system is being
used properly by employees, customers or tenants. There must not be
§ 462-36 UNION CODE § 462-37
456:768
garbage in the recycling containers or recyclables in the garbage
containers. The owner/operator/contractor is responsible for resolving
problems which may arise from the improper use of containers and for
instructing employees, tenants, and customers to understand and use
the recycling system.
D. If patrons, customers or employees are involved in the waste disposal
process (i.e., fast food stores or company cafeteria), the recycling
system must allow for this and include notice to customers as to their
responsibilities.
E. The owner/operator/contractor is responsible for arranging for
recyclables to be removed from the premises and for assuring that they
go into the recyclables market. The owner/operator/contractor may
make arrangements to deliver the recyclables to the municipal
collection system (drop-off center or curbside collection) if permitted by
the municipality. Otherwise, the owner/operator/contractor is
responsible for arranging to have recyclables picked up and for
resolving any problems with the transporter of recyclables.
F. The owner/operator/contractor must arrange to obtain documentation
in order to report the tonnages of materials recycled at least once per
year or else he/she must arrange to have the collector provide that
documentation directly to the municipality.
G. Single/dual stream recycling. Commercial and institutional
establishments may opt to collect their recyclables in a single stream or
dual stream (fiber, commingled) provided the material recovery facility
(MRF) that receives the material has certified that they have the ability
to separate out and maximize the capture rate of the mandated
recyclables. The UCUA Division of Solid Waste Management will
compile and maintain an updated list of those facilities.
H. Recycling containers. Commercial and institutional establishments that
have outdoor garbage containers for their customers must also have
outdoor recycling containers. There must be sufficient recycling
containers for any mandated recyclables in the commercial/institutional
waste stream.
I. All schools must provide written notice at the beginning of each school
year to all students, teachers, and other staff on the recycling
requirements. The notice must contain a contact number to call if they
observe any problems associated with recycling or if recycling is not
properly occurring.
J. Single stream recycling of mixed classes of construction recyclables.
Construction/demolition sites may opt to collect all recyclables in one
container provided there are no other materials (including garbage) in
that container. To qualify for this provision, recyclables must go to a
transfer station/MRF that is properly permitted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and has certified that they
have the ability to separate out and maximize the capture rate of the
§ 462-37 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-37
456:769
§ 462-38. Compliance requirements for fairs, parks, concerts,
streets, and other outdoor events.
mandated materials. The specific materials that may be commingled
together will be determined by the provisions in the receiving transfer
station/MRF's permit.
K. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and to maintain such records as may be
prescribed for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
A. The organizer/owner/contractor of the location must provide a
recycling system that is operated in compliance with the requirements
of this municipal article.
B. The recycling system must provide for any mandated recyclables
generated at the event. It must be clear to an inspector that the system
is being serviced: i.e., containers must be clearly marked and the area
neatly maintained; there must not be garbage in the recyclables or
recyclables in the garbage; container capacity must be adequate to hold
materials between pick-ups. There must be sufficient recycling
containers for any mandated recyclables generated at the event.
C. The organizer/owner/contractor of the location is responsible for
arranging for recyclables to be removed from the premises and for
ensuring that they are taken to an approved recyclables market. The
owner/operator/contractor may make arrangements to deliver the
recyclables to the municipal collection system (dropoff center or
curbside collection) if permitted by the municipality. Otherwise, the
owner/operator/contractor is responsible for arranging to have
recyclables collected and transported and for resolving any problems
with the transporter of the recyclables.
D. The recycling system must be made accessible and available to all
patrons, customers, and employees. Notice/signs must be provided to
ensure all are aware of their responsibilities.
E. The owner/operator/contractor of the location is responsible for
obtaining pertinent documentation in order to report the tonnages of
materials recycled at least once per year or else he/she must arrange to
have the collector provide that documentation directly to the
municipality.
F. Single/dual stream recycling. The recycling system may utilize separate
containers for each recyclable material or it may provide for two or
more materials to be placed in one container. Establishments may opt to
collect their recyclables in a single stream or dual stream (fiber,
commingled) provided the MRF that receives the material has certified
§ 462-37 UNION CODE § 462-38
456:770
§ 462-39. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional or industrial properties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 13:1E-99.16c:
§ 462-40. Prohibition of the collection of solid waste mixed with
recyclable materials.
that they have the ability to separate out and maximize the capture rate
of the mandated recyclables.
A. Any application to the planning board of the municipality of the
Township of Union for subdivision or site plan approval for the
construction of 25 or more units of multifamily residential housing,
single-family developments of 50 or more units, or any commercial,
institutional, or industrial development proposal for the utilization of
1,000 square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This
plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the municipality of
the Township of Union the owner of any new multifamily housing or
commercial, institutional or industrial development must supply a copy
of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of
collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in
those instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
§ 462-38 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-40
456:771
§ 462-41. Enforcement; inspections.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Health, the Recycling
Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official, or their designee are
hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of
this article. An inspection may consist of, but is not limited to, sorting
through containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or
sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
§ 462-42. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by
a fine not less than $250 nor more than $1,250, or to imprisonment for
a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not
to exceed 90 days. Each day for which a violation of this article occurs
shall be considered a separate offense. Fines levied and collected pursuant
to the provisions of this article shall be immediately deposited into the
Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or equivalent). Monies in the Municipal
Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for the expenses of the municipal
recycling program.
§ 462-43. Severability; when effective.
In the event that it is determined, by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
that any provision or section of this article is unconstitutional, all other
sections and provisions shall remain in effect. This article shall take effect
immediately, unless otherwise provided by resolution of the governing body.
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary
code.225
C. Once placed in the location identified by this article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 596, Sanitary Standards.
§ 462-40 UNION CODE § 462-43
456:772
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
§ 462-44. through § 462-53. (Reserved)
§ 462-44 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-44
456:773

ARTICLE V
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 5109]
§ 462-54. Purpose.
An ordinance requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Union and/or the waters of the state
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 462-55. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains, that is owned or operated by the Township of Union or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including rain and
snow, that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 462-56. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 462-54 SOIL REMOVAL § 462-56
456:775
§ 462-57. Exceptions.
§ 462-58. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township of Union Department of
Public Works.
§ 462-59. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Union.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 462-56 UNION CODE § 462-59
456:776
Chapter 467
SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
§ 462-59 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 462-59
467:777

ARTICLE I
Storage, Maintenance and Use
[Adopted 12-11-1956 by Ord. No. 1712 (Ch. 242, Art. I of the 1986
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 467-1. Use restricted.
On and after April 29, 2004, no person, firm or corporation shall use, keep
for use or maintain for use in any structure or portion of a structure a
portable liquid-fuel-burning space heater for the heating of space therein.
§ 467-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PORTABLE LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING SPACE HEATER — Any heater, stove
or appliance designed for the heating of space in structures, using or
designed for using kerosene, fuel oil or other inflammable liquid, which
is neither flue or chimney connected, which is not permanently affixed to
any part of the structure and which is capable of being moved while in
operation.
§ 467-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be issued an Imminent Hazard Order (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.16) as per the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code directing that the appliance be removed
from the structure within 24 hours. A refusal or deliberate failure to comply
with this order will result in a fine of $5,000.
§ 467-1 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 467-3
467:779

ARTICLE II
Inspections
[Adopted 12-11-1956 by Ord. No. 1713(Ch. 242, Art. II of the 1986
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 467-4. Duty to inspect.
Effective immediately upon the adoption of the article it shall be the duty of
the Chief of the Fire Department of the Township of Union in the County of
Union or such officers as may be designated by him, to cause to be made an
inspection of all liquid-fuel-burning space heaters in use in structures within
the Township and the storage of liquid fuel therein for the same and the
installation and facilities in connection therewith. In order to accomplish
the aforementioned inspection, the Chief of the Fire Department or his
authorized agents may enter upon lands and buildings in the municipality
by exigent circumstances, voluntary consent from the owner or agent and
or by administrative search warrant for the purpose of inspection of flues,
chimneys, space heaters and the storage of liquid fuel and installations and
facilities in connection therewith.
§ 467-5. Declaration of violation.
Where, in the opinion of said Chief of the Fire Department or his authorized
agents, the installation, maintenance or use of such equipment or facilities,
by reason of type, installation or place of use, constitutes a fire or explosion
hazard endangering the lives of persons and property, said installation,
maintenance or use shall constitute a violation of the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code and the Code of the Township of Union.
§ 467-6. Notices of imminent hazard violations.
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department or his authorized agents, by
inspection or otherwise, discover a violation as provided in § 467-5 of this
article, notice in writing shall be given to the owner or agent of the premises
to remove or abate the same within 24 hours from the date of service
thereof.
§ 467-7. Refusal to allow entry.
Any person who refuses to permit said Chief of the Fire Department or his
authorized agents to enter upon the premises and to make an inspection
of a non-exigent nature will be issued an administrative search warrant to
allow entry.
§ 467-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or organization who violates or neglects to
comply with any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not
§ 467-4 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 467-8
467:781
to exceed $1,250, imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 467-8 UNION CODE § 467-8
467:782
Chapter 471
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Economic Development Committee — See Ch.
34, Art. I.
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
§ 471-1. District created; special assessment imposed. [Amended
7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 4261]
There is hereby created and designated within the Township of Union the
Union Township Special Improvement District, hereinafter designated by
street address and tax lot and block number as set forth in Appendix A
attached hereto and made part hereof226 and referred to in § 471-3 hereof.
The district shall be subject to a special assessment on all property within
said district which shall be imposed by the Township of Union and collected
with the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or
otherwise, and all of these payments shall be transferred to the District
Management Corporation to effectuate the purposes of the statute and
to exercise the powers given to it by this chapter and for the purposes
of promoting the economic and general welfare of said district and the
municipality.
§ 471-2. Purpose; design criteria; review and approval. [Amended
7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 4261]
It is the intention and purpose of this chapter to encourage and endeavor
to have the exteriors of all structures in the district which are or become
used, whether all or in part, for nonresidential use, as defined in Chapter
170, Land Development, of the Township of Union to be representative of
the design of nonresidential structures in existence during the Williamsburg
Era to the end that, with the passing of time, Williamsburg facades will
be existent on such structures as much as the original architecture of the
structure will architecturally allow, or as much as possible to have the
structures returned to their original architectural designs. Therefore, no
building permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or signage
of any such building or structures without the prior review and approval of
the District Management Corporation to assure compliance with the above
design criteria. The aforementioned Williamsburg Era facades requirement
is only applicable to new tenant occupancy. In addition, on or after the
effective date of this chapter, the Planning Board shall not approve site
plans or subdivisions unless and until the proposed exterior design of
226. Editors Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Township Clerk, where it may be
examined during regular office hours.
§ 467-8 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 471-2
467:783
said structures shall have first been submitted to the District Management
Corporation. Said District Management Corporation shall review all said
plans and shall recommend to the Construction Code Official approval
or disapproval of said plans, with a copy of said recommendation to be
delivered to the applicant.
§ 471-3. Certain initial costs financed and assessed to specially
benefited properties.
All costs of development, construction and acquisition relating to providing
public improvements for the district not borne by federal, state, county or
local governments shall be financed and assessed to properties specially
benefited by such improvements. The properties specially benefited by the
creation of the district as described by lot and block number and street
address are listed in Appendix A attached hereto made part hereof.227
§ 471-4. Annual costs.
§ 471-5. Report and estimate required.
A. It is hereby determined that the improvements in the district may
involve annual costs in addition to the initial cost of constructing and
making improvements within the district. Such annual costs relate to
maintenance services peculiar to the district and are distinguished from
maintenance services normally provided by the Township outside of the
district and will provide benefits primarily to the property included in
the district rather than to the Township as a whole. The improvements
and the facilities thereof shall be maintained and operated pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter and to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq., and the
costs thereof shall be assessed or taxed to the benefited properties or
businesses pursuant to this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A.
40:56-85. The properties to be assessed or taxed to provide for the
payment of such annual costs are set forth in Appendix A228 mentioned
in § 471-3 hereof.
B. Said annual costs shall not exceed the sum of $150,000, plus a CPI
increase over the base year 1993. [Added 7-27-1993 by Ord. No.
4261]
C. The first annual budget commencing July 1, 1993, shall be $124,871.
[Added 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 4261]
A. Concurrently with the submission of the Improvement Implementation
Plan for the Special Improvement District and annually thereafter, the
District Management Corporation, with the assistance of the Township
Administrator, shall report to the Township Committee an estimate of
227. Editors Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Township Clerk, where it may be
examined during regular office hours.
228. Editors Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Township Clerk, where it may be
examined during regular office hours.
§ 471-2 UNION CODE § 471-5
467:784
§ 471-6. District Management Corporation.
There is hereby created the Township of Union District Management
Corporation, which shall exercise the following powers:
the cost of operating and maintaining and annually improving the
district for the next fiscal year to be incurred under the plan and
an estimate of changes in the amounts of said costs which would
follow upon the adoption of any addition or amendment to the plan
recommended to or under consideration by the Township Committee.
B. Such estimate shall be reasonably itemized and shall include a
summary of the categories of cost properly chargeable in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:56-80. The Township Administrator, with the assistance
and concurrence of the District Management Corporation, shall submit
a detailed annual budget for approval by resolution of the Township
Committee in accordance with the statute.
A. Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection
with the performance of its functions and duties.
B. Employ such persons as may be required, and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the Corporation.
C. Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting and the appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money.
D. Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient
to the exercise of the powers and functions of the Corporation,
including contracts with any person, firm, corporation, governmental
agency or other entity.
E. Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations.
F. Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180 days
and from governmental entities for that or longer periods.
G. Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in the
district through grants or loans.
H. Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the district.
I. Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in the
district.
J. Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
corporation.
K. Provide security, sanitation and other services to the district,
supplemental to those provided normally by the municipality.
§ 471-5 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 471-6
467:785
§ 471-7. Membership; terms.
The Corporation shall be governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of nine
members, appointed by the Township Committee as follows:
L. Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to locate
there or to visitors to the district, including, but not limited to, litter
cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities,
recreational and rest areas and facilities and those improvements
generally permitted for pedestrian malls under Section 2 of P.L. 1972, c.
134 (N.J.S.A. 40:56-66), pursuant to pertinent regulations of the
governing body.
M. Publicize the district and the businesses included within the district
boundaries.
N. Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in, and to balance the business
mix of, the district.
O. Organize special events in the district.
P. Provide special parking arrangements for the district.
Q. Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district.
R. Operate its budget on a fiscal year commencing July 1 and terminating
on June 30 of each year. [Added 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 4261]
A. A member of the Township Committee appointed by a majority vote of
the full Township Committee; two residents of the Township of Union
who are neither an owner or tenant of property in the district nor
conduct a business therein nor is a stockholder, officer, employee or
director of any business conducted in the district; three persons who
are owners of real estate located within the district or officials of a
corporation or entity owning real estate within the district; and three
persons who are proprietors or employees of businesses conducted in
the district.
B. The appointment of members of the Board of Trustees shall initially be
as follows: two members for a one-year term; three members for twoyear
terms; and three members for three-year terms. Thereafter,
appointments will be for three-year terms. Terms shall expire on
December 31. The term of the member of the Township Committee shall
expire on December 31 each year.
C. Appointments to the Board of Trustees shall be made by the Township
Committee. Vacancies on the Board will be filled by the Township
Committee for the unexpired term.
D. The Chairman of the Board of Trustees shall be appointed by the
Township Committee annually.
§ 471-6 UNION CODE § 471-8
467:786
§ 471-8. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBER SHOP — Includes service mainly to cut, dress, groom, style and
shave men and boy's hair.[Added 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 5412]
BEAUTY BAR — Shall include any business whose services include but
are not limited to blow outs, up-dos, make up applications, manicures,
pedicures, waxing, hair and styling, tinting and facials, and
massages.[Added 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 5412]
BEAUTY/ HAIR SALON — Includes service dealing with cosmetic
treatments for men and women, including cutting hair and styling and
which may also include a spa. This further includes but is not limited to
services related to skin health, facial aesthetic, foot care, nail manicures,
aromatherapy, even meditation, oxygen therapy, mud baths, and many other
services.[Added 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 5412]
NAIL SALON — Shall include any business whose primary business is
providing manicures, pedicures or other fingernail and/or toenail cosmetic
treatment.[Added 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 5412]
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT and DISTRICT MANAGEMENT
CORPORATION — Are intended to be defined in the same manner as
said terms are defined in N.J.S.A. 40:56-66 and are adopted by reference
thereto.229
§ 471-9. Public notice.
At least 10 days prior to the date fixed for a public hearing on this chapter,
a copy hereof and notice of the date, time and place of said hearing shall
be mailed by certified mail to all the parties owning real property within the
Special Improvement District as listed in Appendix A attached hereto.230
§ 471-10. Restrictions; violations and penalties. [Added 11-10-2005
by Ord. No. 4914]
A. Nail salons. [Amended 3-14-2017 by Ord. No. 5412]
(1) Location. Within the confines of the Special District, no nail salon,
hair salon, beauty salon, barbershop, or beauty bar shall be located
within 1,000 feet of any existing nail salon, hair salon, beauty salon,
barbershop, or beauty bar as defined herein. The distance between
the businesses shall be measured from the nearest entrance of an
existing business to the nearest entrance of the proposed new
business along the route that a pedestrian would normally walk.
229. Editor's Note: Former § 243-9, Review, and former § 243-10, Expiration date, both added
7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 4261, which previously followed this section, were repealed
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 4543.
230. Editors Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Township Clerk, where it may be
examined during regular office hours.
§ 471-8 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 471-10
467:787
Chapter 474
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pet waste — See Ch. 168, Art. I.
Wildlife feeding — See Ch. 168, Art. III.
Land development — See Ch. 170.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 434.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
602.
B. Parking of large trucks and nonprivate passenger automobiles
prohibited. [Added 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 5271]
(1) The parking, including stopping or standing, of motor vehicles in
the Special Improvement District shall be restricted to private
passenger automobiles or trucks of a capacity not greater than 3/4
of a ton.
(2) Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty not
exceeding $1,250 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90
days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or
any combination thereof.
§ 471-10 UNION CODE § 471-10
467:788
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§ 474-1. through § 474-30. (Reserved)
§ 474-1 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 474-1
467:789

ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 4909]
§ 474-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Union, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 474-32. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of Union
unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than
the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Union or other public body,
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
§ 474-31 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 474-32
467:791
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
§ 474-33. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Union any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 474-34. Enforcement.
For the purpose of this article, the Health Officer and Department of Public
Works Code Enforcement Division Officers, Division of Solid Waste and
Recycling, as well as the Construction Code Official, shall be designated
as the enforcing officers. The enforcing officers shall be authorized by
the Township Committee to designate as many subcode officials as are
deemed reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose of this article.
The enforcing officer or his designee is authorized to perform as a law
enforcement officer solely with respect to the enforcement of the provisions
of this article by being empowered to issue summonses for any violations
of this article, in accordance with rules governing the courts of the State
of New Jersey. Members of the Union Township Police Department are also
authorized to enforce this article when a littering violation occurs in plain
view of an officer.
§ 474-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 474-32 UNION CODE § 474-35
467:792
ARTICLE III
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 4911]
§ 474-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Township of Union, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 474-37. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Union or other public body,
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
§ 474-38. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Union is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 474-39. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to prohibition include:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 474-36 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 474-39
467:793
§ 474-40. Enforcement.
For the purpose of this article, the Health Officer and Department of Public
Works Code Enforcement Division Officers, Division of Solid Waste and
Recycling, as well as the Construction Code Official, shall be designated
as the enforcing officers. The enforcing officers shall be authorized by
the Township Committee to designate as many subcode officials as are
deemed reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose of this article.
The enforcing officer or his designee is authorized to perform as a law
enforcement officer solely with respect to the enforcement of the provisions
of this article by being empowered to issue summonses for any violations
of this article, in accordance with rules governing the courts of the State
of New Jersey. Members of the Union Township Police Department are also
authorized to enforce this article when a littering violation occurs in plain
view of an officer.
§ 474-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities including the washing of fire-fighting
vehicles.
I. Vehicle and equipment washwater from municipal operations pursuant
to Part I, Section F.8.e of the Borough's Tier A Municipal Stormwater
General Permit.
J. Flows from rinsing equipment with clean water used in the application
of salt and de-icing materials immediately following salt and de-icing
material applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles
to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g.,
shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to
storage for reuse or properly discarded.
§ 474-39 UNION CODE § 474-41
467:794
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 474-41 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 474-41
467:795

ARTICLE IV
Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting on Private Property
[Adopted 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 5110]
§ 474-42. Purpose.
An ordinance requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which
are in direct contact with the repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Township of Union so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 474-43. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains, that is owned or operated by the Township of Union or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and ombination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 474-44. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property except a residential lot with one
single-family house, shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top-coating or chipsealing
with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 474-42 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 474-44
467:797
§ 474-45. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 474-44 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 474-45 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 474-44 UNION CODE § 474-45
467:798
§ 474-46. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township of Union Department of
Public Works.
§ 474-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 474-45 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 474-47
467:799
Chapter 477
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Engineering Department — See Ch. 47.
Public Works Department — See Ch. 113.
Bicycles — See Ch. 179.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 207.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 277.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Human-powered locomotion devices — See
Ch. 362.
Motorcycles and similar vehicles — See Ch.
369.
Outdoor cafes; outdoor displays — See Ch.
390.
§ 474-47 UNION CODE § 474-47
467:800
ARTICLE I
Backfilling of Trenches in Streets
§ 477-1. Regulations. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5129]
Rules and regulations concerning backfilling of trenches in streets and
right-of-way areas:
A. Road openings are to be closed as soon as possible. When an opening is
made by the applicant himself or by agents or employees on his behalf,
the opening shall be closed immediately after the purpose for which the
opening was made has been effected and shall, in any event, be closed
without delay. The resurfacing of the opening shall be done at the
direction and under the supervision of the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent.
B. Restoration of pavement.
(1) The applicant shall restore the pavement, either bituminous
concrete or plain or reinforced concrete, to as good a condition as
before the excavation was made. The material excavated shall not
be used as backfill, unless the excavated material is of such
composition as to be used for backfill as determined by the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent. If the
backfill is not deemed suitable by the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent, it shall be removed
immediately from the area of the excavation, and the trench shall
then be backfilled with a ready-mixed flowable fill with a twentyeight-
day compressive strength of 1,200 psi to within six inches of
the surface of the pavement for a hot mixed asphalt base course
(four inches) and a hot mix asphalt surface course (two inches) as
further described in § 477-1D.
(2) Bituminous concrete pavement may not be substituted for
reinforced concrete unless authorized by the Township Public
Works Superintendent or authorized agent.
C. Placement of backfill material. The backfill material shall be placed to
within six inches of the surface of the pavement, within four inches, or
in the case of driveways six inches, of the surface of the sidewalk or
within four inches of the surface of the grassed area within the
dedicated street right-of-way. In lieu of ready-mixed fiowable fill,
sidewalk and grassed areas may be backfilled with bank-run sand and
gravel or dense graded aggregate. The material used for backfill shall
be placed and tamped with suitable tamping equipment in twelve-inch
lifts.
D. Restoration shall be as follows:
(1) Bituminous concrete pavement. A base course of four-inch
compacted thickness consisting of a bituminous stabilized base
course pursuant to New Jersey Department of Transportation
§ 477-1 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-1
467:801
§ 477-2. Concrete sidewalks.
The trench shall be backfilled with stone and tamped with suitable
mechanical equipment, and concrete sidewalks shall be constructed
thereon. The sidewalk shall be of Class B concrete in accordance with New
Jersey Department of Transportation specifications, four inches in thickness
and, in the instance of driveways, six inches in thickness reinforced and four
feet in width with a clean construction joint at four-foot intervals in lengths
of 12 feet with preformed bituminous expansion joints at intervals of 12
feet.
§ 477-3. Grassed areas.
The topsoil in the trench area shall be stripped, stockpiled during the
construction and replaced after the construction is completed. The area of
disturbance shall be reseeded as required to restore the area to its original
condition. Topsoil shall be no less than two inches in compacted thickness.
§ 477-4. Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized
agent or designee to be notified in advance.
§ 477-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days, or by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to
become effective on the effective date of this section.
specifications, Mix No. 2, rolled or tamped with suitable
mechanical equipment, and there shall be placed thereon two
inches of compacted thickness of a bituminous concrete surface
course Mix No. 5.
(2) Before placing the surface course, the edge of the pavement shall
be cut back. The surface course shall be compacted with a selfpropelled
roller having a minimum weight of two tons, or a
vibrating roller having an equivalent compacting force.
A. The applicant or permittee shall notify the Township Department of
Public Works in advance of the opening of any street and shall also
notify the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent
at least 24 hours before backfilling is commenced.
B. In cases of emergency service, outside the normal office hours of the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent, notice
shall be given as soon as possible after the opening.
§ 477-1 UNION CODE § 477-5
467:802
ARTICLE II
Openings in Public Streets
§ 477-6. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to excavate, dig in, tunnel or open any public street in
the Township of Union in the County of Union for any purpose without a
permit being first secured from the Township Public Works Superintendent
or authorized agent and except upon compliance with the provisions of
this article. "Street," for the purpose of this article, shall mean any road,
thoroughfare, highway, public way, public alley, easement or other right-ofway
accepted or maintained by the Township as a public street, as well as
any other state or county road or highway over which the Township has
acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 477-7. Application procedures. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
4918]
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring a permit for the opening of a
street or tunneling therein shall make application to the Township of Union
Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent setting forth the following
information:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number, if any, of the abutting property.
C. The Township Tax Map index, block and lot number of the property for
the benefit of which the opening is to be made.
D. The nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
E. The character and purpose of the work proposed.
F. The time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
G. The plan showing the exact location and dimension of all openings.
H. The name and address of the workmen or the contractor who is to
perform the work, if different from the applicant.
I. A statement that the applicant agrees to replace, at his own cost and
expense, in accordance with Township specifications and details, the
opening to the same state and condition as they were at the time of the
commencement of the work, and further agrees to comply with all other
applicable ordinances, regulations and laws relative to the work.
J. Agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the Township from all loss,
damage, claim or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense
of any litigation arising out of injury to any person or property resulting
from any work done by the applicant under the permit.
§ 477-6 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-7
467:803
K. Such other information as the Township Public Works Superintendent
or authorized agent may consider pertinent.
L. The registration number from the underground location service
[Supersnooper (800)-272-1000] indicating that they have been properly
notified and will locate underground facilities in the area of the
proposed opening or tunneling operation.
M. The following streets have Joint Meeting of Essex and Union County
(JMEUC) sanitary sewer trunk lines; any requests for road opening
permits for which sanitary sewer connections are proposed on these
streets shall be reviewed to verify if connections are being made
directly to the JMEUC trunk lines. The list shall not be deemed inclusive
of all JMEUC facilities and is subject to change pending upgrades and
modifications to JMEUC facilities. If connections to the trunk sewer
owned by JMEUC are proposed, the applicant shall be referred to
JMEUC for permission to connect. If JMEUC approval is granted, the
applicant may return with evidence of JMEUC approval to complete the
road opening process.
Street Name Sewer Location
Allen Avenue Between Burnet Avenue and Center Street
Allen Avenue Crossing near Kathleen Terrace
Brookfall Avenue Entire length
Burnet Avenue Crossing between Allen Avenue and Branford
Avenue
Carlton Terrace Crossing near Kathleen Terrace
Dorchester Road Crossing near Burnet Avenue
Erhardt Street Entire length
Everett Circle Entire length
Franklin Street Entire length
Greenfield Street Crossing approximately 3/4 of street from
Springfield Avenue
Hamilton Terrace Entire length
Harold Street Crossing at end of street
Hendricks Drive Crossing near Public Works yard
Kathleen Terrace Near Allen Avenue
Lehigh Avenue Crossing between Morris Avenue and Hampton
Avenue
Liberty Avenue Crossing at Hamilton Terrace
Linwood Road Between Gail and Liberty Avenue
Lynmar Way Between North Avenue and Travers Street
Monmouth Road Between City of Elizabeth municipal boundary
and Lynmar Way
§ 477-7 UNION CODE § 477-7
467:804
§ 477-8. Authority to grant or refuse license. [Amended 11-22-2005
by Ord. No. 4918]
Street Name Sewer Location
North Avenue Between Vivian Terrace and Lynmar Way
Potter Avenue Between Beverly Road and Salem Road
Route 22 Crossing between Highland Avenue and North
Sunset
Salem Road Crossing between Clifton Terrace and Hillside
Township Municipal Boundary
Springfield Road Crossing near Home Depot jug handle
Stahuber Place Crossing between Dorchester Road and Vauxhall
Road
Swanstrom Place Crossing near Public Works yard
Union Avenue Between Gregory Avenue and Garden State
Parkway
Vauxhall Road Between Brookfall Avenue and Robert Street
Vauxhall Road Crossing between Winslow Avenue and
Swanstrom Place
Walker Avenue Crossing between Day Terrace and Interstate 78
Winslow Avenue Between Morrison Avenue and Vauxhall Road
N. If the applicant is proposing a sanitary sewer connection to a Townshipowned
sanitary sewer, the applicant shall submit sanitary sewer
connection details. The submittal shall include inverts elevations at the
proposed connection and exiting the structure.
A. The Township of Union Public Works Superintendent or authorized
agent is hereby authorized to refuse the issuance of any permit if such
refusal is in the interest of public safety, public convenience or public
health. If a permit is refused by the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent, an appeal may be taken to the
Township Committee. The Township Committee, after hearing the
applicant and the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized
agent and such evidence as may be produced, may either direct the
issuance of such permit or sustain the refusal of the Township Public
Works Superintendent or authorized agent.
B. Permits for openings requested on roadways which have been
resurfaced within 10 years shall be refused, unless the work is deemed
by the Township Engineer to be an emergency. Roadways that have
been microsurfaced within five years shall also be refused, unless, as
noted above, the work is deemed to be an emergency. Emergency repair
work shall not include any routine or preventative maintenance or
upgrades to public owned utilities. New residential or commercial
construction is exempt from the above moratoriums, provided the
§ 477-7 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-8
467:805
§ 477-9. Compliance with regulations. [Amended 11-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 4918; 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5129]
All permits issued under this article shall require the applicant to comply
with the following:
applicant complies with § 477-9. Should the applicant be granted a
permit for emergency work or new construction, the applicant shall be
responsible to restore the road in accordance with § 477-9. [Amended
10-11-2016 by Ord. No. 5397]
A. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and,
during the hours of darkness, shall be provided with the proper warning
lights. The applicant shall provide such signs, controls, barricades,
warning lights and personnel necessary for safe operation and
compliance with the current edition of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Construction Specifications for Bridge and Roadway
Construction, the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, and all applicable federal and state laws.
B. All excavations or tunneling shall be sheeted, shored or braced in
accordance with applicable safety codes and Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) standards.
C. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
to traffic unless the closing is approved by the Township Public Works
Department and the Police and Fire Departments. The Township Public
Works Department and the Police and Fire Departments shall be
notified of all street closings at least 24 hours in advance, except where
the work is of an emergency nature, when notice shall be given to the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent and Police
and Fire Departments when work commences.
D. Longitudinal and transverse trenches must be sawcut in a neat straight
line. The lines shall be parallel to the roadway centerline with square
edges. If during construction the pavement edge is broken, the
pavement shall be sawcut to provide a neat straight line.
E. All refuse and material shall be removed within 24 hours.
F. All excavations shall be completely backfilled with a ready-mixed
flowable fill with a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 1,200 psi
to within six inches of the surface of the pavement for the hot mixed
asphalt base course (four inches) and hot mix asphalt surface course
(two inches).
G. If tunneling operations are required the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
H. If blasting is required in the course of any excavation, it shall be done in
strict compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations.
§ 477-8 UNION CODE § 477-9
467:806
§ 477-10. Conditions applicable to permits.
The following conditions and regulations shall apply to all permits issued
under this article:
I. Restoration of any street foundation or surface shall not commence
until the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent or
his designated representative has determined that the ready-mixed
flowable fill has cured sufficiently for placement of asphalt courses.
J. The finished pavement thickness shall match that of the existing
roadway, but shall not be less than six inches thick. The typical
pavement section shall consist of Hot Mix Asphalt Base Course, Mix I-2,
four inches thick and Hot Mix Asphalt Surface Course, Mix I-5, two
inches thick. For longitudinal trenches, the contractor shall, at a
minimum, mill and resurface half of the roadway width from edge of
pavement to center line of the road. Prior to placing the top course
material, the base course and cold joints must be tack coated. Where
openings have been made in a concrete roadway, the trench shall be
excavated to the bottom of the concrete base course. The existing
concrete base course shall be drilled and doweled and concrete base
course with a minimum twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,500
psi shall be installed to match the existing concrete thickness.
K. The street surface shall be restored to the satisfaction of the Township
Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent. The surface
pavement at the utility service connections shall be heated using
infrared technology so that the mending of the old and new asphalt is
achieved and joints are not visible.
L. All work, material, and equipment shall conform to the requirements of
the current edition of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Construction Specifications for Bridge and Roadway Construction. The
materials and work shall also be in accordance with applicable
Township regulations, specifications, and details as deemed
appropriate by the Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent.
A. Transferability. A permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable.
B. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within
30 days from the date of issuance of the permit, which shall be valid for
30 days therefrom. If work is not commenced within that time, the
permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended in writing by the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent.
C. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit shall be kept in possession of
the person actually performing the work and shall be exhibited on
demand to any duly authorized representative or police officer of the
Township.
§ 477-9 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-10
467:807
§ 477-11. Fees to accompany applications. [Amended 11-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 4918]
D. Revocation of permit. The Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent may revoke a permit for any of the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
rules, regulations, law or ordinance.
(2) Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
(3) Carrying on work under the permit in a manner which endangers
life or property, or which creates any condition which is unhealthy,
unsanitary or a nuisance.
E. Modification of permit conditions. In a special case, the Township
Committee may, by resolution, impose special conditions to which the
issuance of the permit may be subject, or may decide that any provision
of this article shall not be applicable or may be modified.
F. The Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent may
make any rules and regulations which he considers necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this article, but no regulation shall
be inconsistent with, alter or amend the intent of any provision of this
article or impose any requirement which is in addition to those
expressly or by implication imposed by this article. Copies of all current
regulations shall be furnished each permittee at the time of the
issuance of the permit.
A. Prior to issuance of any permit pursuant to this article, the applicant or
owner shall file an application for said permit at least 48 hours prior
thereto and shall pay for said permit in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1) Application fee:
(a) Normal: $40.
(b) Nonreported opening: $200.
(2) Permit fee:
(a) Up to 25 square feet: $100.
(b) Between 25 and 50 square feet: $150.
(c) Over 50 square feet: $3 per square foot.
(3) Cash bond:
(a) First opening: $1,000.
(b) Second and subsequent openings: $500 each.
§ 477-10 UNION CODE § 477-11
467:808
§ 477-12. Deposits.
One year after the permanent restoration is completed, the Township shall
reinspect the area. If the restoration is satisfactory, the cash bond shall
be refunded; if additional restoration is required, the Township shall notify
the applicant of the additional work to be performed and will reinspect the
restoration area again. One month after the corrective action, a refund shall
then be made if restoration is satisfactory.
§ 477-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to
become effective on the effective date of this section.
B. All application and permit fees are nonrefundable, and said application
and permit, once issued, are valid for a period of one year, pending
compliance with § 477-10B.
C. The fee will be waived for work done by Union County forces although
Union County shall be required to file an application prior to any work
being done.
D. Public utilities will be allowed to establish an escrow account with the
Township of Union for the required cash bonds. A maximum of $2,500
shall be deposited in this account, unless a single project requires the
posting of a larger amount as determined by the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent. The Township of Union shall have
the authority and right to use the escrow funds to restore or maintain
the work covered by the permit if the applicant fails to do so within 24
hours of notification by the Township in instances of public safety of the
traveling public.
§ 477-11 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-13
467:809

ARTICLE III
Curb and Sidewalk Construction
§ 477-14. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct or remove, or cause to be constructed
or removed, any curb or sidewalk, or any part thereof within any public
right-of-way of the Township of Union without a permit being first secured
from the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent and
except upon compliance with the provisions of this article. "Public rightof-
way," for the purpose of this article, shall mean any road, thoroughfare,
highway, public way, public alley, easement or other right-of-way accepted
or maintained by the Township as a public street, as well as any other
state or county road or highway over which the Township has acquired
jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 477-15. Application; information required.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit for the construction
or removal of curb or sidewalk shall make application to the Township
Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent setting forth the following
information:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name of the street where the curb or sidewalk is to be constructed
or removed and the street number, if any, of the abutting property.
C. The Township Tax Map index, block and lot number of the property.
D. The character and purpose of the work proposed.
E. The time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
F. The plan showing the exact location and dimension of all construction
or removal.
G. The name and address of the workmen or the contractor who is to
perform the work, if different from the applicant.
H. A statement that the applicant agrees to replace at his own cost and
expense, in accordance with Township specifications and details, the
curb or sidewalk to the same state and condition as they were at the
time of the commencement of the work, and further agrees to comply
with all other regulations and laws relative to the work.
I. Agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the Township from all loss,
damage, claim, or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense
of any litigation arising out of injury, to any person or property,
resulting from any work done by the applicant under the permit.
J. The line and grade shall be furnished by the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent. The applicant shall furnish, if
§ 477-14 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-15
467:811
§ 477-16. Authority to issue or refuse permit.
The Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent is hereby
authorized to refuse the issuance of any permit if such refusal is in the
interest of public safety, public convenience or public health. If a permit
is refused by the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized
agent, an appeal in writing may be taken to the Township Committee within
10 days of receipt of notice of denial. The Township Committee, after
hearing the applicant and the Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent and such evidence as may be produced, may either direct
the issuance of such permit or sustain the refusal of the Township Public
Works Superintendent or authorized agent.
§ 477-17. Compliance with regulation.
All permits issued under this article shall require the applicant to comply
with the following:
required, a line and grade plan showing the proposed work to include
such information as may be requested by the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent and upon which the Township
Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent may develop said line
and grade.
K. Such other information as the Township Public Works Superintendent
or authorized agent may consider pertinent.
L. The registration number from the underground location service
[Supersnooper (800)-272-1000] indicating that they have been properly
notified and will locate underground facilities in the area of the
proposed construction and/or removal.
A. All excavation shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and, during
the hours of darkness, shall be provided with the proper warning lights.
The applicant shall provide such signs, controls, barricades, warning
lights and personnel necessary for safe operation and compliance with
applicable federal and state laws.
B. All construction shall utilize formwork acceptable to the Township
Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent and be inspected
prior to placing of concrete.
C. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
to traffic, unless the closing is approved by the Township Department of
Public Works. The Township Department of Public Works shall be
notified of all street closings at least 24 hours in advance, except where
the work is of an emergency nature, when notice shall be given to the
Public Works, Police and Fire Departments when work commences.
D. All refuse and material shall be removed within 24 hours after
completion of the work.
§ 477-15 UNION CODE § 477-17
467:812
§ 477-18. Conditions applicable to permit.
The following conditions and regulations shall apply to all permits issued
under this article.
E. No concrete sidewalks shall be replaced or covered with bituminous
concrete.
F. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire
section or sections of curb shall be removed and replaced. The breaking
and recapping of curbing is specifically prohibited.
G. Curbing shall be either vertical concrete curb or Belgium block as
designated by the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized
agent and shall be in accordance with Township specifications and
details on file in the office of the Township Public Works Superintendent
or authorized agent.
H. Sidewalks shall be concrete and shall be in accordance with Township
specifications and details on file in the office of the Township Public
Works Superintendent or authorized agent.
I. Exception. A permit shall not be required for the initial installation of
curbs, sidewalks or driveway aprons in a major subdivision where the
work is covered by performance guaranties required by the Planning
Board.
A. Transferability. A permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable.
B. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within
30 days from the date of issuance of the permit which shall be valid for
30 days therefrom. If work is not commenced within that time, the
permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended in writing by the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent.
C. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit shall be kept in possession of
the person actually performing the work and shall be exhibited on
demand to any duly authorized employee or police officer of the
Township.
D. Revocation of permit. The Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent may revoke a permit for any of the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
rules, regulations, laws or ordinances.
(2) Violation of any condition of the permit required.
(3) Carrying on work under the permit in a manner in which endangers
life or property, or which creates any condition which is unhealthy,
unsanitary or a nuisance.
§ 477-17 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-18
467:813
§ 477-19. Fees and deposits.
Before any permit is issued pursuant to this article, the applicant or owner
shall file an application for said permit at least 24 hours prior thereto and
shall pay for said permit a fee of $10. In addition to the aforementioned
permit fee, the applicant shall deposit the sum of $10 for every linear foot
of curbing to be constructed or removed and/or $10 for every linear foot of
sidewalk. The minimum deposit shall be $100. The Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent is hereby authorized to charge an
inspection fee of $10 per inspection for initial inspection, form inspection,
and final inspection. In the event the restoration of work authorized under
the permit is not accomplished in a manner satisfactory to the Township
Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent or in accordance with
this and other applicable ordinances or regulations, the entire deposit shall
be forfeited and used by the Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent to correct the deficiencies.
§ 477-20. Use of deposits.
All deposits shall be replenished to the extent of any deductions chargeable
against the same, so that on the first day of each month there shall be
additionally deposited with the Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent the amount of any charges or deductions made. Any part
of the deposit not used under the provisions of this article shall be returned
when all the work and repairs have been completed and approved by the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent. Regardless of
the amount of any deposit, the applicant or permittee shall be responsible
for full, proper and complete restoration or necessary repairs occasioned by
the construction or removal and for the full cost thereof.
§ 477-21. Enforcement of defective curbs or conditions.
In the event that the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized
agent determines that curbing or sidewalks in front of property are in a
hazardous condition, the Township shall notify the resident or owner thereof
in writing that the condition of said curbs or sidewalks shall be corrected
E. Modification of permit conditions. In special cases, the Township
Committee may, by resolution, impose special conditions to which the
issuance of the permit may be subject, or may decide that any provision
of this article shall not be applicable or may be modified.
F. The Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent may
make any rules and regulations which he considers necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this article. No regulation shall be
inconsistent with, alter or amend the intent of any provision of this
article or impose any requirement which is in addition to those
expressly or by implication imposed by this article. Copies of all current
regulations shall be furnished each permittee at the time of the
issuance of the permit.
§ 477-18 UNION CODE § 477-21
467:814
within 30 days after receipt of said notice. In the event that the resident
or property owner does not correct such defective curbs or sidewalks
within the prescribed period, the Township Public Works Superintendent
or authorized agent shall be empowered to issue summonses for failing to
correct said condition. In the event that the resident or property owner still
does not correct such defective curbs or sidewalks, the Township Public
Works Superintendent or authorized agent shall cause the work to be done,
and the property owner shall be assessed accordingly for the full cost
thereof, in accordance with the statute in such case made and provided.
§ 477-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail, or in any other place provided by the municipality, for
the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
§ 477-21 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-22
467:815

ARTICLE IV
Brush, Hedges and Plant Life at Intersections
§ 477-23. Cutting and trimming responsibility.
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants, of any lands within the Township
of Union, wherever necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public safety, shall be required to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection
of two roadways cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet, and within 10
days after written notice sent to the last known post office address of said
owner or tenant, by registered mail, said owner or tenant shall cut the same.
§ 477-24. Failure to comply.
In the event the owners, tenants or occupants fail to correct said condition,
the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent shall be
empowered to issue summonses for failing to correct said condition. In
the event a summons is issued and the owner, tenant or occupant still
fails to correct such condition, the Township Public Works Superintendent
shall cause the work to be done, and the property owner shall be assessed
accordingly for the full cost thereof in accordance with the statute in such
case made and provided.
§ 477-25. Enforcement.
In every case, in which by force of this article, the cutting of the foregoing
by reason of the refusal or neglect of the tenant or owner to cut the same is
done under the direction of the Township Committee, the cost thereof shall
be certified to the Township Committee, which shall examine the certificate
of cost and, if found correct, shall cause the same as shown thereon to
be charged against the lands, and the amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon such lands, and shall be added to, and become and form
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same
to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and to be collected and enforced
by the same officers, and in the same manner as payment of taxes.
§ 477-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall refuse or neglect, after proper notice, to comply with
the demands therein made with respect to the cutting of the foregoing, for
the preservation of the public safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the Township of Union, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to one or
more of the following: imprisonment in the county jail, or in any other place
provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term
not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the
effective date of this section. Each and every day in which said owner or
tenant shall refuse or neglect to so cut said matter shall be and constitute a
separate offense.
§ 477-23 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-26
467:817

ARTICLE V
Closing Streets
§ 477-27. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful to make use of any portion of any street in the Township
of Union in the County of Union for vehicular or pedestrian traffic when
said part of said street has been closed against use by the Township Public
Works Superintendent or authorized agent and when there has been placed
upon said street a sign marked "Road Closed" or containing any other
designation indicating that the portion of the road in question has been
closed against usage.
§ 477-28. Pedestrian or vehicular restrictions.
Whenever the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent
shall place upon a street a sign bearing the words "Road Closed" or any
other phraseology to indicate that the road is not to be used, it shall be
unlawful to pass beyond said sign, either for pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
into the portion of the street designated as closed, whether or not the sign
or signs are spread over the entire width of the street and whether or not
the barricading of said streets extends throughout the entire width of said
street.
§ 477-29. Unlawful to pass barricade.
Whenever the Township Department of Public Works shall place barricades
upon any street to indicate that the portion of the street beyond said
barricade is closed against usage, it shall be unlawful to pass said barricade,
either for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, into the closed part of the street,
whether or not said barricade extends across the entire width of the street.
§ 477-30. Use of streets unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to make use of any portion of any street, either for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, when said portion of said street has been
closed by the Township Department of Public Works or by authority of the
Township Committee of the Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 477-31. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, group of persons, partnership or
corporation, and either the masculine, feminine or neuter gender shall be
implied, and either the singular or plural shall be implied, whichever is
conducive to the effectuation of this article.
§ 477-27 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-32
467:819
§ 477-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any
other place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for
any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on
the effective date of this section.
§ 477-32 UNION CODE § 477-32
467:820
ARTICLE VI
Driveway Apron Construction
§ 477-33. Requirements.
No driveway apron shall be constructed in the Township of Union in the
County of Union unless the same complies with the following requirements:
§ 477-34. Materials.
The materials hereinbefore provided for shall at all times comply with
the specifications of the Township of Union in the County of Union with
reference thereto.
§ 477-35. Multiple aprons at single location.
In such instances as may require two or more aprons at one location, there
shall be at least 35 feet of curbing of the same height as contiguous curbs
in the area between said driveway aprons.
§ 477-36. Fees and deposits.
A. Residential zones:
(1) All such aprons shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous
concrete.
(2) The maximum width for any such apron shall be as follows:
(a) One-car garage: 12 feet.
(b) One-car garage, with allowance for additional off-street
parking: 18 feet.
(c) Two-car garage: 24 feet.
B. Business zones and industrial zones:
(1) All such aprons shall be constructed of concrete.
(2) The maximum width of any such apron shall be 20 feet, except,
however, in the instance of gasoline service stations, in which event
the maximum width may be 35 feet.
A. Before any driveway apron is constructed, a permit shall be secured
from the Township Department of Public Works and a fee of $10 paid
therefor, and, in addition, the applicant shall deposit with the Township
Department of Public Works $100 in connection with a bituminous
concrete installation and $100 in connection with a concrete
installation, which deposit shall be as assurance for the proper
construction of said driveway apron and repair of any damage to the
sidewalk, curb or street. The applicant or permittee shall make any
repairs necessary to restore the sidewalk, curb or street in good
§ 477-33 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-36
467:821
§ 477-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
condition, subject to the approval the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent and pursuant to his directions,
and upon failure to do so promptly and diligently, the Township Public
Works Superintendent or authorized agent may make such repairs and
charge the cost against the deposit, and if the cost is in excess of
the deposit, the applicant and permittee shall be answerable for such
difference or excess.
B. The applicant, in addition, shall also pay an inspection fee of $5 per
inspection for initial inspection, form inspection, and final inspection. In
the event the restoration of work authorized under the permit is not
accomplished in a manner satisfactory to the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent in accordance with this article and
other applicable ordinances or regulations, the entire deposit shall be
forfeited and used by the Township Department of Public Works to
correct the deficiencies.
C. Any part of the deposit not used under the provisions of this article shall
be returned when all the work has been completed and approved by the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent.
§ 477-36 UNION CODE § 477-37
467:822
ARTICLE VII
Snow, Ice and Sleet Removal
§ 477-38. Responsibility of owner to clear snow.
§ 477-39. Responsibility of owner to render sidewalks safe for
travel.
A. The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of
premises abutting upon a public street in a residential zone in the
Township of Union shall remove from the abutting sidewalk, within 12
hours after the first daybreak after the falling or formation thereon, so
much of the snow and ice as it is possible to remove and shall apply
sand, sawdust, ashes, salt or some other harmless substance to the
portion not removed so that the same shall be rendered safe for travel
and, as soon as possible thereafter, shall remove the remainder,
together with any substance which has been applied to it.
B. The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of
premises used by the public or business invitees shall remove all snow
and ice from the sidewalks, streets and parking areas used by the public
in the transaction of business thereat and, in the event of ice which may
be so frozen as to make removal impractical, shall cause the same to be
thoroughly covered with sand, sawdust, ashes, salt or other harmless
substance so as to render travel safe prior to the opening of business,
but no later than 12:00 p.m. in any event, after the first daybreak after
the same shall fall or be formed.
C. The owner or owners, tenant or tenants or their agent shall cause all
interior sidewalks in multifamily residential areas containing four or
more dwelling units, particularly condominiums or cooperatives, to be
cleared of snow within six hours after the first daybreak after the same
shall fall or be formed and, in the event of ice which may be frozen as to
make removal impractical, shall apply sand, sawdust, ashes, salt or
other harmless substance to the portion not removed and shall, as soon
as possible thereafter, remove the remainder, together with any
substance which has been applied to it.
A. No owner, tenant, occupant or agent of the owner, tenant or occupant of
any premises abutting on any street or gutter shall throw, place or
deposit any snow or ice into or upon any street or gutter in the
Township, it being the intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit
all persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow or ice
which accumulates within the private property belonging to that person
upon the sidewalks, streets or gutters of the Township of Union.
B. In case such snow and ice shall not be removed from such sidewalks or
shall be cast or deposited thereon or placed upon the sidewalk, gutter
or the street by the owner, tenant, occupant or agent of the owner,
tenant or occupant of any premises hereinabove provided, the same
shall be removed forthwith under the direction of the Public Works
§ 477-38 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-39
467:823
§ 477-40. Interference with Department employees.
No person or corporation shall prevent, delay or interfere with the
Department of Public Works, or its employees, while in the operation of
snow plowing or snow and ice control operations.
§ 477-41. Violations and penalties.
Any persons or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by one or more of the following: a fine
not exceeding $500 or by a period of community service not exceeding
60 days, to become effective on the effective date of this section. Each
and every twenty-four-hour period in which the violation subsists shall be
a separate and distinct violation subject to the penalties stated herein.
Authority is hereby given to the various department heads of the Township
of Union to enforce such portions of this article as be within their respective
jurisdictions.
§ 477-42. Snow emergencies. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 5364]
Superintendent. Costs incurred in the removal shall be certified to
the Township Committee by the Public Works Superintendent. The
governing body shall examine such certification and, if found to be
correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against the real estate so
abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks, and the amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien upon the real estate or land and shall be
added to, recorded and collected in the same way and manner as the
taxes next to be levied and assessed upon the premises and shall bear
interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine or
fines or any other penalty for a violation of this article or any other
ordinance shall not constitute any bar to the right of the Township of
Union to collect the cost as certified for the removal of snow and ice in
the manner herein authorized.
A. A snow emergency may be declared by the Mayor, Deputy Mayor or, in
their absence, any member of the Township Committee, Township
Administrator or Police Director when a hazardous condition exists due
to a snowfall that poses a substantial threat to the health, welfare and
safety of the Township.
B. Whenever a snow emergency is found to exist, in order to afford the
Township the opportunity to clear its streets, no vehicle, except those
designated in Subsection F hereof, shall be allowed to stand or park,
whether attended or not, upon any street or highway of the Township,
except for picking up or discharging passengers or for picking up or
delivering essential merchandise or other commodities; until such time
that the snow emergency is lifted.
§ 477-39 UNION CODE § 477-42
467:824
§ 477-43. Use of driveways.
In residential areas of the Township, homeowners or tenants or occupants
shall be required to remove their vehicles from the streets and park them
in their driveways upon the beginning of a snowfall. Violation of this section
shall subject the owner to the penalties in § 477-41 or the removal of the
vehicle under § 477-42C. It shall be an affirmative defense to this section
that one does not have a driveway in which to park the vehicle.
§ 477-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
C. Whenever a vehicle has been parked or left standing in violation of the
provisions of the preceding subsection, any police officer of the
Township of Union or the Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent or his representative may move or cause the removal
of such vehicle to such place as may be designated by the Police
Director or authorized agent for the impounding of such vehicle. Such
vehicle shall be there retained and impounded until the person owning
such vehicle shall pay the cost of removal, together with storage. Within
72 hours after the vehicle has been so removed, the Police Director or
any member of the Police Department acting for him shall give written
notice thereof to the registered owner, if the name and address may be
ascertained, which notice may be given by personal service of mail
addressed to such owner at his last known address.
D. After any vehicle removed as provided in the preceding subsection has
been in the possession of either the Police Department or its designated
representative for a period of six months and the owner cannot be
found or refuses to receive and remove such vehicle and pay the costs
imposed thereon, then the Police Director may proceed to sell such
vehicle in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State of
New Jersey.
E. The registered owner of the removed vehicle shall be presumed to be
the person who parked such vehicle in violation of this section or that
the same was so parked by his duly authorized agent, unless proven
otherwise, and therefore shall be held responsible for violation of this
section.
F. The provisions of this section forbidding parking on streets due to
snowfall shall not apply to any municipal, county or state vehicle nor to
any ambulance nor to the vehicle of a physician while operated by such
physician for the treatment of patients in an emergency situation nor to
any vehicle of the United States Postal Service nor to vehicles of any
public service corporation while being operated in any emergency
arising in the Township.
§ 477-42 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-44
467:825
SIDEWALK — Any walkway customarily used by or designed for the use of
pedestrian traffic, whether the same is constructed of concrete, blacktop,
gravel or cinder.
§ 477-44 UNION CODE § 477-44
467:826
ARTICLE VIII
Traffic Control for Work Zones
[Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
§ 477-45. Findings and purpose.
The Township Committee of the Township of Union hereby finds and
declares that problems of traffic control occur when traffic must be moved
through or around road or street construction, maintenance operations and
utility work, above or below ground, which requires blocking the roadway
and obstructing the normal flow of traffic, and that such obstructions are
or can become dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better
promote the public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to
establish controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious
movement of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to
provide safety for the work forces performing these operations.
§ 477-46. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
The Township of Union in the County of Union does hereby adopt the
current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, hereafter known as
"MUTCD," except as hereby supplemented and amended as it controls and
regulates whenever construction, maintenance operations or utility work
obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility who
fails to comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work
is in violation of this article.
§ 477-47. Preconstruction meeting required.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or, in the case of
a public utility wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway,
to contact the Township of Union Police Department to arrange a
preconstruction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction of work. Any person, contractor or
utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work or
whose plans are not approved by the Township of Union Police Department
is in violation of this article.
§ 477-48. Emergency telephone numbers; correction of hazardous
conditions.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Township of Union Police
Department with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be
called in case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance
site prior to the start of any work. If, for any reason, emergency contacts
cannot be reached or if the emergency contact person does not respond
to a call from the Police Department to correct the hazardous condition,
the Township may respond to correct such hazardous conditions. The
reasonable fees for such emergency services by the Township shall be
charged to the person, contractor or utility responsible for such conditions.
§ 477-45 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-49
467:827
§ 477-49. Hours for work. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 5090]
Township, state and county contractors shall be permitted to work on public
roads between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Saturdays. No work shall
be permitted outside these hours or at any time on Sunday unless it is
deemed to be an emergency. Township, state and county contractors may
be restricted to, off-peak working hours (e.g., 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., or
9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.) if it is determined by the Traffic Safety Officer of
the Union Police Department and/or his/her designee that the work will
substantially delay traffic on those roads if performed during the peakhour
periods. For all other contractors, there shall be no construction,
maintenance operations or utility work on any roadway in the Township
before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. This time limit may be
adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by the Traffic
Safety Officer of the Union Police Department and/or his/her designee. If it
is determined by the Traffic Safety Officer of the Union Police Department
and/or, his/her designee that the construction or maintenance operations
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or
cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 477-50. Approval for road closings.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Township of Union Police Department 10 days in advance of the start
of work, unless in an emergency.
§ 477-51. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Township of Union Police Department that the
same are necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement
of traffic. It shall also be determined by the Township of Union Police
Department when the traffic director shall be a police officer or a flagman.
§ 477-52. Authority to stop work.
The Township of Union Police Department, as well as the Department
of Public Works Superintendent, shall have the authority to stop work,
including the removal of equipment, vehicles, stored material within the
street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other related
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or any violations
of this article.
§ 477-53. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
§ 477-49 UNION CODE § 477-53
467:828
than 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 477-53 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-53
467:829

ARTICLE IX
Building in Public; Obstructions
[Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 5217]
§ 477-54. Restrictions.
No person or persons or corporation shall obstruct or encumber any street,
avenue, highway or sidewalk in the Township of Union which has been
opened, graded or regulated according to law, with any article or thing
whatsoever, except as may be permitted by this article.
§ 477-55. (Reserved)
§ 477-56. Permits; fees for storage containers in street for
residential properties.
A. The Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent shall
have the power to grant a permit to any person, persons or contractor
to occupy with building material and/or storage container part of the
street on which building operations are being conducted, not to exceed,
however, 1/3 of the width of said street, provided that, in the opinion of
the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent, such
occupancy will not be harmful to the convenience or interest of the
public. Such permit, if granted, shall forthwith be posted in some
conspicuous place or near such building material, and/or storage
container and shall be kept there so as to be readily accessible for
inspection by the public, and the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent. A fee of $25 shall be paid to the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent by the
applicant for each such permit. The permit shall be valid for a period of
15 days and can be extended for additional period of 15 days.
B. A separate permit shall be required for storage of building material and
or storage container in front of each separate building or in front of
each separate excavation, and no permit shall be issued for the storage
of material over an area exceeding a frontage of 50 feet measured along
the sideline of the street. The payment of the fee for the permit The
permittee shall pay a daily fee of $5 per day so long as the storage
container remains upon the street and until storage container has been
removed and the street has been left in a condition satisfactory to the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent, such daily
fees to be deducted from the deposit hereafter mentioned.
C. Such permits shall provide that the sidewalk and gutter shall at all
times during the tenure of the permit be kept clear and unobstructed,
and all dirt, rubbish, snow, ice and debris shall be promptly removed,
from time to time, during the course of such building work by applicant
or permittee, and all such permits shall be revocable by the Township
Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent in his discretion.
§ 477-54 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-57
467:831
§ 477-57. Security deposit for storage containers in street.
§ 477-58. Powers and duties of Superintendent of Public Works or
authorized agent.
The Superintendent of Public Works or authorized agent is hereby
authorized and empowered to use so much of the money so deposited as
may be needed to effect the prompt removal of such dirt or rubbish as
may be left, from time to time, upon streets, sidewalks or gutters by or
for the applicant or permittee, and also to remove any building material
and/or storage container which may remain on streets, sidewalks or gutters
after the expiration or revocation of any permit under which such building
material or dirt or debris was so placed or accumulated.
§ 477-59. Replenishing deposit; revocation of permits.
In case such deposit shall have been diminished or exhausted by reason
of such use by the Superintendent of Public Works or authorized agent
A. No permit provided for in this article shall be granted until the
applicant shall have deposited with the Township Public Works
Superintendent or authorized agent the sum of $150 as security that
such applicant will promptly and at all times comply with the conditions
of this article, and will promptly remove all dirt, rubbish, debris and
encumbrance from gutters or sidewalks, and will also promptly remove
all building materials and or storage container placed upon any street
or sidewalk, in the event that the permit therefor shall have expired or
shall have been revoked.
B. The applicant shall, on the first day of each month, replenish the deposit
to the extent of the charges that may have been made against it for
daily fees, so that on the first day of each month said deposit shall be
kept up and maintained at no less than $150.
C. The applicant or permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to
the street shoulder, gutter or curb or to any other part of the street, and
shall at his expense repair and make good any such damage, subject to
approval of the Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized
agent, and no deposit shall be returned until such repairs have been
made to the satisfaction of the Township Public Works Superintendent
or authorized agent. Upon failure of the applicant or permittee
diligently and promptly to make repairs when requested by the
Township Public Works Superintendent or authorized agent, then such
repairs may be made by the Township Public Works Superintendent or
authorized agent and the cost thereof charged against and deducted
from the deposit, and if the deposit is insufficient, the applicant or
permittee shall be answerable for the difference or excess in cost. Any
part of the deposit not used under the provisions of this article shall be
returned when all work and repairs have been completed and when
they have been approved by the Township Public Works Superintendent
or authorized agent.
§ 477-57 UNION CODE § 477-59
467:832
for the aforesaid purposes, the amount thereof shall be replenished by the
applicant or permittee and made good up to the sum of $150 upon notice,
in writing, from the Superintendent of Public Works or authorized agent
and, in default thereof, such permits theretofore issued to the applicant
or permittee failing to comply with said notice shall be revoked, and no
permit shall thereafter be granted to such applicant until such deposit
shall have been replenished and made good up to said sum. Said deposit
may be withdrawn, and shall be returned to any applicant, provided that
said applicant shall hold no other unexpired permit, and has fully complied
with all conditions of any other permits theretofore issued; otherwise said
applicant shall be entitled to withdraw and receive only so much of said
deposit as may remain unexpended, after the requirements of this article
relative to use of said money for the abovementioned purposes shall have
been met.
§ 477-60. Materials to be lit.
Any and all building materials and or storage containers placed in any
street, by virtue of the provisions of this article, shall be kept well-lighted at
night for the protection of the traveling public. Reflectors shall be placed on
storage containers.
§ 477-61. Protection of pavement.
No building materials shall be placed, nor shall mortar, cement or other
materials be mixed upon any sidewalk, and no building materials shall be
placed, nor shall any mortar, cement or other materials be mixed upon the
pavement of any street, except under a permit issued by the Superintendent
of Public Works or authorized agent, which permit shall provide that such
pavement shall be protected by first laying planks thereon, and a watertight
box for mixing mortar or other similar material. Storage containers shall
have sufficient wood planks placed under the container to protect the
pavement.
§ 477-62. (Reserved)
§ 477-63. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days, or to both, in the discretion of the court.
§ 477-64. Enforcement authority.
For the purposes of this article, the Superintendent of Public Works or
authorized agent shall be designated as the enforcement officers. The
enforcement officers shall be empowered by the Township Committee to
designate as many subcode officials as deemed reasonable and necessary
to carry out the purpose of this article. In addition to the Superintendent
of Public Works or authorized agent, all police officers in the Township of
§ 477-59 SPACE HEATERS, LIQUID-FUEL-BURNING § 477-64
467:833
Union shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of all articles contained
within Township Code Chapter 477.
§ 477-64 UNION CODE § 477-64
467:834
Chapter 483
SUMP PITS AND PUMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Engineering Department — See Ch. 47. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
§ 483-1. Residential dwellings.
§ 483-2. Commercial, industrial or storage buildings.
§ 483-3. Permits.
The owner or tenant occupying a structure requiring a sump pump shall
be required to obtain a permit from the Building Department prior to
installation. Upon approval of plans, as specified herein, a permit shall be
issued which authorizes installation. A fee of $25 is required to be paid at
the time of application. The applicant shall also be required to separately
secure all other permits as are required under the Building Code.231
A. All residential dwellings having a storage or habitable area below grade
shall install a sump pit and sump pump as approved by the Plumbing
Subcode Official of the Township of Union.
B. The discharge from the sump pump shall be routed through a seepage
pit of a design approved by the Township Engineer prior to its
connection to a storm drainage facility located not further than 100 feet
from the property line or, when said facility exceeds 100 feet, to the
street gutter. The Township Engineer may also approve an alternate
method of discharge when the same is necessary.
A. All commercial, industrial or storage buildings having a cellar,
basement or storage area below grade shall install a sump pit and sump
pump as approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official of the Township of
Union.
B. The sump pit and the sump pump shall be as specified by a professional
engineer or architect licensed to practice in New Jersey on plans
containing said professional engineer's or architect's signature and
embossed seal.
C. The discharge from the sump pump shall be routed through a seepage
pit of a design approved by the Township Engineer prior to its
connection to a storm drainage facility located not further than 100 feet
from the property line or, when said facility exceeds 100 feet, to the
street gutter. The Township Engineer may also approve any alternate
method of discharge when the same is necessary.
231. Editor's Note: See Ch. 128, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 477-64 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 483-4
483:835
§ 483-4. Violations and penalties.232
Any person or business entity violating the terms of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not
more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge of
the Municipal Court.
Chapter 487
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Tax Assessment — See Ch. 138.
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 483-4 UNION CODE § 483-4
483:836
ARTICLE I
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 4799 (Ch. 250, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 487-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c.
114,233 which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or
after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant
to subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40234 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3),
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 487-2. Tax established.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
Township of Union which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Union on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Union on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c 40
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3, sales tax).
§ 487-3. Tax additional to other taxes or fees.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 487-4. Payment of tax; violations and penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by the article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
233. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1.
234. Editor’s Note: See P.L. 1966, c. 30 § 3(d) (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3).
§ 487-1 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 487-4
483:837
§ 487-5. Collection.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Township
of Union by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer.
Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally
liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder.
Any such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax
from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the
same time; provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall
be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with
any provision of this section shall, if convicted, be subject to a fine of
not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination of the above.
§ 487-4 UNION CODE § 487-5
483:838
ARTICLE II
Five-Year Tax Exemptions in Special Improvement District
[Adopted 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 5206235]
§ 487-6. Establishment. [Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5401]
There is hereby established a program, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et
seq., commonly known as the "Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law," of
tax exemptions for construction, conversion and improvement of properties
in the Union Township Special Improvement District and the Crossroads
Garden Apartment Rehabilitation Area in accordance with the provisions
hereof.
§ 487-7. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings consistent with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.:
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction or improvement of a building or structure
thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this Act. No tax
abatements are intended to be permitted herein.
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof used for office,
commercial, retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or for any
combination thereof, which the governing body determines will tend to
maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality, assist in
the economic development of the municipality, maintain or increase the tax
base of the municipality and maintain or diversify and expand commerce
within the municipality.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed or improved.
CONDOMINIUM — A property created or recorded as a condominium
pursuant to the New Jersey Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c.257 (N.J.S.A.
46:8B-1 et seq.).[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5401]
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a new commercial structure, or the
enlargement of the volume of an existing commercial structure by more
than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of an existing building or
structure to another use.
CONVERSION — The alteration or renovation of a nonresidential building
or structure, or hotel, motel, motor hotel or guesthouse, in such manner
as to convert the building or structure from its previous use to use as a
dwelling or multiple dwelling above the first floor.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest thereof is entitled to possess and occupy
for dwelling purposes a house, apartment, or other unit of housing owned
235. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that a certified copy be forwarded to the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey.
§ 487-6 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 487-7
483:839
by the corporation or association, or to purchase a unit of housing owned by
the corporation or association.[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5401]
CROSSROADS GARDEN APARTMENT REHABILITATION AREA — The
property commonly known as "Block 405, Lots 19 and 57" on the Tax Map
of the Township of Union that has been designated as an area in need of
rehabilitation pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, P.L.
1992, c.79 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.).[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No.
5401]
EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement or construction not regarded as increasing the taxable value
of a property pursuant to this article and the Five-Year Exemption and
Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — A property submitted to a horizontal
property regime pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168
(N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.).[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5401]
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness
of the building or structure as a place for human habitation or work,
the cost of which improvement shall exceed $100,000, and which does
not change its permitted use to a use that is not permitted; provided,
however, that in the case of an improvement to a multiple dwelling in
the Crossroads Garden Apartment Rehabilitation Area, there shall be no
minimum investment required in order to be deemed an improvement
under this article. In no case shall it include the repair of fire or other
damage to a property for which payment of a claim was received by any
person from an insurance company at any time during the three-year period
immediately preceding the filing of an application pursuant to this article
and the Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et
seq.[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5401]
MIXED-USE STRUCTURE — A structure with two or more different uses
such as, but not limited to, residential and commercial.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building or structure meeting the definition
of "multiple dwelling" set forth in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c.76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), which means, for the purpose
of improvement or construction, the "general common elements" and
"common elements" of a condominium, a cooperative, or a horizontal
property regime.[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5401]
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT — That area established as a Special
Improvement District by Chapter 471 of this Code and designated by the
Township of Union as an ANR236 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., by
Ordinance No. 4254, adopted by the Township Committee on June 22, 1993.
236. Editor's Note: The abbreviation "ANR" means an "area in need of rehabilitation,"
according to the preamble of Ord. No. 5206.
§ 487-7 UNION CODE § 487-8
483:840
§ 487-8. New construction.
A. Applicants for tax exemption for construction (as defined in § 487-7, the
definition of "construction") of commercial structures, or dwellings or
multiple dwellings in mixed-use structures, shall enter into a tax
agreement pursuant to § 487-11 and shall provide the Tax Assessor and
the Township Committee with an application on a project basis
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., setting forth:
(1) A general description of the project for which exemption is sought;
(2) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
(3) Plans, drawings, and other documents as may be required by the
Township Committee to demonstrate the structure and design of
the project;
(4) A description of the number, classes, and types of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project;
(5) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the
project, and a description of the benefits to be realized by the
applicant if a tax agreement is granted.
(6) Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
(7) A statement showing:
(a) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project
site;
(b) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of the agreement;
and
(c) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant
on the project during the first full year following the
termination of the tax agreement;
(8) A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
user's business; and
(9) Such other pertinent information as the Township Committee may
require.
(10) Any other information required by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9.
B. Copies of the application and accompanying information shall
simultaneously be filed with the Tax Assessor, Township Clerk,
Township Administrator, Planning Board and Department of Economic
Development.
§ 487-8 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 487-9
483:841
§ 487-9. Improvements and conversions.
A. All conversions or improvements, as defined in § 487-7, of commercial
structures, dwellings or multiple dwellings in mixed-use structures or
multiple dwellings in the Crossroads Garden Apartment Rehabilitation
Area shall be eligible for exemption (but not abatement) from local real
property taxes, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., for a
period of five years if approved by the Tax Assessor after proper
application has been made pursuant to such statutes. Application shall
be made upon the forms prescribed by the Director of the Division of
Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and shall be in compliance
with any and all regulations adopted by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs. [Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord.
No. 5401]
B. Applicants shall be encouraged to apply for tax exemption on
improvements and conversions prior to the commencement of
construction of the improvement or construction, provided that the
applicant must file a proper application with the Tax Assessor within 30
days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion of the
improvement in order to be eligible for tax exemption thereon. The Tax
Assessor will simultaneously file copies of the application with the
Township Clerk, Township Administrator, Planning Board and
Department of Economic Development.
C. Every properly completed application for exemption of one or more
improvements or conversions, which is filed within 30 days including
Saturdays and Sundays of the completion of the improvement, shall be
approved and allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the application
is consistent with the provisions of this article, provided that the
improvement or conversion for which the application is made qualifies
as an improvement or a conversion pursuant to the provisions of the
Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law, L. 1991, c. 441 (N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq.), and this article. The granting of an exemption shall
be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records of the
Township, which records shall contain a notice of determination date
thereof.
D. In determining the value of real property in which there are one or two
residential units and for which exemption is granted, the Township shall
regard the first $25,000 in the Assessor's full and true value of
improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by
the improvement in any dwelling more than 20 years old as not
increasing the value of the property for a period of five years,
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
improvements are made is increased thereby. During the exemption
period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the
assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements,
unless there is damage to the dwelling through action of the elements
sufficient to warrant a reduction. The determination of value for all
other improvements, conversions or construction for real property in
§ 487-9 UNION CODE § 487-9
483:842
§ 487-10. Determination of value.
In determining the value of property, the Township shall regard up to
the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements, conversion or
construction, as defined herein, as not increasing the value of the property
for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property
to which the improvements are made is increased thereby. During this
exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the
assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless
there is damage to the structure through action of the elements sufficient to
warrant a reduction. The granting of an exemption shall relate back to, and
take effect as of, the date of completion of the project, or portion or stage of
the project for which the exemption is granted, and shall continue for five
annual periods from that date. The grant of the exemption or tax agreement
shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records of
the taxing district, which record shall contain a notice of the termination
date thereof.
§ 487-11. Tax agreements for construction.
which there are more than two residential units or for commercial
structures shall be as provided in § 487-10. [Amended 10-25-2016 by
Ord. No. 5401]
A. The Township Committee may, for a particular project, enter into a
written agreement with the applicant for the exemption of increases in
local real property taxes which would be attributable to new
construction as defined in § 487-7, the definition of "construction." The
agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to the municipality in
lieu of full property tax payments an amount annually to be computed
by the following formula:
(1) Tax phase-in basis: The agreement shall provide for the applicant to
pay to the municipality in addition to the property taxes which
would be otherwise due based on the property tax assessment prior
to construction an amount in lieu of full property tax payments
equal to a percentage of increased taxes otherwise due based on
the construction, according to the following schedule:
(a) In the first full year after completion; no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due;
(b) In the second tax year, 20% of taxes otherwise due;
(c) In the third tax year, 40% of taxes otherwise due;
(d) In the fourth tax year, 60% of taxes otherwise due; and
(e) In the fifth tax year, 80% of taxes otherwise due.
B. The exemption and payment in lieu of taxes shall not apply to that
portion of the assessed value of a property as it existed prior to
§ 487-9 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 487-11
483:843
§ 487-12. Eligibility for additional construction or improvement.
An additional improvement or construction, completed on a property
granted a previous exemption during the period in which such previous
exemption is in effect, shall be qualified for an exemption, just as if such
property had not received a previous exemption. In such case, the additional
improvement or construction shall be considered as separate for the
purposes of calculating exemptions, except that the assessed value of any
previous improvement or construction shall be added to the assessed
valuation as it was prior to that improvement or construction for the
purpose of determining the assessed valuation of the property from which
any additional exemption is to be subtracted.
§ 487-13. Determination of tax due.
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, conversion or construction, the true
taxable value thereof. Except for projects subject to tax agreement,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9 to 40A:21-12 and this article, the amount of
tax to be paid for the tax year in which the project is completed shall be
based on the assessed valuation of the property for the current tax year,
prorated, plus any portion of the assessed valuation of the improvement,
conversion or construction not allowed an exemption pursuant to this article
and N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., also prorated. The property shall continue
to be treated in the appropriate manner for each of the four tax years
subsequent to the original determination by the Assessor and shall be
prorated for the final tax year in which the exemption expires.
§ 487-14. Taxes upon termination.
At the termination of a tax exemption agreement, a project shall be subject
to all applicable real property taxes as provided by state law and local
ordinance.
§ 487-15. Payment of fees.
No application for tax exemption shall be accepted by the municipality
unless accompanied by full payment of the required application fee. Such
fees shall be 1% of the estimated total project cost. These fees shall be
construction or improvement of a building or structure thereon. The
assessment on such portion shall remain unaffected and taxes on such
portion shall remain unaffected. The property shall be so treated for the
year beginning as of the date of completion of the construction and for
each of the four tax years subsequent to the original determination by
the Assessor and shall be prorated for the final tax year in which the
exemption expires.
C. Within 30 days after the execution of any tax agreement, the Municipal
Clerk shall forward a copy of same to the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 487-11 UNION CODE § 487-15
483:844
received as compensation for the legal review and related work of the
municipality's departments and agencies.
§ 487-16. Cessation or disposition of property.
If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax exemption
agreement, the applicant ceases to operate or disposes of the property
or otherwise fails to meet the conditions of eligibility, the tax otherwise
due if there had been no abatement or exemption shall become due and
payable by the property owner. The Tax Assessor shall notify the property
owner and the Tax Collector forthwith and the Tax Collector shall within
15 days thereof notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes
due. Where, however, with respect to sale or other disposal of the property
it is determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use
the property pursuant to the conditions which were set forth in the tax
exemption agreement, the exemption shall continue pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:21-12.
§ 487-17. Disqualification from exemption for nonpayment of taxes.
No exemption shall be granted, or tax agreement entered into, pursuant
to this article or the statute authorizing this article, with respect to any
property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid, or for
which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 487-18. Duration.
All tax agreements entered into by the Township of Union pursuant to this
article shall be in effect for no more than five full tax years next following
the date of completion of the project.
§ 487-19. Conflict with other provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to alter or amend any
land use or development regulation of the Township of Union or to exempt
any applicant from any provision of federal, state or local laws not expressly
set forth herein.
§ 487-20. Applicability of statutory regulatory provisions.
Every application for exemption and every exemption granted shall be
subject to all the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., and all rules and
regulations issued thereunder.
§ 487-15 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 487-20
483:845
Chapter 490
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic generally — See Ch. 266. Limousines — See Ch. 354.
§ 490-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLERK — The Township Clerk.
DRIVER — A person to whom a taxicab driver's permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, firm or corporation as the same may
be applicable.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — The location of the main place of
business of the taxicab company in the Township of Union where taxicab
service is conducted, where taxicabs are dispatched and where taxicab
drivers report for duty.[Added 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 5292]
TAXICAB — Any automobile, taxicab or other motor vehicle engaged in the
business of transporting passengers, for hire or pay within the Township,
whether operated from stands in the street or dispatched by telephone calls
to garages, or in any other manner, it being the intention of this chapter to
include in the definition of "taxicab" such vehicles as carry passengers, for
hire or pay, for which public patronage is solicited. Any motor vehicle, other
than a bus or autobus, traveling on designated routes, using the streets
of the Township for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, for which
public patronage is solicited, and the owner of which vehicle holds himself
out as a public carrier shall be deemed a "taxicab" and shall be licensed as
such.
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE PERMIT — The permit granted by the Clerk
to a person to drive the driver of a taxicab upon the streets of the Township.
TAXICAB OWNER'S LICENSE — The license granted by the Clerk to
operate a taxicab company, whose principal place of business is in the
Township of Union.[Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 5292]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union, Union County, New Jersey.
TRANSFER — To sell, transfer or in any other manner dispose of a taxicab
license. Where the license is in the name of a corporation or other legal
entity, any change in majority ownership of the corporation or other legal
entity shall constitute a transfer thereof.
§ 487-20 UNION CODE § 490-2
483:846
§ 490-2. Granting of licenses and permits.
The Clerk shall be empowered to issue or grant a taxicab owner's license
and a taxicab driver's permit, provided the applicant thereof meets all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 490-3. Number of licenses and permits to be issued.
§ 490-4. Taxicab operation; insurance requirements.
§ 490-5. License and permit required.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the Township,
and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so
operated, and no taxicab licensed by the Township shall be so operated at
any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first obtained
and shall have currently in force a taxicab driver's permit issued under the
A. Taxicab owner's licenses. The number of taxicab owner's licenses under
this section to be issued and outstanding in any one year shall not
exceed four.
B. Taxicab driver's permit. The holder of a taxicab owner's license under
this section shall be permitted to obtain a taxicab driver's permit for as
many drivers it deems necessary to the operation of the business.
A. No taxicab owner's license to operate a taxicab shall become effective
until the owner of the taxicab shall have filed with the Township Clerk
an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact business
under the insurance laws of this state. Such license shall become
effective, and operation thereunder shall be permitted, only so long as
said insurance policy shall remain in force in the amounts as aforesaid.
Said insurance policy shall remain in force in the amounts as aforesaid.
Said insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the taxicab or any fault in respect thereto and
shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury
as aforesaid.
B. The insurance policy must satisfy all claims for damages, by reason of
bodily injury to, or death of, any person(s), or damages to property
resulting from or on account of an accident by reason of the ownership,
operation, maintenance or use of such taxi upon any public street.
C. The insurance policy must provide the greater of:
(1) Not less than $35,000 of motor vehicle liability insurance coverage
or
(2) The amount required by N.J.S.A. 39:6B-1, maintenance of vehicle
liability insurance coverage.
§ 490-2 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 490-5
483:847
provisions of this chapter and the owner of said taxicab shall have first
obtained and shall have currently in force a taxicab owner's license.
§ 490-6. Application information for owner's license.
A. An application for a taxicab owner's license shall be filed with the Clerk
upon forms provided by the Township. Said application shall be verified
under oath and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and, where the applicant is
not a natural person, the name and address of all owners or
participants in the ownership of the legal entity and all officers,
directors or others of like position, whatever be their title. The
trade name of the business, if any.
(2) The year, type, model, plate number, serial number, and passenger
capacity (not including driver) of vehicle for which the license is
desired.
(3) Name, address of insurance company with minimum insurance
requirements and expiration date of policy.
(4) A certified and sworn statement that the applicant has never been
convicted in any state or a crime or a violation of this chapter or
any prior ordinance of the Township relating to taxicabs.
(5) Upon an initial application for a taxicab owners license, the
applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the Police Department of
the Township.
B. The annual application for renewal of taxicab owners license or to apply
for a new license shall be filed not later than 90 days prior to the
expiration date.
C. No taxicab owner's license shall be issued, unless the applicant
therefor:
(1) Is at least 18 years of age.
(2) Has been a resident of the State of New Jersey for at least one year.
(3) Has consented to a criminal background check and has not been
convicted of any of the following crimes:
(a) Aggravated assault.
(b) Arson.
(c) Burglary.
(d) Escape.
(e) Extortion.
(f) Homicide.
§ 490-5 UNION CODE § 490-6
483:848
§ 490-7. Duration of license and permit; fees.
§ 490-8. Sale or transfer restrictions.
(g) Kidnapping.
(h) Robbery.
(i) Aggravated sexual assault.
(j) Sexual assault.
(k) Endangering the-welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:24-4.
(l) Crime pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4
or 2C:39-9.
(m) Other than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons
offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled
dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.237
A. A taxicab owner's license shall be for a term of two years. A fee of
$1,000 shall accompany each application for an owner's license. In
addition, a fee of $50 shall accompany each application for each vehicle
operated as a taxicab.
B. A taxicab driver's permit shall be for a term of one year. A fee of $55
shall accompany each application for a driver's permit.
C. Additional fees shall apply for fingerprint and background checks and
will be due upon request of the police department.
A. No taxicab owner's license may be sold, assigned or otherwise
transferred without the consent of the Clerk. A license may be
transferred to another person to be used in the bona fide operation of a
taxicab business with the consent of the Clerk, upon the
recommendation of the Police Department, after the filing of an
application and upon payment of a transfer fee of $500, provided the
new license holder complies with the terms of this chapter. No transfer
may be made during the month of January.
B. No taxicab license shall be assigned, mortgaged, pledged or otherwise
hypothecated to secure a debt, loan, advance or the like, unless such
assignment, mortgage, pledge or other security arrangement is first
approved by the Clerk.
237. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, concerning license suspension, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 5235.
§ 490-6 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 490-9
483:849
§ 490-9. Driver's permit required.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the Township,
and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so
operated, and no taxicab licensed by the Township shall be so operated at
any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first obtained
and shall have currently in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 490-10. Permit not transferrable.
A taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid
for the taxicab owners license stated in the application and shall not be
transferrable to another taxicab owner's license.
§ 490-11. Permit prerequisites.
A. An application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be filed with the Clerk
upon forms provided by the Township. The application shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) Places of residence for the preceding five years.
(3) Age, height, color of eyes and color of hair.
(4) Place of birth.
(5) Marital status.
(6) Previous employment and employer.
(7) A statement made under oath that the applicant has not been
convicted of any of the crimes set forth below.
(8) Whether a driver's license issued by any state or municipality to
him has ever been suspended or revoked and for what cause.
(9) Satisfactory evidence that he has been the holder for at least one
year immediately prior to the date of application of a valid New
Jersey automobile driver's license.
(10) Driver's license number.
(11) Name of taxicab owners license to which permit will apply.
B. The application shall be accompanied by four passport-type
photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days of the application,
front view, size two inches by two inches.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of a licensed
physician of the State of New Jersey, dated within 60 days prior to the
filing of the application, stating that in his opinion the applicant is
§ 490-9 UNION CODE § 490-11
483:850
§ 490-12. Processing of applications for license and permit.
Upon filing of an application for a taxicab owner's license or a taxicab
driver's permit, the Clerk shall refer the same to the Police Department
which shall conduct an investigation thereof. The applicant's photograph
and fingerprints shall be forwarded to the Bureau of Records and
Identification in the Police Department. A report of such investigation and a
physically sound, with good eyesight and is not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might make him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
D. Upon an initial application for a taxi driver's license, the applicant shall
submit to fingerprinting by the Police Department of the Township.
E. Has consented to a criminal background check and has not been
convicted of any of the following crimes:
(1) Aggravated assault.
(2) Arson.
(3) Burglary.
(4) Escape.
(5) Extortion.
(6) Homicide.
(7) Kidnapping.
(8) Robbery.
(9) Aggravated sexual assault.
(10) Sexual assault.
(11) Endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4.
(12) Crime pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4 or
2C:39-9.
(13) Other than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense
for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous
substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
F. Has a current driver's license at the time of application and maintains a
valid license during the term of the permit. [Amended 3-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 5235]
G. The annual application for renewal of taxicab licenses or to apply for a
new license shall be filed not later than 90 days prior to the expiration
date.
§ 490-11 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 490-12
483:851
copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached
to the application and returned for the consideration of the Clerk.
§ 490-13. Issuance of license or permit.
If an application for a taxicab owners license or driver's permit meets the
requirements of this chapter, the Clerk shall issue the license or permit to
the applicant. The driver's permit shall bear the name, signature and recent
photograph of the applicant. The permit shall also contain the Township
permit number and bear the signature of the Clerk. The license shall contain
the Township permit number and bear the signature of the Clerk.
§ 490-14. Responsibility for operation of vehicle.
Every holder of a taxicab driver's permit shall be responsible for the
operation of the vehicle for which the license has been granted, regardless
of the legal relationship between such holder and the driver of said vehicle.
§ 490-15. Vehicle state inspection.
Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this
chapter, said vehicle must pass New Jersey State inspection, if applicable.
The Department of Police may also examine any and all such licensed
vehicles at any time. A report in writing of all such inspections shall be
made to the Clerk.
§ 490-16. Condition of vehicles. [Amended 3-13-2012 by Ord. No.
5235]
Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and the vehicle shall be free from body damage, rust and
the like.
§ 490-17. Vehicle identification and markings.
Every taxicab shall bear the following identification:
A. While a taxicab driver is operating a taxicab, his driver's license and
permit shall be displayed as provided in this chapter.
A. A card at least three inches in height by five inches in length, setting
forth in legible letters the name of the taxicab owner, the license
number of the vehicle and year of issue, which card shall be so affixed
as to be visible to any passenger within the taxicab.
B. The taxicab driver's permit issued by the Clerk shall be so affixed as to
be visible to any passenger within the taxicab.
C. Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each front door in painted
letters not less than three inches nor more than four inches in height, in
contrasting colors, the name of the owner, association of which the
owner is a member or registered trade name by which the owner
§ 490-12 UNION CODE § 490-17
483:852
§ 490-18. Fares.
The fares authorized to be charged to the public for the use of a taxicab
shall be reasonable and customary, and not excessive.
§ 490-19. Disputes.
§ 490-20. Seating requirements.
No person, other than the licensed driver of the taxicab, shall ride or sit
in the front seat of the taxicab, unless the rear seat is fully occupied by
passengers. This provision shall not apply to passengers who must sit in the
front seat for physical or health reasons.
§ 490-21. Renting of taxicabs.
conducts his business. The number assigned to each cab by the Clerk
shall be placed on each side of the taxicab and on the center of the rear
trunk deck lid. The numbers assigned by the Clerk shall run in sequence
and not be duplicated.
D. The name of the owner or corporate owner shall be painted in legible
letters two inches in height on the rear doors.
E. All taxicabs shall display on the body of the vehicle their taxi license
number along with each municipality that has issued a taxi license to
that taxicab. The information shall be no less than three inches in
height. The taxi license number must be located on the center rear
quarter panel on the driver and passenger sides as well as the rear
center line of the truck.
F. Each taxicab shall have one dominant color that is the same for all other
taxicabs operating under the same taxicab owner's license. [Added
3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 5235]
A. All disputes as to the fare charged may, upon request of the driver or
passenger, be determined by the police officer then in charge of the
police headquarters.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Fail to comply with a determination described in Subsection A of
this section; or
(2) Hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the person from whom it is
hired of the value of such service.
A. It shall not be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab to hire out or rent
such taxicab to a taxicab driver or any other person for use within the
Township for a stipulated sum over a specified period of time, provided
that:
§ 490-17 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 490-21
483:853
§ 490-22. Receiving and discharging passengers.
Taxicab drivers shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway
but shall pull their taxicabs as close as possible to the right-hand curb or,
in the absence of a curb, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and
there receive or discharge passengers. On one-way streets passengers may
be discharged at either the right- or left-hand curb or side of the roadway
where no curb exists.
§ 490-23. Restricted occupancy.
§ 490-24. Refusal to carry persons upon request.
No driver shall refuse or neglect to carry any orderly person or persons,
upon request, to the destination requested, unless the driver is previously
engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.
§ 490-25. Advertising on vehicles.
Subject to such regulations as may be promulgated by the Township
Committee, it shall be lawful for any taxicab licensee to permit advertising
matter to be affixed and installed in taxicabs licensed under this code. Such
advertising matter shall be of a dignified nature and shall not be lewd,
lascivious or obscene, and the copy thereof shall, before being affixed to the
taxicab, be approved by the Township Clerk.
(1) Said lessee is licensed by the Township to drive a taxicab upon the
streets of the Township.
(2) The owner files with the Clerk a certificate of insurance that the
operators and drivers of such taxicabs are covered by worker's
compensation insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of
New Jersey. The period of insurance coverage, as evidenced by said
certificate, shall be concurrent with the term of the license.
B. No holder of a taxicab license or driver of a taxicab shall knowingly
permit his taxicab to be used for any illegal or immoral purpose.
A. No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride said taxicab,
unless the person or persons first employing the taxicab shall consent
to the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers.
B. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger, except when the
additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's
destination.
C. Unless otherwise permitted by the Clerk, no driver shall permit more
than four persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers. A child
under six years of age shall not be counted as a passenger for the
purposes of this subsection.
§ 490-21 UNION CODE § 490-26
483:854
§ 490-26. Lost property; disposition.
At the termination of each trip, the driver of a taxicab shall thoroughly
search the interior of such taxicab for any property lost or left therein by a
passenger. Such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner,
must be reported in writing by the driver or holder to the Police Department
with brief particulars and description within 24 hours after the same has
been found.
§ 490-27. Responsibility of owners.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a licensed taxicab to
permit such taxicab to be operated by any person who does not hold a valid
taxicab driver's permit as required by this chapter.
§ 490-28. Daily records; available for inspection.
§ 490-29. Taxi stands.238
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B hereof, the holder of a
taxicab owner's license shall require each driver to maintain, and the
driver of each taxicab shall maintain, a daily record upon which all trips
shall be recorded. The daily record shall show the taxicab number,
license number of the driver, specific hours of duty, time and place of
origin and destination of each trip and the amount of fare received for
each trip. All such records shall be furnished to the holder of the license
and shall be retained by him for one year. The holder shall be
responsible for the maintenance of daily records of all taxicabs
operated by him.
B. In the event that one or more taxicabs are dispatched by radio from a
central location, the records required by Subsection A hereof shall be
maintained at said central location.
C. Every holder shall record in a book, maintained solely for such purpose,
the time of departure from the garage of every licensed taxicab; the
name, address and license number of the driver thereof; the license
number of the taxicab and the time of the taxicab's return to the
garage.
D. All records required by this section shall be open to inspection by
representatives of the Police Department.
A. All such stands shall be used by taxicab drivers on a first-come-firstserved
basis. The Administrator may prescribe the maximum number of
taxis which may occupy any one stand at any one time.
B. Taxi stands are limited to use by a taxicab occupied by a driver.
238. Editor's Note: As to specific provisions relating to taxi stands, see Ch. 266, Vehicles and
Traffic.
§ 490-26 SUMP PITS AND PUMPS § 490-30
483:855
§ 490-30. Suspension or revocation.
Any taxicab owner's license or permit, for proper cause, maybe suspended
or revoked upon the filing and serving of charges and after a due process
hearing held thereon. Said suspension may be immediate, if determined by
the Police Department to be an emergency affecting the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township, but in such case, the license holder
or permit holder shall be entitled to a hearing within five business days
before the Township Committee.
§ 490-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be, upon conviction thereof, punished by one or more of the
following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by
the municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding
90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of
this section. In addition thereto, the license or licenses authorized by this
chapter shall be suspended pending action by the Township Committee with
respect to the suspension or revocation thereof in accordance with § 490-30
hereof.
Chapter 494
TELEPHONES, PUBLIC
§ 494-1. Permit required; application.
No person may place or maintain any outdoor telephone on or above any
public street or sidewalk without having first obtained a permit as provided
in this chapter. Permits shall be issued subject to the approval of the
location and means of installation of the telephone by the Construction Code
Official of the Township of Union. Before installation, a plan or sketch of
the telephone shall be furnished in sufficient detail to describe the size,
location, equipment and means of installation and cabling. The Township of
Union shall be notified before the removal of any telephone before receiving
a permit.
§ 494-2. Fees. [Amended 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
The initial fee for a permit shall be $325 for each telephone. The annual
renewal fee shall be $200 for each telephone.
§ 494-3. Removal or relocation of telephones.
The Township of Union shall be informed of the intent of any person to
remove or relocate a telephone.
§ 490-30 UNION CODE § 494-4
494:856
§ 494-4. Regulation of telephones contributing to illegal or illicit
activities.
The Township of Union may reject any permit application or require the
removal of an existing outdoor public telephone if the public telephone has
the potential to or has demonstrated a propensity to create or contribute
to illegal or illicit activities or otherwise interfere with free passage of
pedestrians and the rights of the public.
§ 494-5. Exemption from fees. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
4245]
No fees shall be charged for telephones furnished by the Township of Union
as an accommodation to the public or for permits issued to any person or
entity who or which pays a franchise fee or tax for use of public facilities.
Such person or entity shall not, however, be exempt from the regulatory
provisions of the Municipal Code.
§ 494-6. Installation and maintenance standards.
A. Any telephone installation subject to this chapter shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) No booth surrounding a telephone shall exceed eight feet in height,
four feet in width or four feet in thickness.
(2) Each telephone shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund
if a call cannot be placed. The coin mechanism shall be maintained
in good working order.
(3) Each telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to
everyone using the telephone, the name and address of the
distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone
service to report a malfunction, secure a refund or give the notices
provided for in this chapter.
(4) Telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, a telephone shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon.
(c) Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably
free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discolorations.
(d) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading.
§ 494-4 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 494-6
494:857
§ 494-7. Calls permitted without charge; rate information to be
provided.
§ 494-8. Location and placement of telephones.
§ 494-9. Applicability to existing telephones.
The owners of existing public telephones shall apply for the permit required
hereunder within 30 days from the date this chapter becomes final. The
Township of Union reserves the right to reject any and all locations
submitted for approval based upon their existing conformance to this
chapter.
(e) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly
misshapen.
(f) The telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
B. Any person who fails to maintain a telephone in working condition may
be given a ten-day notice by the Township of Union to repair the
telephone.
C. Each telephone shall, upon the written request of the Chief of Police, be
capable of being restricted to outgoing calls only within 10 days of the
request.239
A. Telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without charge:
(1) Calls to the 911 emergency number.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police
and Fire Departments.
B. Current telephone rates for a local coin call shall be posted on the
telephone or on the telephone booth if applicable.
C. Toll rate quotations must be available for the operator upon request.
A. No telephone shall be installed in a residential zone.
B. No telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property.
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles.
C. Telephones shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent their
being blown down or around the public street or sidewalk but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants or mailboxes.
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 494-6 UNION CODE § 494-10
494:858
§ 494-10. Violation and penalties. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
4245240]
Violators will have 30 days to remove pay telephones that do not have
permits, or the Township shall have the pay telephone removed, and the
violators shall pay for all removal and storage costs. Any violation of this
chapter shall also subject the violator to one or more of the following: a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each
noncomplying pay telephone violation will constitute a separate violation.
Each day of said violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 494-11. Enforcement authority. [Added 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
4245]
The Township Clerk's office shall notify the Deputy Chief of the Police
Department of the location of any pay telephone which does not comply
with the provisions of this chapter. The Police Department shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 499
THEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of amusements and
entertainment — See Ch. 164, Art. II.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 216.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 285.
§ 499-1. Definitions.
A. Terms defined. As used or referred to in this chapter, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, corporation or association of
persons, their agents, servants or employees.
THEATER — Includes any place, whether indoors or outdoors, devoted
to public amusement wherein dramatic, operatic, vaudeville, motionpicture
exhibitions or other like forms of amusement are provided for
public entertainment.
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular, or the male gender shall include the female, each as the case
may be.
240. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 494-10 THEATERS § 499-2
499:859
§ 499-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a theater without having first
obtained a license therefor.
§ 499-3. Applications for licenses.
§ 499-4. Investigation.
The Township Clerk shall transmit one copy of such application to the Chief
of Police of the Township, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant and report thereon to the Township Committee. No license shall
be issued to any applicant who shall have been convicted of a crime.
§ 499-5. Certificate of approval.
The applicant shall also present with his application a certificate of approval
of the Chief of the Fire Department of the Township, showing that the
building complies with all laws of the State of New Jersey and all local
ordinances pertaining to fire or safety.
§ 499-6. Issuance of license.
The license hereby required shall be issued by the Township Clerk upon the
direction of the Township Committee.
§ 499-7. Annual license fee; transfers. [Amended 11-25-1975 by
Ord. No. 3046; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997; 12-14-1993 by Ord.
No. 4282; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
The annual license fee for each such license for an indoor theater of not
more than 400 seats shall be $950. For an indoor theater of more than 400
seats, the annual license fee shall be $1,250. Each such fee shall be payable
on or before January 1 in each year. No license shall be issued until said fee
has been paid. In the event that said license shall be revoked, no part of said
license fee shall be returned to the licensee. Each such license shall expire
on December 31 of each year, and such license may be renewed from year to
year upon the filing of an application for renewal filed in the same manner
as the application for an original license. No license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be transferred by the holder thereof without the approval of
the Township Committee.
A. All applications for licenses shall be in writing and filed in triplicate
with the Township Clerk to whom shall be paid the required fee.
B. Such application shall be signed and sworn to be each individual
applicant and, if applicant is a corporation, by all principal officers,
before an officer authorized by the laws of New Jersey to administer an
oath.
§ 499-2 UNION CODE § 499-8
499:860
§ 499-8. Hours of operation permitted. [Amended 7-12-1977 by Ord.
No. 3219]
§ 499-9. Exits, passageways; aisles; fire escapes.
The exits and exit doors of each theater shall open directly from the
exhibition hall on to a street, alley or public parking area. All aisles shall
lead directly to exits. No aisle or passageway shall be less than three feet
in width, and all aisles and passageways in said theaters shall be kept free
from obstructions, and no person other than an employee of the licensed
premises, a policeman or fireman shall stand in or occupy any of said
aisles or passageways during any performance, exhibition or any public
assemblage. The booth enclosing the projection machine shall rest upon
a balcony. The theaters shall be provided with fire escapes placed as and
where directed by the Construction Code Official and Chief of the Fire
Department; provided, however, that where the entire seating capacity of
such theater shall be maintained on the ground floor of any building, no
balcony or fire escape shall be required. In the instance of an outdoor
theater, it shall not be necessary to install fire escapes, nor shall a balcony
be required for the booth; provided, however, that it is required that the
booth of such outdoor theater be enclosed, and no exits as herein set forth
shall be required.
§ 499-10. Operating regulations.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter for an indoor
theater shall not be deemed to permit the operation in or on the
licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. or
before 1:00 p.m. on Sundays.
B. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter for an open-air
automobile drive-in theater shall not be deemed to permit the operation
in or on the licensed premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00
a.m. or before 1:00 p.m. on Sundays.
A. All licensees shall operate theater premises according to local and state
regulations, which may now or which may hereafter be promulgated,
and every such theater shall have sufficient attendants to facilitate
entrance and exit of persons and cars from and to the theater and
parking area and adjoining public roads, and to keep order and prevent
panic in case of emergency.
B. In the operation of said theater, the owner or operator shall provide and
enforce such rules and regulations as are necessary to keep order,
ensure against unnecessary noise and all forms of disorderly conduct
and shall remove promptly from the premises persons who are
disorderly. Blowing of car horns or other noise devices shall be
prohibited.
C. Sufficient fire prevention equipment as determined by the Chief of the
Fire Department shall be provided at all times during performances at
§ 499-8 THEATERS § 499-10
499:861
§ 499-11. Smoking.241
No smoking shall be permitted in any enclosed theater during hours in
which motion-pictures or theatrical productions are being shown or
conducted.
§ 499-12. Inspections.
Any state or municipal officer, police officer or fireman may enter any
theater at any time for the purpose of inspection to enforce obedience of
the laws of the State of New Jersey and the ordinances of the Township of
Union.
§ 499-13. Adequate lighting required.
Every portion of a theater, including exits and corridors, devoted to the
public use or the accommodation of the public shall be adequately lighted.
§ 499-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998242]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, to become effective on the effective date of this section.
Chapter 505
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
Gasoline and automobile service
stations — See Ch. 298.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 523.
the theater as is necessary to control and extinguish fires occurring
upon the theater premises.
D. All driveways and all exterior lights must be approved by the Township
Engineer.
241. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 450, Smoking; Tobacco Products.
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 499-10 UNION CODE § 505-1
499:862
§ 505-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards, regulations and rates
for police-requested towing and storage services requiring a response
thereto by the licensees. It is the further purpose of this chapter to regulate
these services from both a public safety perspective that would result in
the quickest response time in good and bad weather, thereby minimizing
waiting time both for police officers on scene and the removal of motor
vehicle cars from the roadway as a result of an accident and from an
administrative perspective to ensure compliance with the requirements and
specifications of this chapter.
§ 505-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — The operation of a tow truck in and upon a roadway within the
Township of Union to solicit vehicle towing and/or storage business except
in response to a police request.
DRIVER — The person operating the tow truck for the licensee.
HEAVY DUTY — A tow truck with dual wheels, capable of towing large
trucks and shall meet the following minimum requirements: gross vehicle
weight (GVW): 30,000 pounds/gross combination weight rating (GCWR):
80,000 pounds/boom rating: 50,000 pounds/winch rating: 50,000 pounds/
cable size and length: 5/8 inch and 200 feet/equipped with chassis lift/
under-reach: retracted rating 30,000 pounds and extended rating 15,000
pounds.
INSIDE BUILDING — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the wall, for storage and removal of vehicles
and that is secured by a locking device on each opening. An inside building
shall not include a trailer or container storage.[Added 9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 4892]
LEASE — A vehicle may be leased by the towing company. If the registration
is such that the lessee is not listed, the licensee will be required to show
a lease agreement and insurance naming both the licensee and lessor on
the same policy as the other vehicles used by the licensee. In addition, the
licensee's name and address must be affixed on actual vehicle.[Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 5121]
LICENSE — The document approved and issued by the Township of Union
granting the privilege to tow and store vehicles and perform other towing
operations for the Township of Union.
LICENSEE — A towing operator having a license granted by the Township
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
LIGHT DUTY — A car carrier of the rollback and tilt type, with dual
wheels, capable of removing and transporting passenger cars damage-free
and shall meet the following minimum requirements: GVW: 14,500 pounds/
§ 505-1 THEATERS § 505-2
499:863
GCWR: 13,500 pounds/winch rating: 8,000 pounds/cable size and length: 3/
8 inch and 50 inch/bed length: 19 feet/wheel lift - retracted rating: 3,500
pounds and extended rating: 1,500 pounds.[Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 5103]
MEDIUM DUTY — A tow truck with dual wheels, capable of towing small
trucks and shall meet the following minimum requirements: GVW: 18,000
pounds/GCWR: 30,000 pounds/boom rating: -24,000 pounds/winch rating:
30,000 pounds/cable size and length: 7/16 inch and 200 feet/wheel lift
rating: 9,000 pounds and extended rating: 6,500 pounds.[Amended
6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
OUTDOOR SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, that is at least
six feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or other on-site
security measures.[Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 4892]
OWNER — An individual or entity who or which owns or leases, and/or
operates, parks or abandons a vehicle within the Township.
POLICE — The Police Department of the Township of Union or of any
jurisdiction having authority in the subject matter.
PRINCIPAL LOCATION — The business office of an applicant/licensee,
where licensee shall conduct business associated with the towing and
storage of vehicles under authority of the towing license issued by the
Township of Union.
RESPONSE TIME — The time from when the police call the licensee and
then until the licensee arrives at the location to service the vehicle.
ROUTINE CALLS FOR SERVICE — A police request for road service of a
disabled vehicle, i.e., dead batteries, flat tires, out of gas or other services
that do not require towing.
TEMPORARY LICENSE — A towing license, authorized by the Chief of
Police, and issued by the Township of Union for the purpose of replacing
a current licensee, whether that replacement be due to the closing of the
business or the revocation of the licensee's towing license for a violation of
this chapter. This license is for emergency situations only, and the cost will
be prorated on a monthly basis.
TOWING OPERATOR — An individual or entity engaged in the business of
providing towing and storage services.
TOWING SERVICES — The towing service and/or on-site vehicle repair of
the following: tire changes, jump starts or jump starts (optional) rendered
by a towing operator.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway or street.
WAITING TIME — The time a licensee has equipment and personnel waiting
at a scene to perform a towing operation.
§ 505-2 UNION CODE § 505-2
499:864
WINCHING CABLE FEE — A one-time fee charged when a vehicle has
left the roadway, overturned or become embedded, attached, or hitched
to another vehicle, tree, pole, guardrail or other fixed object.[Added
6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
§ 505-3. License required.
§ 505-4. Term of license. [Amended 3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 4938]
Licenses to tow shall be issued for three calendar years commencing
January 1, 2007. Three calendar years shall be referred throughout this
chapter as a license period.
§ 505-5. Application for license; awarding of contracts.
A. No police-requested towing shall operate within the Township of Union
for police-requested towing services and/or storage services unless the
towing operator has obtained a license issued by the Township.
B. Exemptions.
(1) Owner-requested service. No license shall be required for the onsite
repair and/or towing or storage of any vehicle when the
request therefor is received by the towing operator from the owner
or the owner's agent prior to a police request therefor.
(2) Towing from private property. No license shall be required by the
police to tow any vehicle from private property without the consent
of the owner and private property owner except on the express
instruction of the police in the event of an emergency.
A. Form; required information. An application for a license shall be in
writing, typed, signed by the applicant on the form furnished by the
Township, and shall contain all information necessary to evidence the
applicant's identity and legal address, compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and ability to perform the towing services
and storage services contemplated by this chapter. If a partnership,
corporation, LLC or any other entity, the application shall set forth the
names and addresses of all officers, trustees, directors, together with
the names, addresses, social security numbers and dates of birth of all
persons holding more than a 10% interest. The application shall also
contain the names of all tow truck drivers, his or her address, dates of
birth, social security numbers and driver's license numbers. For both
the applicant and tow truck drivers, each state shall whether or not he
or she has ever been convicted of an offense. If he or she has been
convicted of an offense, such offense shall be described on the
application.
B. Filing. Applications in duplicate shall be filed between August 1 and
August 15 with the Township Clerk, together with the application fee
§ 505-2 THEATERS § 505-5
499:865
§ 505-6. Review of application.
[Amended 12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 4702; 3-14-2006 by Ord. No.
4938]
C. Any contracts awarded as a result of the original Chapter 505
ordinance243 are hereby set aside after any new contracts are awarded
pursuant to § 505-6B. In the meantime, any contracts that are currently
in place shall then be otherwise set aside in accordance with a certain
terms of stipulation of settlement filed on September 21, 2001, in the
case of Colonial Towing Services v. Township of Union, et al., under
docket number UNN-L-2335-01, venued in the Superior Court of New
Jersey, Union Vicinage, Law Division. [Added 12-27-2001 by Ord. No.
4702]
A. Reference to Chief of Police. Applications received by the Township
Clerk shall be referred within two business days to the Chief of Police
for his review, along with a copy to the Township Attorney and the
Business Administrator. [Amended 12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 4702;
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
B. Inspection; recommendations; disputes. [Amended 12-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 4702]
(1) After such examination of the applications and such inspections as
the Chief of Police, the Township Attorney and the Business
Administrator may consider necessary to evaluate the applicant's
compliance with and ability to continue to comply with the
requirements of this section, the applications shall be returned to
the Township Clerk with the recommended approval or disapproval
of each application by the these individuals based upon his
examinations, inspections and evaluations.
(2) Should a dispute arise regarding the rejection or acceptance of any
tower under the ordinance244 for the first year, the designated court
auditor(s) shall report the results of any audit to the court. Any
costs of the appointed auditor shall be borne by the Township of
Union. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
C. Applicants and licensees shall cooperate with any and all investigations
conducted by the Chief of Police or his designee or other law
enforcement agency working in conjunction with the Township Police.
The requirement of cooperation shall continue throughout the period of
application and the duration of the license and the storage of vehicles
(even if a license is no longer in effect). A license may be denied for
fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application, or
having an owner, officer, director and/or driver been convicted of a
243. Editor's Note: The original Ch. 505 ordinance refers to Ord. No. 4663, adopted
11-13-2000.
244. Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 4702.
§ 505-5 UNION CODE § 505-6
499:866
§ 505-7. Issuance of licenses.
§ 505-8. Application and license. [Amended 3-14-2006 by Ord. No.
4938; 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
The following schedule of nonrefundable fees is adopted for the obtaining
of a towing license:
§ 505-9. Suspension or revocation; temporary licenses.
crime involving moral turpitude within 10 years or any other crime
within 10 years.
D. The Chief of Police may contact any law enforcement agency where the
applicant has previously performed any service on a regular basis to
verify the basis of any complaint or investigation within the prior
license period.
E. Visual on-site inspections of the premises and equipment shall be made
and approved prior to the Chief of Police or his designee's
recommendations.
A. Authorization. The Township Committee shall at a public meeting by
resolution authorize the issuance of a license to those who satisfy the
requirements of this chapter, after consideration of the applications and
the recommendations of the Chief of Police, the Township Attorney and
the Business Administrator. Minor irregularities in the application may
be waived by the Township Committee. [Amended 12-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 4702]
B. Licenses shall be reevaluated every three years, and each applicant
who was a licensee during the prior license period must have
substantially complied with the response times set forth under this
chapter for which it was licensed within the Township of Union. If the
Chief of Police or his designee has advised the licensee that his or her
response times do not materially conform with the best interests of the
Township as specified herein, then the Chief of Police may make a
recommendation to the Township Committee that the licensee has not
been responsible so as to deem the licensee unsuitable as a licensee
during the following license period. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
5103]
C. Issuance. The authorized license or licenses shall be issued by the
Township Clerk in writing upon payment by the towing operator of the
license fee specified in § 505-8.
A. Application fee: $500 by certified or bank check with application.
B. License fee: $3,000 by certified or bank check due and payable upon
the granting of the license.
A. General.
§ 505-6 THEATERS § 505-9
499:867
(1) The Township Committee shall have the right to suspend or revoke
any license issued under this chapter for good cause upon written
complaint of the Chief of Police following his determination that
there is probable cause for suspension or revocation based upon
violation of this chapter.
(2) A license may be denied, suspended or revoked for material and
willful fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the course of
conducting the towing operation, for violation of this chapter, or for
the conviction of the applicant, its officers or a person or entity
holding a 10% or larger interest in the applicant of a crime
involving moral turpitude or relating to the towing business or for
any other crime. A license may also be denied if the applicant has
had a towing license or contract revoked while working for any
other municipal, county or state agency and due to his or her
inability to meet response times or other conduct as specified in
this section. Such revocation shall have occurred within a twelvemonth
period prior to making application to the Township of Union.
(3) Written notice of such complaint and the basis of the complaint
shall be given to the licensee who shall be entitled to a hearing
within 20 business days before the Township Committee prior to
final determination of the complaint by the Township Committee,
provided that the licensee requests the review in writing and
serves it on the Township Clerk and the Chief of Police within three
business days of being served with the notice from the Chief of
Police. If, after the hearing, a majority of the members of the
Township Committee present and voting decide that there has been
a violation, they may terminate or suspend the license.
B. Emergency suspension. A license may be suspended by the Chief of
Police whenever the Chief in his reasonable judgment considers such
suspension necessary for reasons of safety, or has reason to believe that
the licensee is not covered by the insurance required. Such suspension
shall continue until terminated by the Chief, provided that if the
suspension is not terminated within three business days the Chief shall
file a complaint for suspension or revocation, and the suspension shall
remain in effect pending a determination of the complaint.
C. Temporary license.
(1) In the event of an emergency suspension or other failure of the
licensee to perform its duties under this chapter, the Chief of Police
may issue a temporary license to a towing operator to operate
during any licensee's failure to perform, should the replacement of
said licensee be deemed necessary. The issuance of a temporary
license shall be reported to the Township Committee immediately
upon issuance.
(2) Temporary licenses may be issued for a thirty-day period, which
may be extended for five additional thirty-day periods.
§ 505-9 UNION CODE § 505-9
499:868
§ 505-10. Equipment.
D. Temporary suspension. Any tower shall be suspended for five days if he
or she fails to respond to a request by the Township of Union Police
Department to tow a vehicle.
A. Required equipment. A towing operator, when filing an application for
and at all times while holding a license under this chapter, shall own or
lease for use in performing the services required by the license the
following items of equipment:
(1) A total of five light duty wreckers or flatbeds, both types to be
equipped with wheel lift.
(2) One medium duty wrecker with wheel lift.
(3) Two heavy duty wreckers with wheel lifts.
(4) The above-mentioned equipment classes (light / medium / heavy)
must meet or exceed the standards as stated herein).
(5) Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include:
(a) Slim-Jim lock tool.
(b) "J" hooks and chains or tie-downs.
(c) Snatch block.
(d) Two high-test safety chains.
(e) Auxiliary safety light kit (to be placed on rear of towed vehicle
that does not have functioning taillight flashers).
(f) Rotating amber emergency lights mounted on top of truck
(state-issued permit required, and must be in truck). If the tow
operator has any towing equipment with red rotating light bar,
then that vehicle will not be deemed acceptable for use in the
Township and may not be utilized when determining the
required equipment for licensee.
(g) Two white work lights facing the rear of vehicle.
(h) Two safety cones with reflective strip (minimum height 18
inches).
(i) One shovel.
(j) One broom.
(k) Steering wheel tie down.
(l) Two-way communication system, radio or cellular, with
communication between the licensee's base and all of the
required trucks and from truck to truck.
§ 505-9 THEATERS § 505-10
499:869
§ 505-11. Storage and garage facilities.
(m) Jumper cables or jump box.
(n) Toolbox with assorted hand tools.
B. Additionally required equipment. Proof from vehicle and equipment
manufacturer detailing specifications of requested equipment is
required.
C. Tow truck lettering. All tow trucks operated by the licensee shall be
permanently lettered on both sides in accordance with New Jersey
Statute, Title 39 (newly purchased vehicles will be allowed a four-week
grace period, during which time a pair of magnetic signs shall be used).
D. Required communication. Licensee shall maintain a twenty-four-hour
phone number which is manned by the licensee's personnel. Such
personnel must have constant two-way communication, radio or
cellular, with the licensee's vehicles. Phone calls may not be forwarded
from the principal business location to a residence during nighttime
hours.
A. All storage and garage facilities are to be used exclusively by the
licensee.
B. Inside building secured storage. Each licensee shall have an inside
building secured storage space sufficient to accommodate the capacity
to store at least three vehicles for exclusive use of the Police
Department in connection with vehicles being held as evidence or
under investigation. Inside building secured storage must be within two
miles by radius, of the Township of Union Police Department, located at
981 Caldwell Avenue, Union, or located within the established
boundaries of the Township of Union. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 4892; 3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 4938; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
4982]
C. The inside building storage space shall be capable of being locked/
safeguarded against access by unauthorized person(s), employee(s).
D. Outside secured storage. Each licensee shall have an outside secured
storage area to accommodate the capacity to store 150 vehicles at any
one time dedicated to the storage of vehicles towed from the Township
of Union. The facility is to be lighted at night. Outside secured storage
must be within two miles, by radius, of the Township of Union Police
Department, located at 981 Caldwell Avenue, Union, or located within
the established boundaries of the Township of Union. [Amended
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 4892; 3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 4938;
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4982]
E. Equipment facility. Each licensee shall have an area and facility
adequate for the storage and servicing of the required equipment
specified when not in use. Such equipment facility must be within two
§ 505-10 UNION CODE § 505-11
499:870
miles, by radius, of the Township of Union Police Department, located
at 981 Caldwell Avenue, Union, or located within the established
boundaries of the Township of Union. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 4982]
F. Location; hours; condition. The required storage and equipment
facilities shall be as follows:
(1) Principal location must be within two miles, by radius, of the
Township of Union Police Department, located at 981 Caldwell
Avenue, Union, or located within the established boundaries of the
Township of Union. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4982]
(2) Outside secured storage facility (120-vehicle capacity) and inside
building secured facility (three-vehicle capacity) must be within
two miles, by radius, of the Township of Union Police Department,
located at 981 Caldwell Avenue, Union, or located within the
established boundaries of the Township of Union. [Amended
3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 4938; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4982;
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 5619]
(3) The hours of recovery of vehicles from storage shall be no less than
Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and Saturday or
Sunday, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, and also made available at
Township Police Headquarters for an additional charge. The vehicle
shall be made available by the licensee immediately upon an
emergency request by the Police Department. Facilities shall be
kept clean and in good order to accommodate persons who may
enter facilities with respect to any vehicles stored therein. The
principal location, in addition to the above-mentioned items, shall
have adequate rest room facilities, with running water, that are
clean and in good working order available to persons who may
enter the facility with respect to any vehicle towed by the licensee.
There shall be a waiting area sufficient to accommodate at least
four people who can sit, in the event said individual must wait for
retrieval of his or her automobile. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 4892]
G. Unsecured outside storage. No unsecured storage area of any kind will
be permitted for use by any licensee for storage of any vehicle towed
under the license.
H. The radius for the purpose of this section shall be determined by the
Township Engineer. [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 4892]
I. The minimum storage space required for any one vehicle shall be no
less than 162 square feet. [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 4892] 245
245. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, which required that the minimum inside and outside
storage requirements were for the exclusive use of the Township, added 9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 4892, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-14-2006 by Ord. No.
4938.
§ 505-11 THEATERS § 505-12
499:871
§ 505-12. Continued compliance.
Licensee shall at all times maintain the equipment and storage and garage
facilities required by this chapter throughout the term of the license period.
Failure to maintain the required equipment and storage and garage
facilities throughout the license period may subject the licensee to a
suspension or revocation in accordance with § 505-9. The Police Chief or
his designee may from time to time inspect the licensee's equipment and
storage and garage facilities to ensure continued compliance with this
chapter throughout the license period.
§ 505-13. Licensee's personnel.
A. All tow truck drivers must have an appropriate, valid New Jersey
driver's license with no restrictions or conditional endorsements,
except conditions requiring glasses. Each driver/employee shall be of
good moral character, mentally alert and present a neat appearance at
all times. Drivers and employees shall behave in a professional and
courteous manner at all times when dealing with the Police Department
and the public. Possession of a commercial license with appropriate
endorsements, when required by law, shall be a minimum mandatory
requirement of this chapter.
B. Light and medium duty drivers must obtain Level 1 driver certification
from a tow truck operators training course within six months of the
licensee obtaining a license to tow in Union. New hires must obtain
certification within nine months from start of employment.
C. Heavy duty drivers must obtain Level 2 driver certification from a tow
truck operators training course within six months of the licensee
obtaining a license to tow in Union. New hires must obtain certification
within nine months from start of employment. Heavy duty drivers must
have CDL endorsement on their license. [Amended 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 4892]
D. A heavy duty recovery supervisor must obtain Level 3 driver
certification from a tow truck operators training course (within nine
months of availability) and/or have training from an industry recognized
recovery course. On the recovery scene, not all personnel need to be
recovery qualified, but a responsible recovery supervisor must have the
listed requirements.
E. At the time of the application or at any time a new tow truck driver is
assigned, the licensee shall submit to the Township Clerk the name,
driver's license number, social security number and date of birth of the
tow truck driver prior to the driver's operation of any tow truck
pursuant to a Police Department request.
F. No licensee shall employ directly or indirectly nor any party owning
10% or more of the licensee shall employ any officers of the Police
§ 505-12 UNION CODE § 505-13
499:872
§ 505-14. Towing and storage services.
Towing and storage services shall be governed by the following provisions:
Department, nor shall they employ directly or indirectly any member of
the Township Committee and/or his/her immediate family.
G. No licensee shall knowingly purchase equipment or services from any
business which is owned or controlled by any person who resides in the
same household as an officer of the Police Department and/or member
of the Township Committee.
A. The schedule when a licensee will be on duty will be set by the Police
Department's Administration Bureau and approved by the Chief of
Police for a period of one month. The period shall be no less than one
month and not more than two continuous months. The schedule will
provide for the rotation of all licensed towers. Towers will be
responsible to have equipment available 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, while on rotation.
B. Licensee shall respond to all police requests for towing and/or road
service, when requested by a police dispatcher or any other police
officer expressly authorized to communicate such a request. Licensee
will respond with the number of tow trucks requested to the scene
within a reasonable time. Such reasonable time shall be deemed to be
16 minutes under in normal atmospheric conditions and within 30
minutes in inclement weather. This may be extended in emergency
situations, such as floods or blizzards.
C. If a licensee is wholly or partially unable to respond due to failure of any
equipment or personnel insufficiencies, the licensee will immediately
notify the Police Department who will contact the next towing company
in the rotation to handle the request. If such an incident occurs, the
licensee will furnish, in writing, within five business days, the details of
the circumstances which caused the failure to respond to the Police
Department's Administration Bureau which will make a determination
if a follow-up investigation and/or inspection of the licensee's facility is
required.
D. Tow trucks of a licensee shall not cruise roadways within the Township
for business and shall not respond to any scene where towing may be
required except upon request of the Township Police Department or any
other Police Department.
E. No rotating or flashing lights or sirens shall be used on a tow truck
except as permitted by New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles
(DMV)/Department of Transportation (DOT) (N.J.S.A. 39:3-50), and all
vehicles operated by the licensee shall have a current permit for said
lights issued by the DOT along with all other required vehicle
documents. Unless specifically licensed to have red rotating and
§ 505-13 THEATERS § 505-14
499:873
flashing lights, any vehicle so equipped will not be considered for use
in the Township of Union.
F. All tow trucks shall be operated in accordance with all existing traffic
regulations and in a safe and prudent manner. Tow truck drivers will
request police assistance when they find it necessary to turn around,
back up, tow in a direction opposite the flow of traffic, cross a median or
other hazardous situation during the course of providing service or
towing.
G. Each licensee will be responsible for all vehicles and visible contents in
their custody that are towed off the roads under direction of the police
and shall assist officers in making an inventory at the scene to note such
contents of each vehicle.
H. No vehicle will be removed from any roadway within the Township
without proper authorization from the police at the scene, or the vehicle
owner or operator as the case may be.
I. No licensee shall be required to tow to an area further than the licensed
storage area between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless said
licensee agrees to tow farther. If licensee agrees to tow farther than the
licensed storage area between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., he/she will only
do so if adequate towing coverage will be available to the Township.
J. The investigating officer and/or supervisor at the incident scene is in
complete charge of the incident scene (excluding actual towing
operations), and all tow truck drivers shall comply with the officer/
supervisor's instructions.
K. Each licensee, prior to departing from the scene of towing services,
shall be required to clean and clear the roadway of any nonhazardous
debris resulting from any accident at such scene when rendering
towing services, and at all times carry the necessary equipment to
perform such cleaning services. Such equipment shall minimally
include, but is not limited to, a broom and shovel. The licensee may
charge the owner or his insurance company for the services rendered.
L. In the event a licensee refuses to tow or render services at the scene of
an accident or disabled vehicle (except when a heavy duty tow truck is
required) when requested by the police or vehicle owner/operator, the
officer assigned to the incident shall report the refusal to his supervisor
with all pertinent details.
M. Each licensee shall be required to keep up-to-date records of all
vehicles towed in conjunction with this license. Each licensee shall
provide the Township Police Administration Bureau with a list of all
vehicles towed by order of the police (impounded) that remain
unclaimed in storage every Friday by 12:00 noon.
§ 505-14 UNION CODE § 505-14
499:874
§ 505-15. Towing and storage charges.
Towing and storage charges shall be paid by the owner of a vehicle towed
and/or stored by a licensee at police request, and pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.49, such charges shall be as follows:
N. Vehicles impounded or confiscated by the police and stored by the
licensee shall not be released by the licensee without written
authorization by the Police Department.
A. Towing services. The following is the fee schedule for towing services:
(1) Daytime. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4982; 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 5103]
Light Duty
Medium
Duty Heavy Duty
First two miles or less
(wrecker)
$55 $75 $400*
First two miles or less
(flatbed)
$75 $85 N/A
Each additional mile
or any portion thereof
$2.50 $4.50
*NOTE: Per hour or fraction thereof.
(2) No towing operator will be required to tow any vehicle in excess of
the towing area.
(3) Daytime fee will be applied as follows:
(a) Basic tow: daytime fees apply between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, except New Jersey state holidays.
(b) Accident tow: daytime fees apply between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30
p.m., Monday through Friday except New Jersey state
holidays.
(4) Nights, weekends, and New Jersey state holidays. There shall be an
additional surcharge per tow of $10 in addition to daytime rates.
(5) A "release fee" of $10 shall be paid by the owner or agent to the
Union Police Department at the time he or she is provided with a
vehicle release after showing proof of ownership and insurance.
This fee shall be payable in cash, certified check or money order to
the Record Clerk. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103;
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 5112]
B. Storage services. The following is the fee for per-day storage services:
(1) Storage charges.
(a) Inside building secured storage facility:
§ 505-14 THEATERS § 505-15
499:875
Type of Vehicle Fee
Autos $30
Pickups/vans/SUV $35
Trucks $50
Tractor trailers/buses N/A
(b) Outside secured.
Storage Facility Capacity Fee
Autos $20
Pickup/vans/SUV $25
Tractor trailers/buses $125
(c) Outside unsecured storage fees are not permitted. If a licensee
stores any vehicle in an unsecured location, he or she will have
waived his or her right to collect any fee for the towing of said
vehicle.
(d) Storage charges start to accrue after the vehicle has been
stored for at least one hour. Storage charges are to be
calculated on a per-calendar-day basis starting on the date of
the initial tow to yard.
C. Yard charges.
(1) Administrative fee: $10; car cover fee: $20; car photograph fee:
$20. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
(2) Placing any vehicle on a public street adjacent to it for the vehicle's
removal: $30.
(3) Vehicle estimate requested by the owner or third-party insurance
carrier (includes time with appraiser): $70.
(4) Removal of personal property from the subject vehicle:
(a) First time (up to 15 minutes): no charge.
(b) All additional times: $20.
D. Cleanup charges: Clean debris at accident scene: $20 minimum, and an
additional $15 per each 15 minutes for the cleanup charged to each
vehicle damaged. Speedy dry is an additional $15, charged to the
vehicle leaking fluid. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
E. Waiting time charges. If, once the towing operator arrives at the scene
of the accident, he is required by the police, fire, or other emergency
staff to wait more than 15 minutes to obtain the vehicle, he may charge
$15 per each 15 minutes after the initial 15 minutes has lapsed.
§ 505-15 UNION CODE § 505-15
499:876
§ 505-16. Insurance.
F. The licensee shall accept a minimum of two major credit cards 24 hours
a day and must be able to do so both at the principal location and by
drivers on the road at the time service or tow is performed. The licensee
will only have to accept credit cards from the vehicle owner or operator.
[Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
G. The Township and its Police Department shall not be liable to a licensee
with respect to towing and/or service rendered to any owner pursuant
to the licensee or otherwise. The licensee shall look to the registered
owner and/or operator of such vehicle for payment of towing and/or
storage service charges or any other compensation. If the vehicle is
unclaimed by the registered owner and/or operator and the finance
company and/or lien holder claims the right to retrieve said vehicle,
then the licensee may seek compensation for the towing of the vehicle
and its storage from the date the finance company and/or lien holder
reasonably has notice of the location of the subject vehicle.
H. If a crime victim's vehicle is towed by a licensee to premises controlled
by the Police Department solely for the purpose of utilizing the vehicle
or its contents as evidence or in an ongoing criminal investigation, the
Township shall be charged $1 per tow. If this vehicle cannot be removed
from the premises controlled by the Police Department in a timely
manner by the crime victim or an authorized agent, then the licensee
may be requested by the Police Department to remove and store said
vehicle where the owner or agent shall be responsible for these charges
only not the original tow. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
I. Township motor vehicles shall also be towed at the rate of $1 per tow. If
the licensee refuses or fails to respond to a request for a Township
vehicle tow, the licensee who refuses or fails to respond shall reimburse
the Township for any fees associated with said tow within 10 days of
receiving an invoice for the cost of the tow. The licensee shall also be
suspended from towing for the Township of Union for a period of five
days. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
J. Winch cable fee: $125. A one-time fee charged when the vehicle has left
the roadway, overturned or become embedded into, attached, or
hitched to another vehicle, tree, pole, guardrail or other fixed object.
[Added 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5103]
A. The licensee shall have in effect, prior to application and at all times
during the term of the license, the following insurance:
(1) Garage keepers' liability policy in the amount of $500,000 for any
one claimant, and $1,000,000 for more than one claimant with
$500,000 coverage for property damage for any one event.
(2) Automobile liability insurance issued by a financially sound
insurance corporation of, or authorized to transact business in, the
§ 505-15 THEATERS § 505-16
499:877
§ 505-17. Supplementary rules and regulations.
state, insuring the licensee and every tow truck operator against
liability imposed by law for damages because of bodily injury,
including death, sustained by any person and injury to or
destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof, caused by
accident and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of
the tow trucks of the licensee.
(3) The amount of the limits of liability coverage to be offered by such
policy shall be $500,000 for bodily injury to each person,
$1,000,000 for bodily injuries in each accident and $500,000 for
property damage in each accident.
(4) The licensee shall supply a certificate of insurance to the Township
Clerk describing every policy of insurance and identifying the
Township as an insured party. Each such certificate of insurance
shall contain a provision that no cancellation of the policy shall
become effective until after the expiration of 15 days written notice
of such proposed cancellation forwarded by the insurance company
to the Township Clerk and Police Chief.
B. Indemnity. The application of any towing operator for a license
pursuant to this chapter shall include an agreement by the towing
operator that, upon the issuance of a license, the licensee shall
indemnify the Township against all claims of third parties relating to
towing and/or storage service of the licensee.
C. Motor vehicle information. The Police Department shall within five
business days attempt to provide, when requested, towing operators
with Department of Motor Vehicles information regarding registered
owners and lien holders. The information requested and given shall be
in conformance with N.J.S.A. 39:10A et seq. and shall not in any way
violate the confidentiality that is reposed in the Police Department.
A. Ordinance. The Township Committee may from time to time adopt an
ordinance changing any fees charged and/or associated with the towing
and storage of motor vehicles. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
B. Enforcement. The Chief of Police is hereby designated to enforce the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with due process of law.
C. Copies of regulations and fees. Copies of this chapter, the fee schedules
of the licensees, the fee schedule for towing and storage shall be made
available to the public at the either Town Hall or police headquarters
during normal business hours.
D. Objections to the fees and services by the public.
(1) It shall be deemed a theft of services to issue payment by check or
credit card for the towing services under this chapter and
§ 505-16 UNION CODE § 505-17
499:878
Chapter 510
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
§ 510-1. Definitions; word usage.
thereafter stopping payment or having insufficient funds to pay for
the services provided.
(2) Any complaint as to services rendered by the tower or as to fees
charged are to be addressed in writing to both the Chief of Police
and the Clerk within 10 days of paying for said services. The Chief
may dismiss the complaint or recommend a refund (in whole or in
part). If no objection is given, the proposed resolution by either
party within seven days shall be deemed acceptable to all.
E. Every invoice for service generated by the license holder shall use the
terminology and language contained in this chapter so as to avoid or
minimize confusion as to allowable charges. [Added 6-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 5103]
F. Other than the fees specifically enumerated in § 505-15, no other
charges may be collected by the license holder. [Added 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 5103]
G. The license holder must conspicuously display the list of allowable
charges set forth in § 505-15 where payment is made, and if payment is
made not at the license holder's facility, the license holder must provide
the list to the individual at the time payment is tendered. In addition,
said notice shall also contain the following: [Added 6-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 5103]
Any complaint as to services rendered by the license holder or as to
fees charged is to be addressed in writing to both the Chief of Police
and the Township Clerk within 10 days of paying for said services:
Chief of Police Township Clerk
Union Police Dept. Union Municipal Building
971 Caldwell Ave. 1976 Morris Ave.
Union, NJ 07083 Union, NJ 07083
A. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
CAMP COTTAGE — Includes a site or location where cottages, cabins,
tents or other structures are assembled, used or designed for use by
travelers, tourists or other persons for living quarters.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association
of persons.
§ 505-17 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 510-1
510:879
§ 510-2. Tourist camps; license.
TOURIST CAMP — Any site or tract of land occupied or used by one or
more trailers, or available for such occupancy or use, with or without
charge, and shall include any building, structure, tent, camp cottage or
enclosure used or intended for use as part of or in connection with such
"tourist camp."
TRAILER, CAMP TRAILER or HOUSE TRAILER — Includes and means
any vehicle used or intended for conveyance upon the public streets
or highways, so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy of the
vehicle as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons or for
other occupancy or use and capable of being transported either under
its own power or by attachment to a motor vehicle or through other
means of transportation.
B. Word usage.
(1) The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably, and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards
the effectuating of this chapter.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the plural, and
the masculine, feminine or neuter gender shall be implied,
whichever is appropriate and conducive for the effectuating of this
chapter.
A. No person shall operate a tourist camp within the limits of the Township
of Union in the County of Union without a license first secured from the
Township Committee, for which written application shall be made by
the owner, lessee or tenant, stating the location of the proposed camp
and setting forth the available area and whether or not there are
sanitary facilities for furnishing of water and for sewerage disposal.
Upon application being made for issuance of a license, an investigation
of the site and other data in connection with the application shall be
made by the Health Officer, who shall report his findings to the Board of
Health246 and the Township Committee, at least within five days from
the time of the filing of such application, and such report shall include
the comment of the Construction Code Official as to the sufficiency of
the facilities at the proposed site.
B. A fee shall be paid to the Township for each such license granted
pursuant to the terms of this chapter in the sum of $2,000, which said
fee shall accompany the application and shall be returned if the license
is not granted. Licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk upon
direction of the Township Committee. Each such license shall be issued
for a period of three years commencing on January 1 of the year in
which the license is granted and expiring on the 31st day of December
of the third year. [Amended 2-11-1969 by Ord. No. 2519;
246. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Board of Health.
§ 510-1 UNION CODE § 510-2
510:880
§ 510-3. Trailers; license.
12-12-1978 by Ord. No. 3348; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3997;
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4282; 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 4745]
C. In each tourist camp, there shall be reserved for every trailer camped
therein a space of not less than 18 feet wide by 20 feet deep, or an area
aggregating not less than 360 square feet.
D. In every tourist camp, there shall be provided not less than one public
toilet for each sex for every 10 trailers or fraction thereof. In addition,
there shall be one urinal for every 10 trailers. Provision shall also be
made for washing, laundry and similar necessities on the part of the
occupants of said camp. Plumbing construction shall be in accordance
with the ordinances and regulations of the Township on the subject.
(1) This provision shall not apply to those tourist camps that are used
for residential use, provided each trailer, camp trailer or house
contains a permanent connection to each trailer, camp trailer or
house from the public water system and the sanitary sewer system.
"Permanent" shall mean rigidly fixed and connected directly to the
utilities mentioned herein. [Added 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 5026]
E. Chemical toilets or other similar fixtures are prohibited.
F. An adequate supply of clean water shall be supplied in each tourist
camp through faucets only. No dipping vessels or dipping cups shall be
permitted or used.
G. Each tourist camp shall possess adequate sewer facilities.
H. No dog, cat or other animal shall be permitted to run at large in any
tourist camp.
I. Each tourist camp and every portion thereof shall be well lighted at
night.
J. Every tourist camp shall have an office or place designated as such,
with a sign thereon indicating it as the office, in which place shall be
kept a register, and there shall be entered in such register the car
license number of every trailer stopping at the camp and the name,
address, date or arrival and date of departure of the owner and each
occupant.
K. The owner, licensee, manager or person in charge of a tourist camp
shall see to it that said camp is conducted in a quiet, law-abiding
manner, so as not to occasion annoyance to neighbors and, also, that it
shall be conducted conformably with the provisions of this chapter, also,
the provisions of the Board of Health, and of any municipal ordinance or
regulation of the departments of the municipality having reference to
the subject.
§ 510-2 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 510-3
510:881
A. It shall be unlawful to park any trailer upon any of the public streets of
Union Township, except for the time customarily needed for shopping
or to pay any necessary call for a business or other proper purpose.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any trailer in any public street or
thoroughfare in a place at which such parking would cause congestion
or impede the normal flow of traffic or public use of the thoroughfare.247
C. It shall be unlawful to make use of any of the toilet facilities in any
trailer while within the limits of the Township of Union in the County of
Union, and each such trailer, while within the limits of Union Township,
shall have its toilet facilities, lavatories, basins and any other
contrivance, from which any liquid or excreta may flow, completely
sealed while the trailer is in the Township of Union in the County of
Union.
D. Whenever any trailer shall remain in the Township of Union in the
County of Union, at any tourist camp, its occupants shall make use of
the water facilities and sanitary sewer facilities afforded by such tourist
camp.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or dispose of any refuse,
garbage, ashes, rubbish or any other article from a trailer upon any of
the streets of Union Township or upon any other place in Union
Township, except in receptacles especially provided for such purposes
at the tourist camp at which the trailer is parked, and it shall be the
duty of the licensee, manager or any other person in charge of such
camp to provide such receptacles in sufficient amount, and they shall be
kept closed, except when in use, and shall be adequate for the purpose
to prevent leakage, seepage, blowing away of contents or the littering
of the camp or any adjacent areas. The disposal of garbage, ashes and
rubbish shall be in accordance with the ordinance and regulations of
the Township on the subject.248
F. The occupants of trailers shall keep the same in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall, in use of the same, conform to all provisions of the
Board of Health or any ordinance or regulation of the municipality or its
departments that may pertain to the subject, so that trailers and tourist
camps may be maintained in orderly manner, free from nuisance,
infection or contagious disease.249
G. No trailer shall be permitted to remain within the limits of the Township
of Union in the County of Union for a period or periods aggregating
more than 30 days during any one year. This provision shall not apply to
trailers which are kept by the owners on their own or leased property
solely for purposes for sale, display or storage, and not for sleeping or
dwelling purposes.
247. Editor's Note: As to vehicles and traffic generally, see Ch. 266.
248. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 462, Solid Waste; Recycling.
249. Editor's Note: As to legislation of the Board of Health, consult Part III of this Code.
§ 510-3 UNION CODE § 510-4
510:882
§ 510-4. Parking of trailers.250
It shall be unlawful to park, keep, house or maintain any trailer in or upon
any street, or in or upon any site, place or location in the Township of
Union in the County of Union, unless in a licensed tourist camp, except that
parking for a brief time for shopping and other appropriate purposes may
be permitted, pursuant to the provisions of § 510-3A of this chapter.
§ 510-5. Inspections.
All trailers and tourist camps shall be subject to inspection by the Health
Officer of the Township, the Construction Code Official, and the Police and
Fire Departments, with a view to preservation of safe, sanitary and hygienic
conditions, and observance of the ordinances and the regulations of the
municipality which may affect the premises.
§ 510-6. Revocation of licenses.
Any license may be revoked by the Township Committee for violation of
any of the conditions under which it is issued, or for violation of any of
the ordinances of the Township or of the Board of Health. Before any
license is revoked, notice in writing shall be given the owner or person
interested, setting forth the reasons for the proposed revocation, and the
time and place at which a hearing upon the complaint shall be held before
the Township Committee, such hearing shall be within not less than five
days from the time of the service of the notice. Such notice may be served
personally, or by leaving with a member of the family, or at the residence
of the owner or person interested in the conduct of the camp, or in charge
thereof, or if no such person can be found upon whom service can be made,
then such notice may be served by posting the same upon the door of
the office of the camp, or by mailing it to the owner or person interested,
addressed to the camp or the last known address.
§ 510-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-11-1969 by Ord. No.
2519; 8-11-1960 by Ord. No. 2615; 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3879;
12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any
other place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for
any term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on
the effective date of this section.
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 510-4 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 510-7
510:883
Chapter 516
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 113.
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves — See Ch. 192.
Christmas trees — See Ch. 228.
§ 510-7 UNION CODE § 510-7
516:884
ARTICLE I
Willow Trees
[Adopted 10-22-1974 by Ord. No. 2921 (Ch. 269, Art. I of the 1986
Code)]
§ 516-1. Planting unlawful.
On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful to plant
willow trees anywhere within the geographic limits in the Township of
Union in the County of Union.
§ 516-2. Notices directing removal. [Amended 3-24-1992 by Ord.
No. 4182]
In the event that an inspection of an existing willow tree by the Township
Engineer of the Township of Union, in the County of Union, or his designee,
determines that such a tree or trees are impeding the normal flow of either
the storm sewer system or the sanitary sewer system of the Township of
Union in the County of Union, then and in that event a written notice by
certified mail shall be served upon the owner of any such tree so causing
such an impediment or blockage in the flow aforesaid, directing said owner
to remove said tree and the roots thereof from within the aforesaid sewer
system within 10 days from receipt of such notice.
§ 516-3. Failure to remove.
In the event that any such owner so receiving any such notice to remove
any such tree and the roots thereof fails to remove the same within the time
aforesaid, the Superintendent of Public Works shall be and he is hereby
authorized to enter upon public and private property for the purpose of
causing the removal of any such tree and the roots thereof.
§ 516-4. Costs.
Said Superintendent of Public Works shall certify the cost of such removal
to the governing body, which said governing body shall examine the
certificate of costs and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against the lands from which said tree and roots were
removed or, in the event that such cost is excessive, to cause the reasonable
cost thereof to be charged and thereupon the amounts so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands
and shall bear interest at the same rate as is imposed upon delinquent taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same
manner as is municipal taxes.
§ 516-1 TREES § 516-5
516:885
§ 516-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998251]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail or in any other place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, to become effective on the effective date of this
section.
251. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 516-5 UNION CODE § 516-5
516:886
ARTICLE II
Shade and Ornamental Trees
[Adopted 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. 3878 (Ch. 269, Art. II of the 1986
Code)]
§ 516-6. Permission required to cut, prune and remove.
No individual or officer or employee of a corporation shall, without the
written permit of the Department of Public Works, cut, prune, break, climb,
injure or remove any living tree in a public highway; chemicalize or
insecticide any tree in a public highway; or place any rope, sign, poster or
other fixture on a tree or guard in a public highway; or injure, misuse or
remove any device placed to protect such tree on a public highway.
§ 516-7. Planting restrictions.
No shade or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted in any of the public
highways of the Township of Union until such tree or shrub shall have first
been approved and the place where it is to be planted designated by the
Department of Public Works and a permit granted therefor.
§ 516-8. Injury by horses or other animals.
No person shall fasten a horse or other animal to a tree in a public highway
in the Township of Union nor cause a horse or other animal to stand so that
said horse or animal can injure such a tree.
§ 516-9. Impeding free passage of water and air to roots.
No person shall, without the written permit of the Department of Public
Works, place or hereafter maintain upon the ground to a public highway,
stone, cement or other substance which shall impede the free passage of
water and air to the roots of any tree in such highway, without leaving an
open space of ground outside of the trunk of said tree in an area not less
than four feet square.
§ 516-10. Guards and protective devices.
In the erection or repair of any building or structure, the owner thereof shall
place such guards around all nearby trees on the public highways as shall
effectually prevent injury to them.
§ 516-11. Salt water.
No person shall pour salt water upon any public highway in such a manner
as to injure any tree planted or growing thereon.
§ 516-12. Electric wire attachments; electricity.
A. No person shall, without the written consent of the Department of
Public Works, attach any electric wire, insulator or any device for the
§ 516-6 TREES § 516-12
516:887
§ 516-13. Interference with Department employees.
No person or corporation shall prevent, delay or interfere with the
Department of Public Works, or its employees, in the planting, pruning,
spraying or removing of a tree on a public highway, or in the removal of
stone, cement or other substance about the trunk of a tree.
§ 516-14. Repeated violations.
Every repeated violation by the same person of any provision of this article
or the continuation of the violation of any of the provisions on any day
or days succeeding the first violation thereof shall constitute an additional
violation of such provision.
§ 516-15. Violations and penalties.252
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
for any term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,250 or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 516-16. Enforcement. [Added 3-24-1992 by Ord. No. 4182]
For the purposes of this article, the Superintendent of Public Works and/or
his designee and all law enforcement officers shall be empowered to enforce
this article.
holding of an electric wire to any tree growing or planted upon any
public highway of the Township of Union.
B. Every person or corporation having any wire or wires charged with
electricity running through a public highway shall securely fasten such
wire or wires so that they shall not come in contact with any tree
therein.
C. Every person or corporation having any wire or wires charged with
electricity running through a public highway shall temporarily remove
any such wire or wires or the electricity therefrom when it shall be
necessary in order to take down or prune any tree growing in a public
highway, and such removal shall be effected within 24 hours after the
service upon the owner of said wire or wires, or his agent, of a written
notice to remove said wire or wires or the electricity therefrom upon
the order of the Public Works Department.
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 516-12 UNION CODE § 516-16
516:888
Chapter 523
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 170. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
§ 523-1. Storage or placement unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or occupant of lands in the
Township of Union, County of Union, to permit to store or place upon
such land any machines, or parts of machines, automobiles, or parts of
automobiles, or vehicles, so in need of repair as to render the same
incapable of being readily operated under their own power, except where
such storage is specifically authorized by the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township of Union, County of Union,253 or by a variance granted by the
Board of Adjustment in the Township of Union, County of Union.
§ 523-2. Permission of owner, possessor or occupant of land.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or leave standing, any machines,
automobiles or parts of automobiles or vehicles so in need of repair as to
render the same incapable of being readily operated under their own power
on land of another without permission of the owner, possessor or occupant
of such lands.
§ 523-3. Investigation of complaints.
Upon complaint of any resident or property owner of the Township of Union,
or any employee of said Township, or upon his own motion, the Construction
Code Official or his designated agent shall make an investigation of the
condition complained of and report thereon, in writing, to the Township
Committee.
§ 523-4. Notification of owner.
Upon receiving said report, if the land in question about which the
complaint was made is found to be in such condition that a violation of one
or more of the provisions of §§ 523-1 and 523-2 hereof exists on said land,
the Township Clerk, upon direction of the Township Committee, shall notify
the owner and possessor or occupant of said lands complained of, in writing,
either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to take such
steps as will effectively remove said violation from said land within 10 days
after receipt of said notice.
253. Editor's Note: As to land development regulations, see Ch. 170.
§ 516-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 523-5
523:889
§ 523-5. Reinspection.
The Construction Code Official shall reinspect said lands after the tenday
period shall have expired and shall report, in writing to the Township
Committee, whether or not the unlawful condition complained of and
previously found to exist in violation of this chapter has been abated or
remedied.
§ 523-6. Failure to abate or remedy condition.
In the event that the owner, possessor or occupant of said lands shall
refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition complained of and
which constitutes a violation of this chapter, after said 10 days' notice, the
Township Committee shall cause the condition complained of to be abated
and remedied.
§ 523-7. Enforcement.
Upon the removal of any of the items prohibited to be stored or placed on
lands by this chapter, by or under the direction of such officer or officers
of this Township, in cases where the owner or tenant shall have refused or
neglected to remove the same in the manner and within the time provided
above, such officer or officers shall certify the cost thereof to the Township
Committee, which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall
cause the cost, as shown thereon to be charged against said lands. The
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall
be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon said lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 523-8. Appeals for relief.
Appeals for relief from the provisions of this chapter may be made ex parte
to the Township Committee of the Township of Union, County of Union, and
relief may be granted by said body by the adoption of a formal resolution
when, in its opinion, such relief is not detrimental to the public interest.
§ 523-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No.
3879; 4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 3963; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 3998254]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment
in the county jail or in any place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days, or a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-5 UNION CODE § 523-10
523:890
§ 523-10. Unused and unregistered motor vehicles and machinery
declared inimical to public welfare. [Added 7-9-1991 by Ord. No.
4153]
It is hereby declared that the keeping, storage or abandonment of any motor
vehicle not currently used for transportation and not being registered with
the state for the current year or of any unused machinery or equipment
upon lands within the Township is inimical to the public welfare in that
the exposure to view of such motor vehicle, machinery or equipment is
unsightly and detrimental to the neighborhood.
§ 523-11. Keeping of unused and unregistered motor vehicles and
machinery prohibited; exceptions. [Added 7-9-1991 by Ord. No.
4153]
No person shall keep, store, abandon or leave upon any parcel of land
or street or any other place in the Township any unused machinery or
equipment or any motor vehicle which does not display a valid inspection
sticker less than two years old and which vehicle is also not validly
registered with the state for the current year; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to any such motor vehicle, machinery or equipment
which is placed, kept, stored or abandoned inside a garage or other building
in the Township.
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 550
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Township
Committee — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Board of Health — See Ch. 70.
§ 523-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 523-11
550:891

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[An ordinance adopting Part III of the Code of the Township of
Union and making certain substantive changes to existing
ordinances of the Township Board of Health is presently proposed
before the Board of Health. Upon final adoption, it will be included
here as Article I of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 523-11
550:893
Chapter 551
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals as regulated by Township
Committee — See Ch. 168.
Fines for unlicensed dogs and cats — See Ch.
271.
Hunting — See Ch. 273.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 397.
Animals at large in trailer camps — See Ch.
510.
Noise — See Ch. 585.
§ 523-11 UNION CODE § 523-11
550:894
ARTICLE I
Dog Licensing
§ 551-1. Definitions.
§ 551-2. License required; wild, exotic and hybrid animals.
A. Words defined. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained an age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
HYBRID ANIMAL — The offspring of a domestic animal and an animal
of wildlife species.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such a dog in his keeping.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association
of persons.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not
part of a kennel wherein dogs and other animals or pets are kept for
sale or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.
B. Word usage.
(1) The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably, and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards
the effecting of this article.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the plural,
whichever is applicable and conducive towards the effectuating of
this article. The masculine, feminine or the neuter gender shall be
implied, whichever is appropriate and conducive for the
effectuating of this article.
A. No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Township of Union in
the County of Union without first obtaining a license therefore to be
issued by the Clerk of the Township, upon application by the owner and
§ 551-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-2
550:895
§ 551-3. Dogs of licensing age.
§ 551-4. through § 551-7. (Reserved)
§ 551-8. Removal of registration tag restricted.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it is not
issued.
§ 551-9. through § 551-25. (Reserved)
payment of the prescribed fee; and no person shall keep or harbor any
dog in said Township, except in compliance with the provisions of this
article.
B. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any wild or exotic animals as
pets. The definition of such wild or exotic animals shall be that found in
N.J.A.C. 7:25-4.13.
C. Hybrid animals, such as wolf dogs and other offspring of other domestic
animals crossbred with wildlife species, shall be prohibited within the
Township of Union.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
in the month of January of each year, apply for and procure from the
Clerk of the Township a license and official metal registration tag for
each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each
such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto.
B. No such license and official metal registration tag shall be issued for
any dog unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the dog to be
licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a
type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare or has
been certified exempt as provided by the regulations of the State
Department of Health.
§ 551-2 UNION CODE § 551-9
550:896
ARTICLE II
Cat Licensing and Regulations
§ 551-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog, cat, domestic, stray, or feral.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of this Township
or any designated representative thereof charged with administering the
issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of
this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction, as
certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 551-27. Rabies vaccination requirements; exemption.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Township, unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of
this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those held by a state
or federal licensed research facility or a veterinary establishment
where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or
other treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet
shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization, published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
§ 551-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-27
550:897
§ 551-28. Licensing requirements.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of
an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Display of license number. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a
cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and procure from the Clerk
of the municipality, or other official designated by the governing body
thereof to license cats in the municipality in which he/she resides, a
license and official registration tag with license number or a
registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license number
securely fastened thereto or displayed thereon. Acceptable methods of
displaying the license number shall include but are not limited to
breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not
transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
application for a license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Township for no longer than 90
days.
C. Cats brought into Township.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township any cat licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve and shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Township for a period of
more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this
Township any unlicensed cat and shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Township for a period of more than 10
days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or
sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application, contents and preservation of information. The application
shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
the license and registration is sought and whether it is of a longhaired
or shorthaired variety; also the name, street and post office address of
the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
§ 551-27 UNION CODE § 551-28
550:898
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or
other local official designated to license cats in the municipality.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption requirement for license. No Municipal Clerk or other official
designated by the governing body of any municipality to license cats
therein shall grant any such license and official registration tag or
sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the
cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Human Services or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 551-27D of this article. The rabies inoculation
shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
G. License fee schedule.
(1) A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $18 for each
unneutered cat and $13 for each neutered cat.
(2) In addition to the fees charged herein for licensing, there shall be
an additional charge of $2 per month for each month that the
owner of the cat requiring a license fails to renew. The said monthly
penalty for failure to renew shall commence each April 1 of the
licensing period.
H. Payment of fees; renewals; expiration date of license. A license from
another municipality shall be accepted. The person applying for the
license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or
authorized. The fee for the renewal of license and registration tag or
sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and said license,
registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire on the last
day of January in each year. Only one license and registration tag or
sleeve shall be required in the licensing year for any cat in this
Township. Any valid New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New
Jersey municipality shall be accepted by this municipality as evidence of
compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Clerk or other official designated by the governing body may issue a
duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for that particular cat at a
fee of $0.25.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of
any health official, police officer, animal control officer or other
authorized person.
§ 551-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-28
550:899
§ 551-29. Keeping of stray and feral cats.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to leave or abandon a cat(s) or kitten(s)
as feral to fend for themselves. Unwanted animals shall be brought to the
Township of Union Animal Shelter during visitors' hours to surrender the
animal or to call our ACO or Shelter Attendant to pick up the animal. It
is unlawful to leave an animal or animals on the grounds of the shelter
unattended as this will constitute an act of abandonment which violates the
animal cruelty laws.
§ 551-30. (Reserved)
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 551-28 UNION CODE § 551-30
550:900
ARTICLE III
Wildlife and Animal Feeding
[Amended 12-14-2016]
§ 551-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of wildlife and/or stray
or feral animals on or in privately owned property within the Township of
Union and prohibiting the feeding of any animal, domesticated, stray, feral
or wildlife in any public park or on any other property owned or operated
by the Township of Union, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 551-32. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory, nor intended to afford
any discretion as to interpretation.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — A canine or feline, or any other animal,
whether or not subject to local licensing regulation, existing in an
association with and/or cohabitating with any person or persons.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible or
other material with the intent of feeding, attracting or enticing any wildlife,
stray or feral animals, and any conduct which a person knows, or reasonably
should know, would result in the giving, placing, exposing, distributing or
scattering of any edible or other material which would result in the feeding,
attracting or enticing of any wildlife, stray or feral animal.
FERAL ANIMAL — A feline, either previously domesticated or not, which is
now, has always been, or has become wildlife and/or stray.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STRAY ANIMAL — A once-domesticated animal that is wandering at large,
either abandoned or lost.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are not domesticated, living in a natural
environment, and existing independent of the possession and/or control of
any person.
§ 551-32.1. Prohibited conduct.
A. No person shall feed any domesticated animal, feral animal, wildlife, or
stray animal in any public park or in or on any other property owned or
§ 551-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-32.1
550:901
§ 551-32.2. Enforcement.
§ 551-32.3. (Reserved)
operated by the Township of Union, other than as authorized by the
Department of Health through the Department-sponsored trapping
program.
B. No person shall feed, any wildlife, stray animal, or feral animal on or in
any privately owned property within the Township of Union other than
as authorized by the Department of Health through the Departmentsponsored
trapping program.
A. This article shall be primarily enforced by the Health Department of the
Township of Union.
§ 551-32.1 UNION CODE § 551-32.3
550:902
ARTICLE IV
Trapping
§ 551-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect both the citizens and animals in the
Township of Union from suffering potential severe and substantial injuries
as a result of using a mechanical or artificial device to trap animals and,
therefore, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 551-34. Trapping prohibited.
It shall be unlawful within the municipal corporation limits of the Township
of Union to engage in the activity known as "trapping" by the use of a leghold,
snare, instant kill body-gripping trap or any other artificial device or
mechanism which can cause pain, injury, suffering or death to any animal
except as specifically permitted by § 551-36 hereinafter set forth.
§ 551-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEG-HOLD, SNARE-TYPE OR BODY-GRIPPING TRAP — Any trap which
grasps the leg or any portion of such animal and which can injure, harm,
cause pain and suffering or death to the animal.
TRAPPING — The intent to capture or kill animal species by the use of
spring traps or other devices intended to capture said animal by virtue of
the use of artificial mechanisms or devices designed to inhibit their natural
movement.
§ 551-36. Exceptions.
Exceptions are as follows:
A. Humane and lawful trapping by the Township Animal Control Service of
the Township of Union of a trap sanctioned by the Health Department.
B. Trap must not violate N.J.S.A 23:4-22.1. C.
C. Health Department traps.
(1) Humane traps on loan from the Health Department in which a
deposit is returned upon the return of the trap in an undamaged
condition. Failure to return the trap or to return a damaged trap
shall be cause for forfeiture of the deposit.
(2) Trap may only be used and or set Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m.
through 3:30 p.m., unless expressly authorized by the Health
Department. A penalty shall be charged by the Health Department
for any trap set from 3:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. or anytime Saturday
§ 551-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-36
550:903
§ 551-37. Confiscation of traps.
Whenever a trap, the use of which is prohibited by § 551-34, shall be found
within the confines of the Township, the same may be confiscated by any
police officer of the Township, the Township Animal Control Service or the
Health Officer and his designees.
§ 551-38. Enforcement.
It shall be the Health Officer and his designees' duty to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 551-39. Authority to enter premises.
Any person or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 551-40. through § 551-41. (Reserved)
through Sunday or any legal holidays, in the amount of $100 per
day. [Amended 4-13-2016]
D. All traps must be labeled conspicuously with the name, address, and
phone number of the individual setting the trap.
E. All traps must be examined and checked by the individual who set the
trap every 10 hours once an animal is discovered in a trap, discovery
shall be reported to the Health Department immediately.
F. The Health Department shall respond to a report of a trapped animal
within two hours, or as soon thereafter as rationally practical under the
circumstance.
G. The trapping of rats or mice shall not be governed by this section and/or
chapter.
§ 551-36 UNION CODE § 551-40
550:904
ARTICLE V
Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds
§ 551-42. Regulations.
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a pet
shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Township Department of Health
for a license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
§ 551-43. Fees for kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
A. The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose or purposes for
which it is to be maintained and shall be accompanied by the written
approval of the Health Officer of the Board of Health of the Township,
showing compliance with the local and state rules and regulations
governing location of and sanitation at such establishments.
(1) Any facility constructed or renovated after January 1995 shall first
submit plan(s) to the Department of Health.
(2) These plan(s) must show the layout of all rooms, areas, pens, cages,
etc., and equipment and utilities necessary to comply with the
standards as set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:23A et seq.
(3) These plans must be completely drawn to scale by at least a
draftsman and contain all information requested by the Health
Officer.
(4) Once a satisfactory plan is submitted the plans must be approved
or denied within 30 days. If denied, the applicant shall revise said
plans and resubmit them.
(5) No kennel, pet shop, shelter, or pound shall be constructed until the
plans have been approved by the Health Officer and only
constructed as approved.
B. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year and be
subject to revocation by the Township Board of Health on
recommendations of the State Department of Health or the Health
Department of the Township for failure to comply with the rules and
regulations of the State Department or the Board of Health of the
Township governing the same, after the owner has been afforded a
hearing by either the State Department or the Board of Health of the
Township.
C. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs or cats by such license and kept at such
establishments; such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
§ 551-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-43
550:905
§ 551-44. Standards for operations of kennels, pet shops, shelters,
and/or pound.
§ 551-45. Dogs in kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds; leash and
safe controls.
No animal kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted
off such premises, except on a leash or in a humane carrier or other means
of safe control.
§ 551-46. Animal Control Officer.
The Township Board of Health shall have the power to appoint an Animal
Control Officer, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Township Board of Health shall also have the power to appoint
one or more persons, to be known as "dog catchers," who may impound
unlicensed dogs running at large in violation of the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, the Health Officer and his designees of the Township of
Union shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 551-47. Impoundment.
The Animal Control Officer of the Township shall take into custody and
impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter
destroyed or disposed of as provided in this section:
A. The fee for a plan review by the Health Department shall be $125,
nonrefundable.
B. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
fewer dogs shall be $10, and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual
license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a
shelter or pound. The licenses herein provided for shall expire on the
last day of January of each year.
A. Any person who is required to secure a license pursuant to § 551-42
shall only receive approval from the Health Officer if that person
demonstrates compliance with the New Jersey Administrative Code,
Title 8, Chapter 23A et seq.
B. Any holder of a license to operate an animal facility shall comply at all
times with the standards of N.J.A.C. 8:23A et seq.
C. Failure of any license holder to comply with N.J.A.C. 8:23A in whole or
in part shall be subject to legal action including but not limited to
license revocation.
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, which said official or his agent, or agents, have
reason to believe is a stray dog.
§ 551-43 UNION CODE § 551-47
550:906
§ 551-48. Authority to enter premises.
Any person or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog, if said owner is present and forbids the
same.
§ 551-49. Hindering or interfering with authority.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Seized dogs.
(1) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
(2) If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or
a registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring
said dog is known, the Animal Control Officer shall forthwith serve
on the person whose address is given on the collar or on the owner
or on the person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice
in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to
be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
the service of the notice.
(3) A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to
the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the
person's usual, or last known place of abode or to the address given
on the collar.
(4) When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after
notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not been and
cannot be given as above set forth, and if the owner or person
keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance not exceeding $5 per day, and if the dog is unlicensed
at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or
harboring said dog has not produced a license and registration tag
for said dog, the Animal Control Officer may cause the dog to be
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible. In such a
case, the owner shall pay to the Township a euthanasia fee of not
less than $100 nor more than $200.
§ 551-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-50
550:907
§ 551-50. Animals creating a public disturbance.
§ 551-51. Dogs running at large.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
run at large upon the public streets or in any public park, or in any public
building, or in any other public place within the Township of Union in the
County of Union.
§ 551-52. Dogs in public to be adequately controlled.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Township of
Union, unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years
and if securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than
six feet long.
§ 551-53. Dogs causing damage to property.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or
property.
§ 551-54. Exotic animals in municipal parks.
No exotic animals are allowed in municipal parks.
§ 551-55. Pet waste.
A. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually
barks or cries. A dog shall be presumed to be habitually barking and/or
crying if the bark or cry continues, uninterrupted, for 10 minutes.
B. No person shall harbor, maintain, shelter or in any other manner or
description keep any dog, cat or other animal outside the main confines
of any dwelling or place of business between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
C. For the purposes of this section, detached or attached garages, sheds,
doghouses or similar shelters used in conjunction with outdoor fenced
areas shall likewise be restricted so that no dog, cat or other animal
may be harbored, maintained, sheltered or kept therein between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. It is the specific purpose and intent of this section to assure that the
ownership of any animal, by any individual or establishment, shall not
cause disturbances to the peace, tranquility or quality of life of any
other individual.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the
proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Township of Union, so as to
§ 551-50 UNION CODE § 551-55
550:908
protect animal health, public health, safety and welfare, environmental
quality, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
B. Definitions and word usage. For the purpose of this section, the
following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability-assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal. Neither a public right-of-way, curb or street
gutter, nor a storm drain is a conveyance to a sanitary sewer system.
C. Requirement for disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
D. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
E. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Township of Union Health Departments' Health Officer or designee.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties as set
forth in Article VIII, § 551-61.
G. Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of
this section is declared to be an independent section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
§ 551-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-55
550:909
§ 551-56. Animal Control/Cruelty Officers; animal facilities
operations; impoundment; fees and fines.
portion of this section to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any
cause or reason shall not affect any other portion of this section.
H. Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect from and
after its adoption and any publication as may be required by law.
A. Animal Control Officer standards:
(1) No person shall serve as an Animal Control Officer in the Township
of Union unless he or she shall have successfully obtained and
maintains in good standing a certification pursuant to N.J.A.C.
8:23A-2.4.
(2) A certified Animal Control Officer shall only serve as such in the
Township of Union pursuant to the approval of the Board of Health
of the Township of Union.
(3) A certified Animal Control Officer appointed by the Township of
Union Board of Health shall be the agent of the Health Officer
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-19, and N.J.A.C. 8:23A.
(4) A certified Animal Control Officer who has successfully completed
an animal cruelty investigators course pursuant to N.J.A.C.
8:23A-2.6, and N.J.A.C. 8:23A-2.8 and is appointed as such by the
Board of Health of the Township of Union shall serve under the
direction of the Health Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-19.
(5) Both Animal Control Officers and animal cruelty investigators shall
enforce the statutes of the State of New Jersey, Title 4, Subchapter
4:19-15 to 4:19-15.16(d); Title 26, 25:4-78 through 95; State
regulations N.J.A.C. 8:23A et seq.; the Township of Union Codes
Chapter 551, Articles I through VII, and Health Department Policy
Procedures as adopted by the Board as well as the New Jersey
State Health Departments Essential Components of Municipal
Animal Control.
B. Animal facilities operations:
(1) The sanitary operations of kennels, pet shops, shelters, and pounds
shall meet the standards of Subchapter 1 of N.J.A.C. Chapter 8:23A.
(2) Conform to § 551-42, Subsections A through C, and § 551-44.
C. Enforcement of animal prohibitions:
(1) Impoundment for dogs.
(a) Dogs, § 551-47, Subsections A, B, and C(1) through (4).
§ 551-55 UNION CODE § 551-56
550:910
§ 551-57. Associated fees and penalties fee schedule.
NOTE: Cats are regulated by Article II as ascribed in this
chapter.
A. Animal adoption and fee.
(1) Dogs and cats cannot be adopted from the Township of Union
Animal Shelter until the potential adoptee has submitted a
completed Township of Union Health Department shelter adoption
application.
(2) The completed adoption application form shall be reviewed by the
Township Health Officer or his/her designee. Such review shall be
approved or denied within two weeks of submission. A reason shall
be provided to the applicant upon denial.
(3) Prior to release of the applied-for dog or cat a fee must be paid in
cash or money order to the Township of Union Health Department
in the amount of $175 per dog, and $125 per cat.
B. Boarding and fee.
(1) The Township of Union Health Department Shelter will not board
pets unless the dog or cat has been lost and been brought to our
shelter or picked up by our ACO as a stray or lost pet.
(2) A stray, lost or abandoned pet shall be kept for seven days and
thereafter, if not redeemed by its rightful owner, it becomes the
property of the Township of Union Health Department.
(3) Unclaimed pets after seven days will be offered for adoption. If the
animal cannot be adopted or rescued, rather than abandoning it
within our shelter, it may be euthanized.
(4) Before anyone can claim their pet they must show positive proof of
ownership. Acceptable proofs include: a current pet license, a
current veterinarian's record of shots and/or treatment; a chip
identifying ownership, and/or pedigree papers.
(5) The fee for, i.e., claiming a pet shall be a fee of $50 and shall
include veterinarians' fees for treating the animal for illness or
injury while being sheltered by the Health Department Animal
Shelter.
(6) Any owner whose pet is redeemed for a second or subsequent time
shall pay $100 for each redemption and be charged with violating
appropriate sections of this chapter.
C. Surrendering and fee. [Added 12-14-2011]
(1) Receiving unwanted animals brought to the shelter with proof of
ownership and residencies are as follows:
§ 551-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-57
550:911
§ 551-58. (Reserved)
(a) Dogs/puppies: $50 per animal.
(b) Cats/kittens: $50 per animal.
(c) All other species received would need proper cage, food, etc.:
$25 per species.
§ 551-57 UNION CODE § 551-58
550:912
ARTICLE VI
Animal Exhibits
§ 551-59. Regulation of animal exhibits.
A. Purpose. While the benefit of human-to-animal contact is recognized,
infectious diseases, rabies exposure, and injury have occurred in
contact settings between humans and animals. The standards as
outlined in this article are established in an effort to minimize risks of
diseases and injuries from animals in public settings.
B. Definitions:
AGRICULTURAL FAIRS — Livestock or farm animals usually exhibited
as prize breeds for show.
ANIMAL OWNERS — Any person, partnership, business, corporation
which holds title to animals involved in an exhibit.
ANIMAL RIDES — Beasts of burden such as horses, ponies, mules,
donkeys, etc., which provide entertainment for visitor to ride, usually
limited to a confined area.
PETTING ZOO — Domestic and/or farm animals contained in a pen or
corral whereby visitors can pet or feed the animals.
VENUE OPERATORS — Any person of legal age employed to monitor
activities of the event featuring domestic, farm animals or live stock
during an event.
C. It shall be unlawful for any animal owner or venue operators to exhibit
animals in a public setting or at an event without first obtaining a
temporary license to do so from the Township of Union Health
Department.
D. An animal owner, venue operator or exhibit promoter shall file an
application for a license with the Health Department of the Township of
Union at least two weeks prior to the planned event or exhibit.
E. The application information shall include:
(1) The name, address, and phone number of the owner of the animals;
(2) The name(s), address(s), and phone number(s) of the
veterinarian(s) caring for the animals;
(3) The breed of animal(s) to be exhibited and a statement from the
veterinarian as the current health condition, including the fact that
the animal(s) have had all appropriate vaccinations including for
mammals a current rabies inoculation;
(4) A statement from the veterinarian that the owner or venue operator
whoever will oversee the animal(s) during the event is familiar with
basic risk reduction recommendations to prevent animal to human
diseases;
§ 551-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-59
550:913
(5) A statement that those staff members so named in the statement
who will be employed at the event have had equal training on
disease risk reduction;
(6) A diagram prepared by the owner or vendor operator drafted to
scale showing the layout of the exhibit focusing on nonanimal areas
and animal areas. The diagram shall include location of signage
and hand washing areas, pre- and post-animal areas. Include the
message of the signs; in example: a nonanimal area into the animal
area warning to prevent the public from eating nonanimal food;
prohibiting strollers, baby bottles, pacifiers, food and/or beverages
into the animal area; exiting signs which also instruct the public to
wash hands and having hand-washing stations available.
F. Animal areas must be monitored by staff at all times to prevent
overcrowding, the segregated feeding and watering of the animals
outside of the access of the public; the prompt removal of manure and
soiled bedding with appropriate tools not accessible to the public;
removal of waste to be directed away from visitors area; discourage
hand-to-mouth contact of children, process reports of injuries, bites
and/or exposures; monitor wellness and stress of animals and remove
any that become ill, aggressive or difficult.
G. The sale or distribution of animal food shall carry verbal warning that
this is not for human consumption. Unpasteurized dairy products as
well as unpasteurized apple cider or juice is prohibited. Only potable
water shall be used for human consumption and water for animals and
hoses accessible to the public must be labeled "not for human
consumption."
H. Fee required for a temporary license to exhibit animals and the license
shall not exceed three days. The fee is $100.
§ 551-59 UNION CODE § 551-59
550:914
ARTICLE VII
Jurisdiction
§ 551-60. Legal jurisdiction.
Violations of any provision in this chapter shall be within the jurisdiction
of the Township of Union Municipal Court or Superior Court of New Jersey
when permitted by law.
§ 551-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-60
550:915

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 551-61. Violations and penalties.
A. The following is a list of authorized penalties for any violations
enumerated by this chapter.
(1) The court may impose a period of incarceration not to exceed 30
days.
(2) The court may impose a period of prohibition as permitted by law
under Title 2.C.
(3) The court may impose an order that the defendant engaged in
community service.
(4) The court shall impose a fine between $100 and $1,250.
B. Nothing in this penalty section shall prohibit a court in imposing any
other sentence, fine, or penalty permitted or mandated by law.
§ 551-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-61
550:917

ARTICLE IX
Fees
§ 551-62. Disposition of fees.
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this chapter, except registration tag fees, Pilot Clinic Fund and the
Animal Population Control Fund, shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the
Township within 30 days after collection or receipt and shall be placed in
an Animal Control Trust Account of the Township of Union Board of Health,
a special trust account established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11 and
4:22-55, separate from any of the other accounts of the Township and which
shall be used for the following purposes: collecting, keeping and disposing
of dogs liable to seizure under this article; for local prevention and control
of rabies; for providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed
to rabies; for all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject; and for administering the provisions of this chapter.
§ 551-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 551-62
550:919
Chapter 557
BOARDING HOMES FOR CHILDREN
Chapter 560
DISEASES, CONTROL OF SPREAD OF COMMUNICABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food service personnel — See Ch. 568.
Commercial laundries — See Ch. 581.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 596.
§ 560-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 560-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE — Satisfactory or adequate; fulfilling the needs or
requirements of a specified rule.
APPROVED — Written acceptance by the Union Township Department of
Health.
BUSINESS — A commercial or industrial enterprise with dealings or
transactions especially of an economic nature.
CLEAN or CLEANLINESS — The absence of soil, dirt, grime and grease.
For the purpose of this chapter, "clean" or "cleanliness" does not equate to
something being disinfected.
CLEANING — To rid of dirt, impurities, or extraneous matter.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — Diseases or conditions diagnosed by a
licensed physician as being contagious or transmissible, which include, but
are not limited to, the following: 1) chickenpox; 2) diphtheria; 3) measles;
4) meningococcal disease; 5) mumps; 6) pertussis (whopping cough); 7)
A. Purpose. This chapter is established to assure sanitation, safety, and
disease prevention and control for the protection of the public's health
and quality of life.
B. Scope. This chapter shall govern: 1) All businesses presently licensed
by the Union Township Board of Health, their officers, employees,
agents and representatives; and 2) any business not presently licensed
by the Board of Health wherein it is reasonable to believe that
equipment, accommodations, or other items maintained by the business
will be used and/or shared by successive customers, invitees, or other
members of the public.
§ 551-62 UNION CODE § 560-2
557:920
plague; 8) rubella; 9) scabies; 10) staphylococcal skin infection (boils,
infected wounds); 11) streptococcal infections (strep throat); 12) tine
(ringworm); 13) tuberculosis.
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Any liquid or semiliquid blood or other
potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that would release
blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semiliquid state
if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially
infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during
handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and other potentially
infectious materials, as defined, N.J.A.C. 7:26-3A.
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks and all
other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation
of an establishment.
ESTABLISHMENT — A physical place of business, permanent in nature, and
includes all areas used by the business, its patrons and invitees.
HAND SINK — A fixture equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the body.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — A health officer, its designee, or registered
environmental health specialist representing the Union Township
Department of Health.
LEWD ACTS — Any conduct resulting in or likely to result in the exchange
of body fluids or contaminated waste, as defined by this chapter.
SANITARY — Characterized by or readily kept in cleanliness.
VERMIN — Small common harmful or objectionable animals that are
difficult to control.
§ 560-3. Authority and administration.
A. Pursuant to this chapter, the health authority shall have the following
authority:
(1) To investigate and inspect, without notice, the business premises of
any business governed by this chapter to ascertain compliance
herewith.
(2) As part of the aforementioned authority to investigate, the health
authority shall have access and be allowed to inspect all rooms,
equipment, furnishing, appliances, beds and beddings, and any
area deemed necessary to inspect or investigate.
(3) Have access and be provided with, upon request, all records,
documents, notes, manuals and employee information retained by
§ 560-2 DISEASES, CONTROL OF SPREAD OF § 560-3
560:921
§ 560-4. Health and disease controls.
the business and/or property or facility or person/entity in charge
of the business and/or property or facility being investigated or
inspected for potential infection, communicable diseases,
unsanitary condition and/or vermin infestation in order to prevent
or contain the spread of communicable diseases.
(4) Be permitted to take samples from any area or surface for
submission to a contracted laboratory to test for compliance with
the standards set forth in this chapter.
B. Following any inspection or investigation authorized by this chapter,
the health authority may, at its discretion, require any of the following:
(1) That any person exposed to or in contact with anyone reported to
have a disease of a communicable nature, as listed in the most
current regulation, N.JA.C. 8:57, submit to a physical examination,
x-ray, laboratory test, and any other such diagnostic procedure to
determine if such person is communicable or is in a carrier state,
and shall prohibit any business from allowing any aforesaid person
from returning to the business or its facility until such exams are
completed.
(2) Any person who is ill, infected, infested with a communicable
disease may, by virtue of the agent of a communicable disease, type
of job function, and/or virulence of the communicable disease, be
prohibited from working or appearing in or around a place of
business until his or her communicable disease abates and the
person is cleared, in writing, by a physician to return to work; said
written clearance shall be provided to the Health Officer.
(3) Quarantine to prevent or control the spread of this disease,
provided that any quarantine order be provided in writing and that
no period of quarantine exceed the period of incubation of the
disease.
A. Persons, while affected with any disease in a communicable form, or
while a carrier of such disease, or while affected with boils, infected
wounds, sores, acute respiratory infection, nausea, vomiting, or
diarrhea which could expose others to infection/infestation, shall not
work in any area or in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such
person contaminating contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms, or
transmitting disease to other individuals, and no person known or
suspected of being affected with any such disease or condition shall be
employed in any such area or capacity.
B. If the manager or person in charge has reason to suspect that any
employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form which
could result in the spread of that disease or has become a carrier of
§ 560-3 UNION CODE § 560-4
560:922
§ 560-5. Hygiene; hand washing.
§ 560-6. Sanitary controls.
such disease, he shall advise the employee to contact his physician for
treatment and shall relieve him of duties.
C. The health authority shall use the latest edition of the American Public
Health Association's text, "Control of Communicable Diseases in Man,"
as guideline for the characteristics and control of diseases, unless other
rules, guidelines or interpretations are issued by the State Department
of Health.
A. Hygiene practices.
(1) Employees shall not use tobacco in any form while engaged in
service.
(2) The employees shall wear disposable medical grade gloves at all
times during the cleanup and disinfection of contaminated
surfaces.
(3) Gloves shall be changed if they become contaminated by contact
with any non-clean surfaces, objects, contact with a third person, or
torn.
(4) Gloves shall be discarded after completion of each procedure.
Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on
more than one cleanup and disinfecting procedure.
(5) At the completion of the procedure, the employee shall dispose of
the gloves, and the hands shall be thoroughly washed.
(6) Written policies and procedures shall be established for
management of employees or clients that have latex allergies.
B. Hand washing.
(1) The hands of all employees shall be kept clean while engaged in
work. Employees shall thoroughly wash their hands and exposed
arms with soap and warm water before starting work, and shall
wash hands during work hours as often as is necessary to keep
them clean, and after smoking, eating, drinking, or visiting the
toilet room.
(2) Employees shall keep their fingernails clean and neatly trimmed.
(3) At all times, the owner or his designee shall assure the continuous
posting of hand-washing signs above urinals, on the inside door to
toilet stalls and upon the inside of the exit door of all rest rooms.
A. Hand-washing facilities:
§ 560-4 DISEASES, CONTROL OF SPREAD OF § 560-6
560:923
(1) Hand-washing facilities shall be adequate in size and number and
shall be so located and maintained as to permit convenient and
expeditious use by all employees.
(2) Hand-washing facilities shall be located within or immediately
adjacent to all toilet rooms or vestibules.
(3) Hand-washing facilities shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-1,
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(4) Each hand-washing facility shall be designed to provide hot and
cold or tempered water (90º Fahrenheit to 105º Fahrenheit).
(5) An adequate supply of hand-cleansing soap or detergent shall be
available at each hand-washing facility. An adequate supply of
towels, or an approved hand-drying device shall be available and
conveniently located near the lavatory. Common towels are
prohibited. Where disposable towels are used, waste receptacles
shall be located conveniently near the hand-washing facilities.
(6) All components of the hand-washing facilities shall be kept clean
and in good repair.
(7) Hand-washing facilities shall be used only for hand-washing
purposes.
B. Toilet facilities:
(1) Each establishment shall be provided with adequate, conveniently
located toilet facilities accessible to the public and employees at all
times.
(2) Toilet facilities shall be installed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-1,
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(3) Water closets and urinals shall be of a sanitary design and be
cleanable.
(4) Toilet rooms shall be easily cleanable, completely enclosed, and
shall have tight-fitting, self-closing doors. Such doors shall not be
left open except during cleaning or maintenance. If vestibules are
provided, they shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair.
(5) Toilet facilities, including toilet rooms and fixtures, shall be kept
clean and in good repair, and free of objectionable odors.
(6) A supply of toilet tissue shall be provided at each toilet at all times.
(7) Hand-washing signs stating: "Wash Hands Before Resuming Work,"
or words of similar meaning, shall be posted conspicuously in all
toilet moms and at each separate lavatory facility. It is also
recommended that a statement concerning disease transmission be
included. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste
materials, and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be
§ 560-6 UNION CODE § 560-6
560:924
covered. Such receptacles shall be emptied at least once a day, and
more frequently when necessary to prevent excessive accumulation
of waste material.
C. Shower facilities:
(1) Showers shall conform to the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23.
(2) Shower stall floors which are located adjacent to walkways shall be
lower than the level of the walkways.
(3) The cross-sectional area of the floor drains in shower rooms and
stalls shall be at least twice the cross-sectional area of the outlet
pipe to which it is connected.
(4) Wood slats or wood flooring material and slopes which are
conducive to slipping, tripping, or falling shall not be used.
(5) Showers shall be cleaned and periodically disinfected especially
when there is a change in occupancy or use.
D. Garbage and rubbish disposal facilities:
(1) All garbage and rubbish shall be kept in leakproof nonabsorbent
containers constructed of durable metal or other approved types of
material which do not leak and do not absorb liquids.
(2) All containers while being stored shall be provided with tight-fitting
lids or covers and shall, unless kept in a special verminproofed
room or enclosure or in a waste refrigerator, be kept covered.
(3) There shall be sufficient receptacles in rooms and areas to hold no
more than one day's solid waste.
(4) These receptacles shall be emptied daily.
(5) Containers and receptacles shall be changed and disinfected at the
change of occupancy.
(6) Liners may be used but they must be changed daily, and the
container shall be cleaned and, when necessary, disinfected.
(7) Plastic bags shall be used for the removal of soiled waste.
(a) Bags shall be of sufficient strength to safely contain waste from
point of origin to point of disposal and shall be effectively
closed prior to disposal.
(b) Outside storage containers for solid waste shall be kept
covered and shall comply with local ordinances.
E. Medical waste: Items saturated and/or dripping with blood or body
fluids shall be handled, stored, packaged, labeled, transported and
§ 560-6 DISEASES, CONTROL OF SPREAD OF § 560-6
560:925
§ 560-7. Environmental controls.
disposed of in accordance with the provisions and standards found at
N.J.A.C. 7:26-3A as medical waste.
A. Floor, walls and ceilings:
(1) All floors shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(2) The floor surfaces in all rooms and areas including dressing or
locker rooms, and toilet rooms, shall be of smooth, nonabsorbent
materials, and so constructed as to be easily cleanable.
(3) Floors that are water-flushed for cleaning or that receive other
fluid waste shall be constructed only of sealed concrete, terrazzo,
ceramic tile or similar materials, and shall be graded to drain.
(4) Carpeting, if used as a floor covering, shall be of closely woven
construction, properly installed, easily cleanable, and shall be kept
clean as to sight, touch and smell and maintained in good repair.
Carpeting is prohibited in toilet room areas where urinals or toilet
fixtures are located. Carpeting must be vacuumed with a HEPA
unit, and is cleaned and sanitized after each occupancy or use.
B. Housekeeping:
(1) Adequate facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of
employees' clothing and personal belongings. Dressing rooms or
designated areas shall be provided.
(2) Adequate lockers within dressing rooms or other suitable facilities
shall be provided and used for the storage of employees' coats,
clothing and personal belongings.
(3) Dressing rooms or areas, and lockers, shall be kept in a clean
condition.
(4) All parts of the establishment and its premises shall be kept neat,
clean, and free of litter and rubbish.
(5) Vacuum cleaning, wet cleaning shall be used, or dust-arresting
sweeping compounds and push broom shall be employed, and all
such cleaning, except emergency floor cleaning, shall be done
during those periods when there is the least amount of exposure to
the public.
C. Pest/vermin control:
(1) Controls shall be used to minimize or eliminate the presence of
rodents, flies, roaches, and other vermin. The premises shall be
kept in such condition as to prevent the breeding, harborage, or
feeding of vermin. The application of pesticide shall conform to the
§ 560-6 UNION CODE § 560-7
560:926
requirements of the New Jersey Pesticide Control Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:30.
(2) No live animals shall be kept or allowed in any room. An exception
shall be made for service animals, which shall be permitted for the
purpose of accompanying physically disabled persons.
(3) All openings to the outer air shall be effectively protected against
the entrance of insects by self-closing doors, closed windows,
screening, controlled air currents, or other effective means.
(4) Screening material shall not be less than 16 mesh to the inch or
equivalent.
D. Decontamination of environmental surfaces:
(1) Body fluid spills on environmental surfaces shall be cleaned as
specified in the Occupation Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) Rule 29 CFR Part 1910.1030, Occupational Exposure to
Bloodborne Pathogens.
(2) Aluminum foil or plastic covers shall be used to protect items and
surfaces (for example, light handles) that may become
contaminated by blood or saliva and that are difficult or impossible
to clean and disinfect. Between clients, coverings shall be removed,
discarded, and replaced with clean material.
(3) A low-level disinfectant shall be used on general environmental
surfaces.
(a) Surfaces shall be disinfected after each use.
(b) Horizontal surfaces shall be disinfected daily.
(c) Rest rooms shall be disinfected daily.
E. Standards of cleanliness:
(1) If, following investigation or inspection conducted by the health
authority pursuant to this chapter, a contracted laboratory
determines that a sample obtained from the premises of any
business governed by this chapter contains evidence of any blood,
semen, vaginal secretion, body fluid, or other contaminated waste,
then the facility will have failed to maintain a standard of
cleanliness and shall be in violation of this chapter.
(2) If, following investigation or inspection conducted by the health
authority pursuant to this chapter, a contracted laboratory
determines that a sample obtained from the premises of any
business governed by this chapter contains evidence of an
unacceptable level of bacteria or virus, then the facility will have
failed to maintain a standard of cleanliness and shall be in violation
of this chapter.
§ 560-7 DISEASES, CONTROL OF SPREAD OF § 560-7
560:927
§ 560-8. Emergency response.
(3) If, following investigation or inspection conducted by the health
authority pursuant to this chapter, the officer or his designee
makes direct observation of unacceptable levels of soil, dirt,
vermin, organic matter, or odor, the business shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter.
A. Outbreak notification. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:13-1 et seq., the New
Jersey Emergency Health Powers Act, or N.J.S.A. 26:4-2, when any
pandemic, epidemic, endemic or outbreak is declared, the Health
Department of the Township of Union shall:
(1) Strictly enforce reporting requirements of N.J.A.C. 8:57-1.1 et seq.
(2) Investigate all suspected cases of illness.
(3) Trace all contacts of the index cases.
(4) Impose, as may be required, social distancing.
(5) Require medical examinations, as may be required, of those ill or
exposed.
(6) Isolate anyone ill with the suspected disease.
(7) Quarantine anyone who has been exposed and assure monitoring
for signs of illness.
(8) Order the disinfecting of any area, item, equipment, etc. that has
been or may been contaminated.
B. Investigations. The Health Officer or his designee shall investigate any
person or persons and any environment to determine:
(1) If a single case or an outbreak of a communicable disease exists;
(2) Ascertain the source and spread of the infection;
(3) Identify household, work and social contacts of the ill person or
persons; and
(4) Determine and implement appropriate control measures to contain,
remediate, and abate the outbreak.
C. Medical examination. The Health Officer or his designee may order in
writing any person who may be ill or may have been exposed to submit
to a medical examination, including but not limited to an x-ray,
laboratory samples, and other diagnostic as may be deemed necessary.
D. Isolation. Any person who is ill with a communicable disease or whose
illness is suspected to be communicable may be removed by the Health
Officer. The Health Officer, by written order, may cause the ill person to
be removed to a hospital or other such medical care facility for
§ 560-7 UNION CODE § 560-8
560:928
§ 560-9. Prohibitions.
isolation. This order shall remain in force until terminated by the Health
Officer.
E. Quarantine:
(1) The Health Officer may, by written order, restrict any person or
persons who have been exposed to a communicable disease, under
conditions specified by the Health Officer, for the period not to
exceed the incubation of the disease.
(2) Restrictions may include but are not limited to:
(a) Quarantine in house or at a quarantine center;
(b) Social distancing in the community, which shall result in:
[1] Closing of schools.
[2] Canceling public transportation.
[3] Suspending public gatherings.
[4] Imposition and enforcement of enteric, universal and/or
respiratory precautions.
F. Disinfection. The Health Officer may, by an order in writing, require
high-level disinfection of all surfaces, equipment, areas, rooms, HVAC
systems, etc. where highly pathogenic agents may pose a biohazard.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or business to prevent, impede or
interfere with the health authority in an inspection or an investigation
being conducted pursuant to this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale, rent, use or accommodate any
articles of clothing, furniture, bedding, equipment or other goods and
items which a person knows, or reasonably should have known, was
contaminated from bacteria, mold, viruses, vermin, body fluids or
pathogenic substances.
C. It shall be unlawful to negligently maintain any environment, including
a room, common area, area, equipment, bed and/or furnishing, in a
condition determined to be unsanitary, infested, unclean, or unsuitable
for the health, safety, welfare and comfort of those who occupy, use or
visit said environment.
D. It shall be unlawful to negligently allow rooms, beds, furnishings,
equipment, areas and environments that have been previously used or
occupied by others without first providing clean, laundered and
disinfected bedding; a cleaning to eliminate the presence of foreign
matter, vermin, blood, body fluids, fecal matter or any source of
contamination until the source is eliminated, cleaned and sanitized.
§ 560-8 DISEASES, CONTROL OF SPREAD OF § 560-9
560:929
§ 560-10. Violations and penalties.
Any entity or person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of no less
than $100, nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or
by community service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service as determined in the discretion of the
Municipal Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violations may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 563
FEES, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees (Township departments and Police
Department) — See Ch. 268
§ 563-1. Fee schedule established.
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to
licenses, permits, and activities required or regulated by the Board of
Health:
E. It shall be unlawful to knowingly allow an employee, patron, invitee
and/or visitor who is ill with a communicable disease, vermin
infestation, or source of infection to use, frequent or occupy any area,
equipment, bedding, furnishing, etc., unless that individual has been
treated medically and is no longer a reservoir of infection/infestation
and no longer communicable.
F. It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit, authorize or allow lewd acts on
the premises of any business governed by this chapter.
G. It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly release, convey, transfer,
spread, or expose another person or persons or to allow for a person to
spread or expose another person to any communicable disease, agent
or vermin that may result in the spread of disease.
H. It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly release, convey, transfer,
spread, or expose another person or persons or allow for a person to
spread or expose another person to any communicable disease,
infectious agent or vermin that is capable of causing disease.
I. It shall be unlawful for any business to maintain its facilities or place of
business in violation of § 560-6, Sanitary controls, and § 560-7, above.
§ 560-9 UNION CODE § 563-1
560:930
A. Food establishments (consistent with definitions of Township Code
Chapter 596, Article I).
(1) Types.
(a) Risk type 1 food establishment: $100.
(b) Risk type 2 food establishment: $175.
(c) Risk type 3 food establishment: $250.
(d) Risk type 4 food establishment: $350.
(e) Temporary food establishments: $25 per day, not to exceed five
consecutive days.
(f) Produce stores offering only fresh fruits and vegetables, uncut:
$100.
(g) Produce stands offering only fresh fruits and vegetables, uncut
temporary, not to exceed 30 days in any one season: $100.
(h) Smoking in retail food facilities is prohibited per N.J.S.A.
26:3D-55 et seq. (exceptions: cigar bars and cigar lounges
must comply with N.J.A.C. 8:6-1 et seq.).
(i) Farmers market vendor: $100.255 [Added 5-14-2018]
(2) Food facility plan review.
(a) New construction, conversion of an existing structure or
remodeling or change of a food facility require properly
prepared floor plans, equipment specifications, proposed
menu, volume of food to be stored, prepared and/or sold and/or
served be submitted to the Health Department prior to any
construction, remodeling, alteration or changes of the facility.
(b) Required submission shall include:
[1] Layout of equipment and facilities.
[2] Mechanical schematics, construction materials and finish.
[3] Equipment types, manufacturer's specifications (cut
sheets), model number, location of equipment on floor plan
and legended with equipment on floor plan and legended
with equipment numbered and coves pending number on
the manufacturer's specifications (cut) sheet;
[4] Performance capacities and installation instructions for
each of the equipment.
255. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(i), regarding nonprofit organizations, was repealed
12-14-2011.
§ 563-1 DISEASES, CONTROL OF SPREAD OF § 563-1
560:931
[5] Other information as may be required by the Health
Department.
(c) Period of review.
[1] Upon submission of the plans and specifications as
identified above, a date stamp shall mark the receipt of
submission.
[2] The Health Department has 30 days from the plan
submission date; however, if there is missing or incomplete
information, the thirty-day period will only apply
subsequent to the applicant submitting all the required
information.
[3] Construction renovation, remodeling or changes shall not
begin until the Health Officer has given his approval of the
plans as is or as may require modification to be code
compliant.
[4] Construction, remodeling, etc., of the facility shall be
consistent with the approved plans. Any changes must
have written prior approval of the Health Officer.
[5] Fee schedule for plan review: existing fee schedule in
§ 563-1A(1) and (2).
[6] A preoperational inspection is required and must pass with
a satisfactory rating before a new constructed, renovated,
or converted establishment can be granted a license to
operate. A satisfactory rating is only issued when the
Health Department determines compliance with N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq.
(3) Incidental food provisions:
(a) Ice: $25.
(b) Ice cream: $25.
(c) Ice cream truck: $100.
(d) Milk: $25.
(e) Mobile retail food establishment according to N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5,
including kiosks: $200.
(f) Vending permit: $80.
(g) Vending license stamps, each: $8.
(4) Any individual, company or business establishment causing or
affected by a situation requiring an inspection or emergent service
by the Board of Health or its personnel during off-duty hours shall
§ 563-1 UNION CODE § 563-1
560:932
Chapter 568
FOOD SERVICE PERSONNEL
§ 568-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD — Includes any substance used or intended to be used as food or
drink for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE — A certificate provided for herein issued
by the Union Health Department or any other agency recognized by the
Union Health Department and acting on its behalf.
be billed by the Board of Health for the reasonable cost of said
inspection or emergent service.
B. Fee schedule for other than food.
(1) Laundries, launderettes, dry-cleaning establishments: $100.
(2) Vital statistics:
(a) Birth certificate: $10.
(b) Burial permit: $15.
(c) Death certificate: $10. [Amended 11-9-2016]
(d) Marriage certificate: $10.
(e) Marriage license: $28 (NOTE: $25 is sent to the Division of
Youth and Family Services in Newark, NJ).
(f) Corrections: $0.
(3) Wells:
(a) Well search: $5 per street.
(b) Well records: $15 per well.
C. Late fees for licenses and permits.
(1) A late payment fee is hereby established as follows: 25% of the
established annual licensing fee.
(2) For those new establishments commencing business from October
1 through December 31 of the year, the licensing fee shall be 25%
of the established annual licensing fee for that calendar year.
(3) A five-day period of grace following the established license
deadline is hereby established.
§ 563-1 FOOD SERVICE PERSONNEL § 568-1
568:933
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee
shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich
shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand;
industrial feeding establishment; private, public or nonprofit organization
or institution serving food; catering kitchen; commissary; box lunch
establishment; retail bakery; meat market; delicatessen; grocery store;
public food market; or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for
retail sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other retail
eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served, handled
or provided for the public with or without charge.
SUPERVISOR — Any person charged with the responsibility of overseeing
the operations, including the supervision of employees engaged in the
preparing, processing and sale of food or drink intended for human
consumption, be it for immediate on- or off-premises consumption.
§ 568-2. Food handler's certificate required.
No establishment shall operate for more than 90 days without the
supervisor(s) employed in that establishment applying for a food handler's
certificate.
§ 568-3. General instruction in bacteria characteristics.
No establishment shall operate for more than six months without the
supervisor(s) employed in that establishment completing a course of
general instruction in bacteria characteristics and growth, spread of
foodborne diseases, methods of preventing food poisoning, proper foodhandling
techniques, equipment and establishment sanitation, dishwashing
and sanitization and insect and rodent control.
§ 568-4. Nontransferability.
No person to whom a food handler's certification is issued or granted shall
give, loan, transfer or permit the same to be used by any other person for
any purpose whatsoever.
§ 568-5. Supervisors to have food handler's certificate.
Within six months of the enactment of this chapter, no establishment shall
be open for business in the preparing, processing and sale of food or
drink intended for human consumption without having a supervisor on the
premises who has a food handler's certificate.
§ 568-6. Comparable courses of instruction.
A food handler's certificate may be granted to a supervisor taking a
comparable course of instruction in another municipality approved by the
Township of Union.
§ 568-1 UNION CODE § 568-7
568:934
§ 568-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation or other organization violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500, in the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, for each offense. Any license issued by the
Union Township Board of Health for any premises wherein a violation of this
chapter is found to exist may, in the discretion of said Board of Health and
after proper hearing had thereon, be revoked.
Chapter 575
HEALTH OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 577
HOUSING
Chapter 581
LAUNDRIES, LAUNDERETTES AND DRY-CLEANING
ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
§ 568-7 HEALTH OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL § 568-7
575:935

ARTICLE I
Business Operations
[Adopted 5-4-1948 (Ch. 304, Art. I of the 1986 Code)]
§ 581-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated;
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT — A place of business conducted for the
purpose of cleansing or removing dirt, grease or other stains from wearing
apparel, textiles or fabrics, or similar items, by processes using nonaqueous
liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable, and shall include the process
of dyeing clothes or other fabrics or textiles in a solution of dye colors and
nonaqueous liquid solvents.
LAUNDERETTE — A place of business conducted for the purpose of
laundering items brought to said establishment by individuals and wherein
there is located one or more washing machines owned by the establishment
and which are used by the individuals bringing the laundry to said place of
business.
LAUNDRY — A place of business conducted for the purpose of laundering
items that may be brought to said place of business or collected by said
establishment and brought to said location, wherein all of the work is done
by or under the supervision of the owner of said business.
§ 581-2. Conduct in residential building. [Amended 3-4-1970;
12-12-1990]
It shall be unlawful to conduct a laundry, launderette or dry-cleaning
establishment in any residential building; provided, however, that:
§ 581-3. Operating license required. [Amended 12-2-1970;
12-12-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any
laundry, launderette or dry-cleaning establishment without securing from
the Board of Health of the Township of Union in the County of Union a
A. This prohibition shall not apply to a residential building in which there
are located washing or laundry facilities operated and used for the
exclusive benefit of the occupants of said building, in which event no
license shall be required.
B. This prohibition shall not apply to any residential building in which the
operator of the proposed laundry or launderette is the owner of said
residential building, and provided further that said residential building
does not contain more than three families, in which event, however, the
operator of said laundry or launderette shall be required to obtain a
license as provided for in this article and to otherwise comply with all of
the terms of this article.
§ 581-1 LAUNDRIES, LAUNDERETTES AND DRY- § 581-3
581:937
license for said purpose. A separate license shall be required for each
establishment. Said license shall expire on the 31st day of December
following the date of its issuance. No such license shall be issued unless the
premises in which the business is to be conducted comply in all respects
to the requirements of the Fire Department, the Building Code and the
Plumbing Code.256 The annual license fee for the full year, or any portion
thereof, in the case of a laundry or a launderette shall be the sum provided
for in the Fees Schedule.257
§ 581-4. Sanitary conditions. [Amended 12-19-1955]
The entire premises devoted to the conduct of said laundry or launderette
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and all areas
where the actual work of washing or laundering is performed shall be
adequately ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial light.
All walls shall be covered with nonabsorbent paint, cement or other
impervious material. There shall also be available an adequate supply of
hot and cold water for flushing and cleaning purposes. The floors of such
room or area shall have a covering of impervious material. There shall
be provided a slab of concrete not less than four inches thick in front
of all washing machinery or equipment, and such slab shall extend from
a point not less than 12 inches under such machinery or equipment and
shall terminate at a point not less than 48 inches from the front face
of such machinery or equipment. This concrete slab shall be so graded
as to drain into a floor drain having a direct connection with the house
drain. All washing machinery and equipment discharging waste or water
shall discharge into a waste line which shall be directly connected to the
house drain. Such waste line shall not receive the discharge of any other
fixtures. Each piece of machinery or equipment shall be separately and
independently trapped and vented and shall conform with the provisions of
the Plumbing Code of the Township of Union.
§ 581-5. Quarantined premises.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any laundry or launderette to
knowingly receive from any person, firm or corporation, or for any person,
firm or corporation to deliver to any laundry or launderette, any household
washing garments, bedclothes or other articles which come from a
residence or other premises quarantined by reason of the presence of a
communicable disease. Every laundry and launderette shall have posted
in conspicuous places in the receiving room open to the public that it is
unlawful to deliver to said laundry or launderette any items from any such
residence or other premises which is so quarantined.
256. Editor's Note: See Ch. 237, Construction Codes, Uniform.
257. Editor's Note: See Ch. 563, Fees, Board of Health.
§ 581-3 UNION CODE § 581-6
581:938
§ 581-6. Records.
Every laundry and launderette shall keep a record of the name and address
of all persons sending or bringing items to said laundry or launderette.
§ 581-7. Clean condition of machines.
All machines used for washing or laundering shall be thoroughly cleaned
before its next use by an attendant employed by the operator of such
laundry or launderette by a scalding process to which a germicide is added,
the temperature of the water so used to be at least 165° F. during the entire
cleaning process.
§ 581-8. Sterilization.
In all cases where the patrons of said laundry or launderette use an
extractor to remove surplus water, the laundry must thereafter be placed in
the dryer on the premises before it may be removed therefrom, and all such
dryers must be operated at a temperature of not less than 175° F. in order
to effect sterilization.
§ 581-9. Diapers.
No laundry or launderette shall permit diapers or any other materials
containing bodily excrement or discharges to remain outside of the laundry
or launderette. All such articles shall be washed in machines especially
designated for such purpose, and all such machines so designated shall be
appropriately and conspicuously marked and shall not be used for any other
purpose.
§ 581-10. Noise requirement.
All machinery used in any laundry or launderette shall be operated in such
a manner so as to cause no unnecessary or unreasonable noise or vibration
to the detriment of the well-being of the neighborhood.
§ 581-11. Attendant on premises. [Amended 4-5-1961]
No launderette shall be permitted to operate unless an attendant shall be on
the premises at all times during the hours of operation of said launderette.
§ 581-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-4-1970; 12-2-1970]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty of not more than $500 nor
less than $5, in the discretion of the court. Conviction under the terms of
this article shall be sufficient cause for the revocation or suspension of the
license herein provided for.
§ 581-6 LAUNDRIES, LAUNDERETTES AND DRY- § 581-12
581:939

ARTICLE II
Dry-Cleaning Establishments; Guidelines
[Adopted 12-12-1990 (Ch. 304, Art. II of the 1986 Code)]
§ 581-13. Guidelines established.
The Township of Union's Department of Health and Environmental
Protection guidelines for dry-cleaning establishments include the following:
A. Any new or renovated facility utilizing perchloroethylene or any other
potentially hazardous material must meet all applicable local, state and
federal standards (i.e., NJDEP, OSHA, etc.).
B. In new or renovated establishments, vaportight (i.e., gastight) barriers
or surface treatments must be utilized to prevent fugitive
perchloroethylene emissions from entering any adjacent facilities. This
condition should be met whether other engineering controls, such as
local exhaust ventilation, are planned or already exist. Common HVAC
systems that would allow the spread of such vapors to other occupied
areas will not be permitted.
C. Vapors must be minimized to reduce personal exposure and contact of
chlorinated hydrocarbon solvent (i.e., perchloroethylene) with an open
flame or hot surface. All ventilation plans require local approval.
D. Portable perchloroethylene detectors (i.e., halide detector) must be
available on site for detection of leaks and other sources of
perchloroethylene emissions on a regular basis.
E. All reasonable efforts must be made to reduce or eliminate emissions
and protect employees during routine maintenance or emergency
procedures (i.e., gloves, NIOSH-approved respiratory protection,
chemical splash goggles, local exhaust, personal hygiene, etc.).
F. Unless otherwise approved, on-site storage of perchloroethylene shall
be limited to machine capacity plus one fifty-five-gallon drum of new
product or its equivalent. Containers of perchloroethylene must be
stored upright and be provided with an approved pump system. Product
storage is to be located in a nonpublic area and placed in a leaktight
container or trough capable of collecting all accidental spill material.
G. Records are to be maintained on site noting quantity of generated
waste, removal date and the name, address and telephone number of
the licensed hazardous waste hauler.
H. Written emergency procedures are to be developed and implemented
that include appropriate training and education of all affected
employees as required by the "OSHA Hazardous Communication Rule,"
Title 29, Part 1920.1200. The following items are to be included in the
emergency procedures:
(1) Emergency telephone numbers posted near each phone.
§ 581-13 LAUNDRIES, LAUNDERETTES AND DRY- § 581-13
581:941
§ 581-14. Violations and penalties.258
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a penalty of not more than $500 nor less than $50, in the discretion of the
court.
(2) At least one person with proper first aid training must be present
on each workshift. First aid kits adequate for the number of
employees present must be available in a prominent location.
(3) Perchloroethylene is to be promptly removed from the skin and
soap and water to prevent absorption and irritation.
(4) Immediate medical attention must be obtained for anyone exposed
to large amounts of perchloroethylene vapors. Employees are to be
reminded not to enter hazardous areas without proper safeguards.
258. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 550, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I).
§ 581-13 UNION CODE § 581-14
581:942
Chapter 585
NOISE
§ 585-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways, or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTIUSE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 581-14 LAUNDRIES, LAUNDERETTES AND DRY- § 585-1
581:943
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of a local, county or regional
health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental
Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement
activities, or a municipality with a Department-approved noise control
ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement training and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using his
or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under
investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound-amplification or -
reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road,. highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 585-2. Applicability.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multiuse property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multiuse property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
§ 585-1 UNION CODE § 585-2
581:944
§ 585-3. Declaration of findings and policy.
§ 585-4. Noise control officers.
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multiuse properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities:
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multiuse properties; and
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and whereas a substantial body of
science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and whereas the people have a right to, and
should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound, now
therefore it is the policy of the Township of Union Board of Health to
prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or
safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life.
B. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from
sources within the Township of Union.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by noise control
officers. A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C.
§ 585-2 LAUNDRIES, LAUNDERETTES AND DRY- § 585-4
581:945
§ 585-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification course which are
offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College,
Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey or any other noise
certification or recertification course which is offered by an accredited
university and approved by the Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 585-5B and C of this regulation and with the definition of "real
property line" as contained herein.259
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Township of Union and cooperate with all other public bodies and
agencies to the extent practicable;
(2) Review the actions of the Township of Union and advise of the
effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter; and
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II,260 when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with § 585-7 below; and
(5) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 585-2A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II, except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multiuse
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
259. Editor's Note: The definition of "real property line" is located in § 585-1.
260. Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 585-4 UNION CODE § 585-5
581:946
§ 585-6. Exceptions. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 5285261]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following exceptions:
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g.. television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multiuse property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multiuse property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling-unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling-
unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.
D. Impulsive sound. Impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels
at all times.
A. The operational performance standards established at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.2
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) Agricultural activities;
(2) Bells, chimes or carillons, which may include electronic devices
that imitate the sounds of bells, chimes or carillons, while being
used in conjunction with religious services;
(3) Emergency energy-release devices;
(4) When public health or safety is involved, emergency work to
provide electricity, water, or other public utilities; to conduct
emergency construction or demolition work; to make emergency
repairs to public roadways or bridges; to address emergency
incidents such as cleanup of spills of hazardous materials; or, upon
written approval of authorized enforcement agency, to utilize
sound-producing devices to relocate wildlife;
(5) Motor vehicle racetrack facilities engaged in the racing of motor
vehicles;
(6) National Warning System (NAWAS): systems used to warn the
community of attack or imminent public danger such as flooding or
explosion. These systems are controlled by the New Jersey
Department of Law and Public Safety;
(7) Noise of aircraft flight operations;
261. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 585-6, Restricted uses and activities.
§ 585-5 LAUNDRIES, LAUNDERETTES AND DRY- § 585-6
581:947
§ 585-7. Enforcement.
(8) Public celebrations that are government-sponsored or governmentpermitted
events;
(9) Public roadways;
(10) Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad when the noise
sources in question are trains in motion, operating retarders, train
horns and whistles, or performing locomotive load test cell stands;
(11) The unamplified human voice;
(12) Use of explosive devices: These are regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Labor and Workforce Development under the 1960
Explosive Act (N.J.S.A. 21:1A-1 to 21:1A-21262);
(13) Normal operation of a handgun, rifle, shotgun, skeet-shooting or
trapshooting range which has been maintained continuously in the
same location since January 24, 1972; or
(14) Emergency electricity generators at a residential, industrial,
commercial, or community service facility in use during an
electrical outage.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in
municipal court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
262. Editor’s Note: See now N.J.S.A. 21:1A-128 et seq.
§ 585-6 UNION CODE § 585-7
581:948
Chapter 589
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 168.
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves — See Ch. 192.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Noise — See Ch. 378.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 434.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 596.
§ 589-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting the lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and the recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health
in removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.263
A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 589-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 589-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for the use and examination of the public.
§ 589-4. Violations and penalties.264
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $100 nor
263. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 550, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 585-7 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 589-4
589:949
more than $500 for each violation or such other penalties as the appropriate
statutes may provide.
Chapter 593
RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disease prevention — See Ch. 560.
§ 593-1. Permit or license required.
No recreational bath place, as defined by N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq., shall be
located, constructed, altered or operated until a permit or license therefor
shall have been issued by the Township of Union Department of Health and
Environmental Control.
§ 593-2. Fees.
The following fees and charges are hereby established:
§ 593-3. Term of license.
Term of license to operate an approved recreational bathing place shall
require an application be filed with the Health Department prior to January
1 of each year and the license, when issued, shall remain in effect, unless
suspended, until December 31 of each year.
§ 593-4. Sanitary and safety standards.
Sanitary and safety standards during the construction, alteration and
operation of a recreational bathing place in the Township of Union shall
be in accordance with New Jersey Administrative Code's Title 8, Chapter
26-1.1 et seq., a.k.a. New Jersey State Sanitary Code Chapter IX, authorized
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9, and are enforceable by the Health Officer of
the Township of Union or his designee.
§ 593-5. Denial or suspension of a license, hearing.
A. Plan submission and review to locate and construct a recreational
bathing place fee: $200.
B. Plan submission and review to provide minor alterations of a
recreational bath place fee: $50.
C. License to operate, or renewal license to operate, an approved
recreational bathing place: $100.
§ 589-4 UNION CODE § 593-5
593:950
§ 593-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating this chapter, or any
provision of N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq., shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10.
§ 593-7. Inconsistent ordinances and codes repealed.
Any and all ordinances, codes, or parts of some inconsistent with this
chapter, or with N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq., are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency.
Chapter 596
SANITARY STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and leaves — See Ch. 192.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 434.
Solid waste — See Ch. 462.
Nuisances — See Ch. 589.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
602.
A. A license required by this chapter may be denied or suspended by the
Township of Union Board of Health for failure to comply with this
chapter or with N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq.
B. An applicant or license holder whose license is denied or suspended
shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the Board of Health upon
written request to the Health Officer within 10 business days from
receipt of notice of denial or suspension.
C. A date and time of the hearing shall be established by the Board, and
the applicant or license holder shall be notified.
D. The suspension or denial shall remain in effect until a formal decision is
determined by the Board of Health. The Board's decision shall be
provided in writing to the applicant or license holder by the Health
Officer.
§ 593-5 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 593-7
593:951

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 596-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD or BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Township of
Union in the County of Union.
CARRIER — Any person who is a bearer or transmitter of communicable
disease germs and is himself immune to the disease.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — Any disease in which the causative agent
may be transmitted from person to person, from animal to person or from
animal to animal by direct or indirect means.
FOOD — A raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption, or chewing gum.[Added 12-17-2009]
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Township of Union,
appointed by the Board of Health of the Township of Union in the County of
Union.
ISOLATION — The placing apart of persons or animals affected with or
exposed to, or suspected of being affected with or exposed to, a
communicable disease for the purpose of preventing contact with other
persons and animals, and the establishment of reductions directly
surrounding such persons or animals.
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any movable restaurant,
truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle, water craft, or other movable unit, including
a hand-carried, portable container in or on which food or beverages are
transported, stored, or prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary
locations.[Added 12-17-2009]
OPERATOR — The entity that is legally responsible for the operation of the
retail food establishment such as the owner, the owner's agent, or other
person.[Added 12-17-2009]
PERSON — An association, a corporation, individual partnership, other
legal entity, government, or governmental subdivision or agency.[Amended
12-17-2009]
QUARANTINE — The confining of persons, animals or materials within a
designated area and the exclusion of other persons, animals or materials
from such areas.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — As defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5,
including risk types 1, 2, 3, and 4. Retail food establishments not included
in the N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5 definition but falling within the definition of risk type
1 such as listed in numbered paragraphs 1 through 6, while not defined as a
retail food establishment, shall be subjected to a temporary food permit as
issued by the Department of Health.[Added 12-17-2009]
§ 596-1 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-1
593:953
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A facility, including mobile or
stationary and a risk category 1, 2, 3, or 4 whose owner or operator
proposed to operate within the Township of Union municipal boundaries for
a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single
event.[Added 12-17-2009]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union in the County of Union.
§ 596-2. Right of entry. [Amended 12-17-2009]
The Health Officer and/or his lawful designees shall have the right to enter
into and upon any premises, public or private building or vehicle for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the health laws
and regulations of the State of New Jersey or to determine whether such
provisions or rules and regulations are being complied with or obeyed. No
person shall oppose such entry or hinder or interfere with the Health Officer
and/or his lawful designees in the performance of their duties.
§ 596-3. Permits and licenses.
A. License required for food service activities; license nontransferable
[Amended 10-14-1998; 12-17-2009]
(1) No individual, company, corporation, partnership, club, fraternal
organization, public or private school, preschool, child-care center,
nursery or any other entity, whether for profit or not for profit,
permanent or temporary, shall conduct or otherwise engage in any
type of food service activity, with or without charge, or conduct a
retail food establishment operation as defined in New Jersey
Administrative Code, Title 8, Chapter 24, without being in full
compliance with said code and without first having obtained a
license to do so from the Township of Union Department of Health
and Environmental Protection. This includes mobile food
establishments, establishments at fixed locations, bed-andbreakfast
facilities, food and drink vending machines and company
employees' cafeterias.
(2) Licenses required in § 596-3A(1) above are not transferable from
previous to new owner even if the corporation or business name
remains unchanged.
B. Issuance. [Amended 12-17-2009]
(1) All applications or permits required by this chapter or any
supplements thereto or amendments thereof except where
otherwise specifically provided shall be made to the office of the
Department of Health and Environmental Control and shall be in
such form and detail as the Department shall prescribe. Upon filing
of such an application and the payment of the fee prescribed
herein, the Health Officer is authorized to issue a license or permit
to the applicant, provided that he has complied with all the
§ 596-1 UNION CODE § 596-3
593:954
§ 596-4. Display of permits and licenses. [Amended 12-17-2009]
All permits and licenses shall be prominently displayed upon the premises
for which they were issued, and upon each and every vehicle or device used
in the business for which a license or permit is required, there shall be
displayed at all times in plain sight, on the left side or rear of said vehicle
or device, each current license or permit sign as may be provided by the
Department.
requirements and the relevant rules and regulations provided in
this chapter.
(2) An application may be denied for reasons of noncompliance with
Township codes, state law and/or regulations.
(3) If for any reason the application is denied, the applicant may
request, in writing, within seven business days from the date of the
notice of denial, to appeal said denial before the Board of Health at
their next regular monthly meeting.
(4) In the event that the applicant requests a special meeting of the
Board to hear his/her appeal, the applicant shall pay a fee
consistent with § 563-1A(4).
C. Revocation. In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the relevant rules and regulations provided herein, a
license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked after a
hearing before the Board of Health, upon charges filed with the Board
and a time for the hearing fixed of which the holder of the license or
permit shall have at least one week's notice by mail, addressed to the
address of the holder of the license or permit as the same appears upon
the aforesaid application. The penalty of revocation provided in this
subsection shall be in addition to any other penalties provided for
violations of this or any other ordinance of the Board. No person shall
operate any business or conduct any activity for which a license or
permit is required by this chapter or the amendments thereof or
supplements thereto after revocation thereof or during the period of
suspension thereof, as hereinafter provided.
D. Suspension. In the event of the violation by the holder of a license or
permit of any of the provisions of this chapter or of the relevant rules
and regulations provided herein, where the effect of such violation is
such as to constitute a hazard or injury to public health, the Health
Officer is authorized to suspend the license or permit pending the
hearing before the Board of Health provided in Subsection B of this
section. In the event of such suspension, the Health Officer shall, within
24 hours after notice of suspension, give to the holder of such license or
permit an opportunity for hearing before him and to present such
evidence as may be desired concerning such violation. After hearing,
the Health Officer may continue or discharge such suspension, but if
continued, an early hearing shall be provided by the Board.
§ 596-3 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-5
593:955
§ 596-5. Exhibiting permits upon demand. [Amended 12-17-2009]
Every holder of a license or permit shall exhibit the same upon demand
to the Health Officer or any other authorized representative of the Health
Officer or any peace officer of this municipality.
§ 596-5 UNION CODE § 596-5
593:956
ARTICLE II
Reportable Diseases
[The current provisions regarding reportable diseases in the
Township of Union are contained in Chapter II of the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Health Officer.]
RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-5
593:957

ARTICLE III
Milk and Milk Products
§ 596-6. Licenses and permits.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer or expose for sale, or
have in possession for sale or delivery in the Township of Union in the
County of Union any milk, cream or milk products, without first having
obtained a license for such sale or delivery to be issued upon
application and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth.
B. Such license shall be issued in the name of the applicant by the Board of
Health of the Township of Union in the County of Union only after and
upon full compliance with the provisions of this article and shall be
issued only for the calendar year or remainder of the year in which the
license is granted. Each such license shall expire on the last day of the
year in which it was issued. The license shall not be transferable.
C. Every applicant obtaining a license for the sale or distribution of milk,
cream or milk products in the Township of Union in the County of Union
shall pay a fee as provided in the Fees Schedule265 for each plant, store,
station, vehicle or wagon used by the applicant for the sale or
distribution of milk, cream or milk products in the Township. Every
applicant obtaining a license for the sale or distribution of milk, cream
or similar products in the Township of Union in the County of Union
from a moving vehicle or wagon shall pay a fee as provided in the Fees
Schedule for each moving vehicle or wagon. Whenever requested by
the Health Officer, any person, firm or corporation engaged in the sale
or distribution of milk or milk products in said Township shall, within
three days of the request, furnish to the Health Officer a complete list of
all persons to whom milk or milk products are sold or distributed by the
licensee. [Amended 12-12-1990]
D. Upon the granting of a license, the Board of Health shall, after payment
of the license fee as provided in the Fees Schedule,266 furnish to the
licensee a sign for each plant, store, station, vehicle or wagon used by
the licensee. Such sign shall be conspicuously placed on the side of
each wagon or vehicle and, in the case of a store, plant or station, shall
be placed conspicuously above the counter, and such sign shall not be
removed therefrom until the expiration or other termination of said
license. [Amended 12-12-1990]
E. No plant, store, station, vehicle or wagon shall be operated for the sale
or delivery of milk, cream or milk products in the Township of Union in
the County of Union without a license as required by this article.
F. No license shall be granted for the sale or delivery of milk, cream or
milk products within said Township unless there shall be first filed with
265. Editor's Note: See Ch. 563, Fees, Board of Health.
266. Editor's Note: See Ch. 563, Fees, Board of Health.
§ 596-6 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-6
593:959
the Township of Union Department of Health and Environmental
Protection in the County of Union a written application. Such
application for a license or permit required under the terms of this
section shall be made in writing, signed by the person applying, upon
forms supplied by the Board for that purpose and shall truthfully set
forth all information which may be necessary to ascertain the facts
that the milk or cream proposed to be sold by the applicant is of
the standard and quality required by and was produced, handled,
processed and transported in accordance with the provisions of this
article and such other information as may be necessary to the proper
administration of this article.267
G. It shall be the duty of the Health Officer, in order to safeguard the
public health, to inquire carefully into the fitness, experience,
requirements and qualifications of each applicant and to determine and
report whether or not, in the opinion of the Health Officer, the license
should be granted. If the Health Officer recommends against granting a
license, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Health of the
Township.
H. No license shall be granted until after a satisfactory inspection has
been made by the Health Officer. The Board of Health may, however,
refuse to issue permits to sell any particular grade of milk unless it is
satisfied that the licensee is able to comply with the rules and
regulations under which such particular grade of milk must be sold.
I. Each license shall be granted on the condition that it is subject to
suspension or revocation for violation of any of the provisions of this
article or of any regulation thereunder.
J. All premises whereon milk is produced or handled for sale or
distribution in the Township of Union shall be open to the Board of
Health, its Health Officer or inspectors for inspection at all times, and
owners of cows from which milk is produced shall permit a veterinarian
employed by said Department to examine such cows at any time.
K. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, expose
for sale, distribute or to have in possession with intent to sell or
distribute in the Township of Union milk which has been produced upon
premises whereon any person shall be ill with communicable disease;
and notice shall immediately be given to the Health Officer of the
existence of any such disease upon such premises; milk produced upon
the premises of any person failing to give such notice shall not be sold
or delivered in the Township of Union until special permission therefor
has been obtained from said Health Officer.
L. The applicant for a license shall set forth the source or sources from
which the water for washing and cooling processes is obtained or is to
be obtained.
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 550, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 596-6 UNION CODE § 596-6
593:960
M. If at any time during the life of the license there is a change in the
source from which the licensee obtains milk or milk products or by
whom they are produced, or if there is a change in the source from
which water for washing and cooling purposes is obtained, the licensee
shall immediately notify the Board of Health of any such change.
N. Every license issued by the Board of Health for the sale or distribution
or bottling of milk shall be issued in the name of the owner of the
vehicle, store, bottling plant, depot or station in which milk or milk
products shall be sold or handled.
O. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require a license
for the sale of condensed (preserved) milk in hermetically sealed cans.
P. Permit for bulk milk and cream. No person shall sell any milk or cream
within the Township in containers of more than one quart's capacity
without obtaining a bulk milk or bulk cream permit to do so from the
Board. Such permit shall only be granted to persons licensed under
Subsection A of this section and shall permit the sale of milk and cream
in containers of more than one quart's capacity under the following
conditions and no other:
(1) In quantities of not less than 20 quarts in a single container to
operators of bakeries, confectioneries, hotels or restaurants for
cooking and manufacturing purposes only.
(2) In sanitary dispensers filled and sealed at the milk plant and so
constructed as to ensure adequate refrigeration during
transportation and use and the protection of the contents from
outside contamination for use by the operators of retail foodhandling
establishments as herein defined; provided, however, that
the type and construction of any such dispenser shall, before use,
be approved by the Board.
§ 596-6 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-6
593:961

ARTICLE IV
Housing
§ 596-7. Heating requirements. [Amended 12-12-1990]
§ 596-8. Sanitation requirements.
A. In all buildings designed to be occupied or occupied as residences by
three or more families, when the owners have agreed to supply heat,
from October 1 of each year to the next succeeding May 1, every unit of
dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall be maintained at
least at 68° F. whenever the outside temperature falls below 55° F.
during daytime hours from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. At times other than
those specified, interiors of units of dwelling space shall be maintained
at least 55° F. whenever the outside temperature falls below 40° F.
B. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not be responsible
for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior temperature
arising out of action by the occupants in leaving windows or doors open
to the exterior of the building. The owner shall be obligated to supply
required fuel or energy and maintain the heating system in good
operating condition so that it can supply heat as required herein
notwithstanding any contractual provision seeking to delegate or shift
responsibility to the occupant or third person, except that the owner
shall not be required to supply fuel or energy for heating purposes to
any unit where the occupant thereof agrees in writing to supply heat to
his own unit of dwelling space and the said unit is served by its own
exclusive heating equipment for which the source of heat can be
separately computed and billed.
C. Every person who shall have contracted or undertaken, or shall be
bound to heat, or to furnish heat for any building, or portion thereof,
occupied as a home or place of residence of one or more persons or as a
business establishment where one or more persons are employed, shall
heat or furnish such heat for every occupied room in such building, or
portion thereof, so that a minimum temperature of 68° F. shall be
maintained therein between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. in
any building or portion thereof occupied as a home or place of
residence and during the usual working hours established and
maintained in a building or portion thereof occupied as a business
establishment, between the dates of October 1 and May 1.
A. The owner, agent or other person in charge of any building, tenement or
apartment house occupied by three or more families shall provide
adequate and proper janitorial service at all times, for the purpose of
keeping the premises in a sanitary condition. [Amended 12-12-1990]
B. No owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of any building, house,
store, room or place shall maintain the same or permit the same, or any
portion thereof, to be maintained in any state of uncleanliness or
filthiness or in an unsanitary condition.
§ 596-7 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-9
593:963
§ 596-9. Discharging dust. [Amended 12-12-1990]
No tenant or occupant of any flat or apartment in any house occupied by
three or more families, and no agent, servant or employee of such tenant
or occupant, shall use any window, dumbwaiter, shaft, fire escape or porch
of such house for the purpose of discharging dust, by shaking or otherwise,
from clothes, rugs or other floor coverings, brooms, mops, rags or other
cleaning implements or material.
§ 596-10. Rats, mice and vermin.
No house, apartment, rooms or building shall be let, leased or occupied
by human beings which is infested with rats, mice or vermin. The owner,
lessor, agent or occupant of any such place, upon notice from the Board,
shall immediately proceed to rid said place of said rats, mice or vermin by
any reasonable and safe means approved by the Board.
§ 596-11. Garbage removal. [Amended 9-6-1972]
Every owner, tenant or occupant of any dwelling house or place of business
shall cause all garbage, refuse, swill, unwanted materials and offal to be
removed from the premises at least twice each week, and more often if so
ordered by the Board of Health.
§ 596-9 UNION CODE § 596-11
593:964
ARTICLE V
Weed Control268
[Amended 12-12-1990]
§ 596-12. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance, providing for
the removal or abatement thereof and the recovery of expenses incurred by
the Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisance and prescribing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws
of 1950.269 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 596-13. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this article is described and
commonly known as the "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 596-14. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of said Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of Health upon
the introduction of this article and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public so long as said article is in effect.
§ 596-15. (Reserved)270
268. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 192, Brush, Grass, Weeds and Leaves
269. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
270. Editor’s Note: Former § 596-15, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-14-2018.
§ 596-12 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-15
593:965

ARTICLE VI
Burning Refuse and Other Material
§ 596-16. Restrictions. [Amended 12-12-1990]
No materials of any kind which are offensive or injurious to health or
tend to decay or to become putrid or to render the atmosphere impure
or unwholesome, no substances of any kind gathered in cleaning yards or
buildings or waste of factories or disused vehicles or parts thereof and
no animal or vegetable substance or garbage or street sweepings shall be
burned or deposited upon or in any premises or be used to fill up or raise the
surface or level of any lot, grounds or premises whatsoever in the Township
of Union unless pursuant to a written permit previously granted to the
applicant therefor by the Board of Health of said Township. See also the Air
Pollution Control Code.
§ 596-16 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-16
593:967

ARTICLE VII
Scalp Micropigmentation/Permanent Cosmetic
[Added 5-14-2018271]
§ 596-17. Definitions.
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
ACCEPTABLE — Satisfactory or adequate; fulfilling the needs or
requirements of a specified rule.
AFTERCARE — Written instructions given to the client, specific to the scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics administered or rendered,
and the surrounding area. These instructions shall include information on
when it is necessary to seek medical treatment.
AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF GOVERNMENTAL INDUSTRIAL
HYGIENISTS (ACGIH) — That private nonprofit organization which, for the
purposes of this chapter, provides technical materials and expertise and is
located at 1330 Kemper Meadow Drive, Cincinnati, Ohio 45240.
ANTISEPTIC — An agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms on
human skin or mucosa.
APPRENTICE — Any person that performs the art of scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics under the direct
supervision of a practitioner in order to learn scalp micropigmentation and/
or permanent cosmetics.
APPROVED — Written acceptance by the New Jersey State Department of
Health and Senior Services.
BIOLOGICAL INDICATOR — A standardized viable population of
microorganisms known to be resistant to the mode of sterilization being
monitored.
CAMOUFLAGE — The application of pigment into skin altered by scars,
pigment loss or color abnormalities of the skin so as to make the area
appear to be part of the natural, surrounding skin. Examples include
treatment of patients with scars from hair transplants, accidents, face lifts,
breast reduction, as well as pigment abnormalities including vitiligo.
CHEMICAL INTEGRATOR — A chemical or physical device designed to
provide an integrated response to various defined combinations of
temperature, time, and the presence of steam.
CLEAN or CLEANLINESS — The absence of soil and dirt.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES — Diseases or conditions diagnosed by a
licensed physician as being contagious or transmissible which include, but
are not limited to, the following:
A. Chicken pox;
271. Editor's Note: Former Article VII, Penalties, as amended, was repealed 5-14-2018.
§ 596-17 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-17
593:969
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Any liquid or semiliquid blood or other
potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that would release
blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semiliquid state
if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially
infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during
handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and other potentially
infectious materials, as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:26-3A.
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
EMANCIPATED MINOR — A person under 18 years of age that has been
freed from the legal authority, care, custody, and control of another by the
effect of a written law or court order.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks and all
other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation
of scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic establishment.
ESTABLISHMENT — A physical place of business, permanent in nature,
and includes all areas used by a scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetics technician and clients, including, but not limited to, treatment
areas and waiting/reception area.
HAND SINK — A fixture equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the body.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — A Registered Environmental Health Specialist or
Health Officer representing the New Jersey Department of Health and
Senior Services or the local health department.
B. Diphtheria;
C. Measles;
D. Meningococcal disease;
E. Mumps;
F. Pertussis (whooping cough);
G. Plague;
H. Rubella;
I. Scabies;
J. Staphylococcal skin infection (boils, infected wounds);
K. Streptococcal infections (strep throat);
L. Tine (ring worm); and
M. Tuberculosis.
§ 596-17 UNION CODE § 596-17
593:970
HIGH LEVEL DISINFECTION — A process that kills vegetative bacteria,
tubercle bacillus, fungi, lipid and non-lipid viruses and bacterial spores.
HOT WATER — Water which attains and maintains a temperature between
95° F. and 110° F.
INVASIVE — Entry into the body either by incision or insertion of an
instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break or compromise the skin or mucosa.
LEGAL GUARDIAN — An individual who, by legal appointment or by the
effect of a written law, has been given custody of a minor or adult.
LOW-LEVEL DISINFECTANT — A process that kills most vegetative
bacteria, some fungi, and some viruses, but cannot be relied on to kill
resistant microorganisms such as mycobacteria or bacteria spores.
MEDICAL-GRADE GLOVES — A Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Class
I medical device made of natural rubber, vinyl or synthetic material (that
is, neoprene, polyvinyl chloride, styrene butadiene) that is worn to prevent
contamination between client and practitioner.
OPERATOR — Includes the owner or the owner's designee having
ownership, control or custody of any place of business or employment and
who manages the day-to-day operations of the scalp micropigmentation and/
or permanent cosmetics establishment.
PERMANENT COSMETICS, MICROPIGMENTATION or DERMAL
PIGMENTATION — The implanting of inert pigments, colors, and/or dyes
intradermally which results in permanent alteration of tissue to gain a
cosmetic effect.
PERMIT — Written approval by the health authority to operate a scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics establishment. Approval
is given in accordance with this article and is separate from any other
licensing requirement that may exist within communities or political
subdivisions comprising the jurisdiction.
PERSON — One or more individuals, legal representatives, partnerships,
joint ventures, associations, corporations (whether or not organized for
profit), business trusts, or any organized group of persons.
PHYSICIAN — A person who is licensed by the State Board of Medical
Examiners to practice medicine, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:9-1 and N.J.S.A.
26:1A-9 et seq.
PRACTITIONER — Any person that performs the act of scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics.
PREMISES — The entire building or structure within which scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic services are provided.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
the client's unclothed body during a scalp micropigmentation and/or
permanent cosmetics procedure, skin preparation of the area adjacent to
and including the site of the scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
§ 596-17 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-17
593:971
cosmetics procedure or any associated work area which may require
sanitizing.
PROCESSING EQUIPMENT — Mechanical devices used for the cleaning
and sterilization of instruments used for scalp micropigmentation and/or
permanent cosmetics, such as ultrasonic cleaners and steam sterilization
units.
SINGLE-USE — Products, instruments or items that are intended for onetime
use and are disposed of after each use, including, but not limited to,
cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups,
gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink
cups and protective gloves.
STERILIZATION — A process resulting in the destruction of all forms of
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial spores.
SUSPEND — Disciplinary action taken by the health authority.
TIP — The stainless steel replacement part that attaches to the body of the
tube.
TUBE — The stainless steel component which is attached to the scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics machine and the tip.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published
by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as "Guidelines
for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and
Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers" in Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6,
and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human
Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-
Prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8,
both incorporated herein by reference. This method of infection control
requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood
and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV and other blood
pathogens. Precautions include hand washing, gloving, personal protective
equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles,
other sharp instruments, and blood and body-fluid contaminated products.
WORK STATION — The area or room used for the purpose of performing
scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic procedures by a
practitioner, operator or apprentice.
§ 596-18. Procedure to locate and construct establishment.
A. Any person desiring to construct, expand, alter, or operate a scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics establishment shall
apply in writing to the local health authority for review and approval
before such construction, expansion, alteration or operation is begun.
Such application shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant's legal name, home address and telephone number,
full business name, business address, post office address and
§ 596-17 UNION CODE § 596-18
593:972
§ 596-19. Review of plans.
The health authority shall review the application for compliance with all the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-2.1 to include the final plans, specifications, and
reports and shall either approve or disapprove of the application in writing
within 30 business days from the date of submission to the health authority.
telephone number. The application shall also include whether the
applicant is an individual, partnership, firm or corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners
shall be included on the application. If the applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of all corporate officers shall
be included on the application;
(2) Plans and specifications shall illustrate the location of the proposed
establishment and a floor plan of the establishment as it is
proposed to be operated. An exact inventory of all processing
equipment as it is to be used. Plans shall indicate the layout of the
reception area, the procedure areas, the cleaning and sterilization
area, the storage area and the toilet facilities;
(3) A statement of approval from the municipal agency responsible for
the administration of planning and zoning ordinances for the
proposed construction or expansion of the scalp micropigmentation
and/or permanent cosmetics establishment;
(4) A complete description of all services to be provided, the proposed
hours of operation, the name of the operator and the names of all
practitioners and their exact duties, a copy of the informed consent
for each procedure;
(5) The names and addresses of all manufacturers of processing
equipment, instruments, and inks used for any and all scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic procedures;
(6) The make, model and serial number of the applicant's steam
autoclave shall be printed on the back of a photograph of the
autoclave; and
(7) A copy of the manufacturer's specifications for operation of the
autoclave.
B. All construction, expansion or alteration to the building, structures, and
facilities used by the public shall comply with the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.272
C. All construction expansion or alteration to the building, structures, and
facilities shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23.
272. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14.
§ 596-18 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-20
593:973
§ 596-20. Denial of approval.
Persons denied approval shall be notified in writing by the health authority.
Such notice shall specify the reason(s) for the action, and shall give the
person(s) denied approval the opportunity for a hearing with the health
authority within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 business days from
date the health authority denied approval of the application.
§ 596-21. Approval to operate.
No scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics establishment
shall be permitted to open for operation until the health authority has given
formal approval by issuance of an appropriate license or permit. This license
or permit shall be renewed annually.
§ 596-22. Change of information notification requirements.
Scalp micropigmentation license and/or permanent cosmetic or permit
holders shall notify the local health authority by mail within five calendar
days of a change in the following information:
§ 596-23. Fees.
A. The license or permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
premises where it may readily be observed by all clients.
B. No person shall operate a scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetics establishment whose license or permit has been suspended.
C. Proof of professional malpractice liability insurance for each
practitioner shall be provided to the health authority as part of the
initial and renewal license or permit application.
D. The operator shall provide a current copy of a negative biological
indicator test result to the health authority as part of the initial license
or permit application.
A. The business name or ownership;
B. The area code and telephone number;
C. An address change resulting from city or postal service action;
D. License status, whether from active to inactive practice or from inactive
to active practice;
E. Closure or sale of facility; or
F. A change in procedures or personnel.
A. Plan submission and review to locate and construct new scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics fee: $200.
§ 596-20 UNION CODE § 596-23
593:974
§ 596-24. Prohibitions.
A person who violates a prohibition under this section shall be subject to
enforcement action authorized by this chapter, civil penalties as provided
by N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10 and all other applicable law and/or injunctive action as
provided by law.
§ 596-25. Insurance.
Each practitioner shall maintain current professional malpractice liability
insurance and shall provide proof of same, annually, to the local health
authority.
§ 596-26. Facility layout.
B. Plan submission and review to provide minimum alterations of an
existing scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics fee:
$100.
C. License to operate, or renewal license to operate, an approved scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics fee: $350.
A. Scarification such as branding and cutting shall not be performed in a
scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic establishment.
B. No person shall practice or attempt to practice scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics in a nonlicensed
facility.
C. No person shall operate a scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetic facility unless it is at all times under the direct supervision of
an operator.
D. No person shall display a sign or in any way advertise or purport to be a
scalp micropigmentation or permanent cosmetics practitioner or to be
engaged in the business without first obtaining a license or permit for
the facility from the health authority.
E. No person shall practice scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetics upon any person under the age of 18.
A. All facilities shall have a waiting area that is physically separated from
the work stations and equipment cleaning room.
B. All facilities that reprocess reusable instruments shall have an
equipment cleaning room that is physically separated from the work
stations. Facilities that use all disposable equipment shall be exempt
from this requirement.
(1) Design shall allow adequate space for receiving, cleaning,
decontaminating, preparing and packaging.
§ 596-23 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-26
593:975
§ 596-27. Environment.
(2) Workflow and traffic patterns shall be designed to flow from soiled
to clean areas.
(3) Suitable signs to designate soiled and clean work spaces shall be
used to limit the possibility of cross-contamination into clean work
areas.
(4) Hand-washing facilities shall be operable and conveniently located
in the equipment cleaning room.
(5) Manual cleaning of instruments shall be conducted in a sink of
sufficient size to process soiled instruments.
(6) An emergency eye-flushing device shall be provided where needlebuilding
activities are performed.
C. All rooms used for scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic
procedures shall be completely separated from any room used for
human habitation, food service or other such activity which may cause
potential contamination of work surfaces.
(1) Display cases and retail sales shall be physically separated from
work stations.
D. The work station shall not be less than 80 square feet. Facilities existing
as of February 19, 2002, are exempt from this requirement until
renovations to expand are conducted.
(1) A separate room shall be provided for scalp pigmentation and/or
permanent cosmetics.
(2) Partitions shall be provided between work stations. The partitions
shall be easily cleanable and kept in good repair. The partitions
shall be at least six feet in height and capable of providing complete
privacy which is required for nipple and genital piercings.
(3) Storage cabinets shall be adequate to accommodate supplies
needed for the procedure in the room.
E. At least one hand sink with hot and cold running water under pressure,
and equipped with wrist, foot, or sensor operated controls and supplied
with liquid soap and disposable paper towels shall be readily accessible
and provided for every two work stations within the scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic establishment.
F. Furniture in the procedure rooms shall be of nonporous materials and
cleaned and sanitized after each use.
(1) Work tables shall be constructed of smooth easily cleanable
material and cleaned and sanitized between use.
§ 596-26 UNION CODE § 596-27
593:976
§ 596-28. Sanitary facilities.
A. All floors and walls shall be made of smooth, nonabsorbent and
nonporous material that is easily cleanable.
(1) Concrete blocks or other masonry used in wall construction shall
be covered or made smooth and sealed for a washable surface.
(2) Walls and ceilings shall be light colored.
(3) The use of carpet in work areas and in the equipment cleaning
room shall be prohibited.
B. The work areas shall be ventilated to prevent odors.
C. At least 50 footcandles of artificial light shall be provided within the
establishment.
(1) At least 100 footcandles of artificial light shall be provided at work
stations and in the equipment cleaning room.
D. The water supply shall be constructed, protected, operated and
maintained in conformance with the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water
Act (N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 through 12A-11 and N.J.A.C. 7:10) and local laws,
ordinances and regulations.
(1) Drinking water fountains shall be constructed according to the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code. N.J.A.C. 5:23.
E. All wastewater shall be disposed of by one of the following approved
methods:
(1) Sanitary sewer: Wastewater shall be discharged into a public
sanitary sewer operated by a municipal sewer authority.
(2) Subsurface sewer disposal facility: The location and construction of
a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:9-2 (standards for the construction of individual
subsurface sewage disposal systems), the New Jersey Water
Pollution Control Act Regulations (N.J.A.C. 7:14) and local laws,
ordinances and regulations.
A. A public restroom shall be available and in operable condition to clients
during all business hours.
B. Water closets and lavatories shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
C. Fixtures shall comply with all applicable local ordinances and conform
to the following requirements:
(1) Toilet tissue and paper towel holders supplied with tissue and
paper towels shall be provided in each toilet;
§ 596-27 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-28
593:977
§ 596-29. Waste management.
§ 596-30. Pest control and animal control.
§ 596-31. Client records.
(2) Suitable receptacles shall be provided for the disposal of paper
towels and waste materials;
(3) Common towels shall not be permitted; and
(4) Liquid soap and dispensers shall be provided and maintained at
each lavatory. The dispenser shall be of all metal or plastic. No
glass shall be permitted in these dispensers.
A. Plastic bags shall be used for the removal of soiled waste.
(1) Bags shall be of sufficient strength to safely contain waste from
point of origin to point of disposal and shall be effectively closed
prior to disposal.
(2) Outside storage containers for solid waste shall be kept covered
and shall comply with local ordinances.
B. For the purpose of this article, solid waste generated during scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic procedures that are
sharp such as needles and razors or items saturated and/or dripping
with blood or body fluids shall be handled, stored, packaged, labeled,
transported and disposed of in accordance with the provisions and
standards found at N.J.A.C. 7:26-3A.
A. Controls shall be used to minimize or eliminate the presence of rodents,
flies, roaches, and other vermin. The premises shall be kept in such
condition as to prevent the breeding, harborage, or feeding of vermin.
(1) The application of pesticide shall conform to the requirements of
the New Jersey Pesticide Control Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:30.
B. No live animals shall be kept or allowed in any room where body art is
conducted. An exception shall be made for service animals, which shall
be permitted for the purpose of accompanying physically disabled
persons.
A. All client records shall be retained for a minimum of three years and
made available upon request to the health official.
B. Each client shall complete an application for all scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic procedures. The
application shall include the following:
(1) The name, date of birth, proof of age, and address of the client; an
emergency telephone number and contact individual for the client;
the date of the procedure; the name of practitioner who performed
§ 596-28 UNION CODE § 596-31
593:978
§ 596-32. General provisions.
§ 596-33. Medical consultation.
the procedure(s); the type and location of the procedure
performed; the signature of client and, if the client is a minor, proof
of parental or guardian presence and written consent;
(2) A medical health history form that includes a history of any
information that would aid the practitioner in the client's scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic healing process
evaluation. The health history form shall, at a minimum, include
medical conditions, such as diabetes, allergies, skin conditions, and
a list of medications; and
(3) A consent form, which shall be established for each procedure and
shall be reviewed verbally with the client prior to performing any
procedure(s). Said consent form shall minimally consist of the type
of procedure(s) to be performed, its risks, alternatives, generally
accepted results, an aftercare plan, and the client's signed
acceptance of the recommended procedure by the named
practitioner.
C. Scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic procedures on a
person under 18 years of age shall not be permitted.
A. No scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics shall be done
on a skin surface that has a rash, pimples, boils, infections, scar tissue
or manifests any evidence of unhealthy conditions.
B. Operators/practitioners shall refuse service to any person who, in the
opinion of the operator/practitioner, is under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
C. Smoking, eating, or drinking by anyone shall be prohibited in the work
area, bathrooms, and the equipment cleaning room.
A. All scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic establishments
shall establish a written agreement with a licensed physician for
consultative services which shall, at a minimum, include skin
conditions, aftercare procedures, infections, and employee health
issues. A copy of said agreement shall be provided to the local health
authority annually. The insurance required under § 596-25 of this
article shall name said physician as an additional insured.
B. Any person who desires scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetics for the purpose of camouflage of a medical disorder or
disfigurement or areola restoration shall be under the general
supervision of a physician. The physician shall provide the practitioner
performing the procedure specific written instructions and guidelines.
The physician shall also provide the practitioner with specific treatment
plan appropriate for the person's diagnosis.
§ 596-31 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-33
593:979
§ 596-34. Emergency management.
§ 596-35. Reporting requirements.
§ 596-36. Hand washing and personal hygiene.
(1) The practitioner shall maintain the physician's written instructions
with the client's application for three years.
(2) A client who desires scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetics with no existing or pre-existing medical disease/
condition shall not be required to have medical supervision.
A. The telephone numbers of local emergency medical services, the local
fire department and the local police shall be prominently posted at the
main telephone.
B. An eye wash shall be operable and included in the cleaning room.
C. A standard first aid kit shall be available at all times and shall be fully
restocked within 24 hours of use.
D. The telephone number of the local health department and local health
officer shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
A. A written record of any infections reported to the practitioner after the
scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics procedure is
performed shall be maintained in the client's application. The record
shall include the site of the infection, the date an infection was reported
to the practitioner, and recommendations made to the client.
B. All infections requiring a medical referral, allergic reactions to
colorants or injuries resulting from any scalp micropigmentation and/or
permanent cosmetics procedure which become known to the operator
shall be reported to the local health authority within 24 hours. The
health authority shall report such infections/injuries to the Department
of Health and Senior Services in January of each year.
A. When performing scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic
procedures, the operator or practitioner shall maintain a high standard
of personal cleanliness, which shall include wearing clean outer
garments, and washing hands after smoking, eating, drinking or
visiting the restroom.
B. Before performing scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetic procedures, the practitioner shall thoroughly wash his or her
hands in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry
with disposable paper towels.
C. The practitioner shall wear disposable medical grade gloves at all times
during the procedure.
§ 596-33 UNION CODE § 596-36
593:980
§ 596-37. Employee health, communicable and bloodborne diseases.
Facility owner(s) shall be responsible for adhering to the following
standards:
D. Gloves shall be changed if they become contaminated by contact with
any nonclean surfaces, objects, contact with a third person, or torn.
E. Gloves shall be discarded after completion of each procedure on an
individual client. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves
be used on more than one person.
F. At the completion of the procedure, the practitioner shall dispose of the
gloves and the hands shall be thoroughly washed.
G. Written policies and procedures shall be established for management of
employees or clients that have latex allergies.
A. The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection.
B. No person affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions,
and/or weeping dermatological lesions shall work in a scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics establishment until
written documentation is obtained from a physician, provided to the
operator, and kept on file, indicating the condition is no longer
transmissible or communicable.
C. A practitioner or employee is prohibited from providing scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic services or working in a
facility while having an acute respiratory infection or other disease or
condition which has been diagnosed by a physician to be in a
communicable or transmissible form.
D. A practitioner or employee shall not diagnose or treat any suspected
communicable or transmissible disease or condition.
E. A practitioner or employee providing services or working in a facility
while diagnosed with or suspected of having acquired
immunodeficiency virus and related immunodeficiency conditions or
the hepatitis B or hepatitis C virus shall observe and follow the
standards for public service workers regarding personal protective
equipment and disposal of blood or bodily fluid contaminated articles,
tools and equipment as set forth in the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) Rule 29 CFR 1910.1030, incorporated herein by
reference, and as amended and supplemented. This includes
practitioners or employees providing services to clients who have been
diagnosed with or are suspected of having human immunodeficiency
virus, related conditions or the hepatitis B or hepatitis C virus.
F. Hepatitis B vaccination series and universal precautions policies shall
be established for employees in accordance with the OSHA Rule 29
CFR 1910.1030, Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens.
§ 596-36 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-38
593:981
§ 596-38. Cleaning of reusable instruments.
All reusable instruments shall either be washed by hand or processed
mechanically.
§ 596-39. Packaging.
All instruments to be sterilized shall be packaged individually in peel-packs.
§ 596-40. Sterilization procedures.
A. Manual instrument washing shall consist of the following steps:
(1) An initial cold water rinse to remove visible soil;
(2) An enzyme pre-soak shall be used prior to cleaning;
(3) Warm water and the detergent appropriate for the particular item
being cleaned shall be used;
(4) The item shall be thoroughly rinsed; and
(5) Instruments shall be carefully inspected for cleanliness and
damage and then dried before packaging.
B. Mechanical instrument washing shall include:
(1) An initial cold water rinse to remove visible soil;
(2) An enzyme pre-soak shall be used prior to cleaning;
(3) The instrument shall be placed directly into the ultrasonic unit for a
ten-minute cycle or as recommended by the manufacturer;
(4) The water and cleaning solution as recommended by the
manufacturer shall be changed when visibly soiled or at a minimum
daily;
(5) The chamber of the ultrasonic unit or cleaner shall be disinfected
after use with 70% isopropyl alcohol; and
(6) Each time the chamber is filled with water, it shall be degassed to
remove any air bubbles caused by the turbulence of the tank filling.
This degassing process shall run at a five- to ten-minute cycle based
upon manufacturer's recommendations.
A. All peel-packs shall contain a chemical indicator or internal
temperature indicator.
B. Tape-sealed or self-sealed peel packs shall be dated with an expiration
date not to exceed 90 days or as specified in writing by the
manufacturer.
A. All instruments that are processed by steam sterilization must first be
cleaned. The manufacturer's instructions of the autoclave regarding
§ 596-38 UNION CODE § 596-40
593:982
§ 596-41. Biological and chemical monitoring.
water purity requirements, filling, draining, and general maintenance
shall be followed. A copy of the instructions shall be maintained on site.
B. Peel-packs shall be positioned standing on edge, paper to plastic.
Loading racks or baskets specifically designed for these types of
packages, or other means of holding them on edge and properly spaced,
shall be used.
C. The manufacturer's written instructions of the autoclave for the cycle
parameters, time, temperature and pressure shall be followed.
D. Policies and procedures shall be established when the cycle does not
include a drying phase. Drying cycle shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
E. Wrapped items being cooled after removal from the autoclave shall
remain untouched in the loading tray during the cooling period.
F. All hinged instruments shall be processed in an open position.
A. All steam sterilizers shall be biologically tested on a monthly basis and
following repair or breakdown. The biological indicator test for steam
sterilization shall consist of bacillus sterothermophilus spores. These
tests shall be verified through an independent laboratory.
B. Biological monitoring of the steam sterilization cycle shall be conducted
in a fully loaded chamber or as recommended by the sterilization
manufacturer. The biological monitor shall be placed in the center of
the load towards the front of the chamber.
C. The following actions shall be taken if a biological indicator tests
positive.
(1) The independent laboratory shall notify the scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics establishment
within 24 hours of a positive test result;
(2) The scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics operator
shall notify the local health authority of the positive test and inform
him or her of the follow-up steps;
(3) Instruments processed in that sterilizer shall be considered
nonsterile and shall be reprocessed before use;
(4) The sterilizer in question shall be immediately rechallenged with a
biological indicator; and
(5) The sterilizer shall not be used until a satisfactory test result (no
growth) is reported by the independent laboratory.
D. All biological test records shall be retained by the operator for a period
of three years and made available upon request.
§ 596-40 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-41
593:983
§ 596-42. High-level disinfection.
§ 596-43. Storage.
E. Sterilizers with recording charts or printouts shall include a chemical
integrator in the first working load each day a sterilization cycle is run.
(1) All charts/printouts shall be reviewed and initialed by the sterilizer
operator at the completion of each cycle and initialed to verify that
all cycle parameters were met.
F. Sterilizers without recording charts/printouts shall include a chemical
integrator in each load run.
(1) If the chemical integrator fails to meet the cycle parameters, all of
the load contents shall be reprocessed.
A. All instruments that are processed by high-level disinfection shall first
be cleaned.
B. The manufacturer's instructions for use shall be followed.
C. The efficacy of chemicals used for high-level disinfection shall be
verified by the use of a test specific to the chemical if a valid and
reliable test method is available and feasible for use. The test shall be
used daily.
D. Personal protective equipment shall be worn to protect employees' skin
and eyes from splashes and contact. Spills shall be cleaned
immediately.
E. Instruments that are removed from high-level disinfectants shall be
rinsed thoroughly, dried, and, if not used immediately, are to be
packaged in a zip-lock plastic bag.
F. All scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic establishments
that use glutaraldehyde-based high-level disinfectants shall monitor the
environment to maintain exposure limits as recommended by the 2001
edition of "Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and
Physical Agents in the Workroom Environment," publication number
0101, by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists (ACGIH), incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented. A copy of this document may be obtained from the
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 1330
Kemper Meadow Drive, Suite 600, Cincinnati, Ohio 45240.
A. All instruments used for scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetic shall be stored to ensure the integrity of the packaging
materials.
B. When assembling instruments just prior to performing the procedure,
the practitioner shall wear gloves and use an aseptic technique.
§ 596-41 UNION CODE § 596-44
593:984
§ 596-44. Single-use items.
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason.
§ 596-45. Decontamination of environmental surfaces.
§ 596-46. Training.
A. Blood spills on environmental surfaces shall be cleaned as specified in
the Occupation Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Rule 29 CFR
1910.1030, Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens.
B. Aluminum foil or plastic covers shall be used to protect items and
surfaces (for example, light handles) that may become contaminated by
blood or saliva during use and that are difficult or impossible to clean
and disinfect. Between clients, the coverings shall be removed,
discarded, and replaced with clean material.
C. A low-level disinfectant shall be used on general environmental
surfaces.
(1) Procedure surfaces shall be disinfected after each use.
(2) Horizontal surfaces shall be disinfected daily.
(3) Restrooms shall be disinfected daily.
(4) General work surfaces in the equipment clean room shall be
disinfected daily.
(5) All storage cabinets shall be cleaned and disinfected on a frequency
established by the operator.
D. If decontamination and sterilization activities are performed in the
same room:
(1) Decontamination activities shall not take place simultaneously with
packaging and/or sterilization activities; and
(2) At the completion of decontamination activities, all countertops and
work surfaces shall be disinfected with an approved disinfectant,
gloves removed and hands washed before beginning and prep/
packaging or sterilization activities.
A. The practitioner shall have completed a forty-hour training program
approved by the Society of Permanent Cosmetic Professionals or the
International Micropigmentation Association prior to being certified
and shall submit a minimum of one photograph whereby the
practitioner has personally performed one complete procedure for each
of the following areas:
(1) Eyebrow simulation;
(2) Lip liner;
§ 596-44 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-46
593:985
§ 596-47. Personal protection.
The following precautions shall be taken by the practitioner during a
procedure:
(3) Full lip color; and
(4) Eyeliner/eyelash enhancer.
B. The practitioner shall be certified by the American Academy of
Micropigmentation by February 19, 2004.
C. A practitioner performing areola restoration shall have completed a
minimum eight-hour training program approved by the Society of
Permanent Cosmetic Professionals or the International
Micropigmentation Association.
D. A practitioner shall have two years of experience prior to performing
camouflage repairs.
(1) Pigment removal shall be done by or under the immediate
supervision of a physician.
(2) All pigment removal solutions shall be labeled with ingredients,
including percentages of active ingredients, pH, preservatives and
directions for use.
E. An apprentice shall have completed a forty-hour training program
approved by the Society of Permanent Cosmetic Professionals or the
International Micropigmentation Association, and shall perform under
the direct supervision of a practitioner a minimum of five of each of the
following procedures:
(1) Eyebrow simulation;
(2) Lip liner;
(3) Full lip color; and
(4) Eyeliner/eyelash enhancer.
F. Client records shall be maintained by the operator to verify that the
minimum requirements for the procedures were completed by the
apprentice.
A. Wearing a clean, single-use, water-impervious gown;
B. Using medical-grade gloves at all times;
C. Wearing a fluid-resistant mask. The mask shall be changed if it becomes
splattered or moist with blood or body fluids; and
D. Using protective eyewear to cover all exposed skin and mucous
membranes of and around the eyes.
§ 596-46 UNION CODE § 596-48
593:986
§ 596-48. Use of antiseptics.
The following shall be the minimum acceptable standards for the use of
antiseptics for scalp pigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic procedures.
§ 596-49. Permanent cosmetic procedures.
§ 596-50. Topical anesthetics.
A. Before applying antiseptics, the practitioner shall thoroughly wash his
or her hands in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse his or her
hands and dry with clean disposable paper towels.
B. When performing eyeliner or eyelash enhancement, the practitioner
shall wash the skin thoroughly with a cotton swab, eye makeup
remover, water or Vaseline.
C. When performing eyebrow procedures, the practitioner shall use a Qtip
to thoroughly clean the area with soap and water or a 70% isopropyl
alcohol disposable wipe and allow the skin to dry before the procedure
is performed.
D. When performing a permanent cosmetic procedure to any other part of
the body the external area of the skin shall be thoroughly cleaned with
Chlorhexidine, 70% to 90% isopropyl alcohol-containing products,
iodophors or iodine compounds.
E. Once applied, the antiseptic shall be allowed to dry before the
procedure is performed.
A. Over-the-counter cosmetics intended for public use cannot be left open
in a procedure room.
(1) Only disposable applicators or surgical markers shall be used
following a permanent cosmetic procedure to avoid possible
contamination.
B. No permanent cosmetic procedure shall be done on skin surfaces which
have sunburn, rash, keloids, pimples, boils, infections, open lesions or
manifest any evidence of unhealthy conditions.
C. Permanent cosmetic procedures shall not be performed on a client
during pregnancy.
D. Permanent cosmetic procedures shall not be performed for a minimum
of one year on clients taking tretinoin medication.
A. Only over-the-counter topical anesthetics shall be used for scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetic procedures by
nonmedical practitioners. A history of allergic reactions to local
anesthetics are an absolute contraindication for their use.
§ 596-48 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-50
593:987
§ 596-51. Aftercare.
Aftercare shall be administered to each client following the scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics. Aftercare shall consist of
both verbal and written instructions concerning proper care of the area.
A copy of the written aftercare instructions shall be signed by the client
and kept on file with the client's records. Instructions shall specify at a
minimum:
§ 596-52. Pigments.
B. Labeling for topical anesthetics used for scalp micropigmentation and/
or permanent cosmetic procedures shall be prepared by a FDA
registered drug manufacturer and shall comply with 21 CFR 333,
Topical antimicrobial anesthetic over-the-counter products for human
use.
(1) The name and lot number of each topical anesthetic used shall be
recorded for each procedure in the client's chart.
C. No liquid topical anesthetics shall be permitted for use in the proximity
of the eye or eyelids.
(1) Anesthetic eye drops are not permitted for permanent eyeliner
procedures.
D. Topical anesthetics are for external use only and not for injection or use
in the eye.
(1) Local anesthetics shall not be added to pigments.
E. No occlusive dressings or external heat sources shall be applied to
topical anesthetics used in proximity to the eye.
F. No prescription topical anesthetics shall be used by practitioners unless
by or under the direct and immediate supervision of a licensed
physician.
A. Responsibilities and care specific to the site of the scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics following service;
B. Possible side effects;
C. Information regarding any physical, cosmetic or other restrictions;
D. Signs and symptoms of infection; and
E. Instructions to consult a physician if infection occurs.
A. All dyes used for scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics
shall be nontoxic, nonirritating to tissue, stable to light and inert to
tissue metabolism.
B. Pigments shall not contain talc, coal tar or any known carcinogens.
§ 596-50 UNION CODE § 596-52
593:988
§ 596-53. Temporary establishments not permitted.
Temporary establishments shall not be permitted in the Township of Union.
§ 596-54. Inspection.
The health authority shall inspect every scalp micropigmentation and/or
permanent cosmetics establishment as often as the health authority deems
necessary using an inspection report form approved by the Department of
Health and Senior Services.
§ 596-55. Criteria for closure.
C. Nontoxic materials shall be used when preparing dyes or pigments.
D. Single-use, individual containers for dyes or pigments shall be used for
each client and discarded after each procedure.
E. Any excess dye or pigment applied to the skin shall be removed with a
single-use, lint-free paper product.
F. A record of the dye(s) used for the scalp micropigmentation and
permanent cosmetics, including the lot number of each pigment, shall
be maintained for each client.
G. Colorants shall be free of acrylic monomers or polymers.
A. A representative of the health authority shall provide proper
identification.
B. The operator shall permit access to all parts of the establishment and
all pertinent records required for the inspection shall be made available
to the health authority representative for review.
C. An inspection report shall identify in a narrative form any violations of
this chapter and shall be cross-referenced to the section of the chapter
being violated.
D. Results of the inspection shall be made available to the public upon
request.
A. The approval, license or permit of any person to operate a scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics establishment may be
suspended at any time, when in the opinion of the health authority such
action is necessary to abate a present or threatened menace to the
public health.
B. The following shall be reason(s) for closure:
(1) Failure or lack of properly functioning equipment;
(2) Unsanitary or unsafe conditions which may adversely impact the
health of the public;
§ 596-52 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-55
593:989
§ 596-56. Separability.
If any provision or application of any provision of this chapter is held
invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter.
(3) The health authority has reasonable cause to suspect that a
communicable disease is, or may be, transmitted by an operator/
practitioner;
(4) The practitioner(s) has demonstrated gross incompetence in
performing scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics;
(5) The owner obtained or attempted to obtain a permit by means of
fraud, misrepresentation or concealment;
(6) The owner or practitioner(s) has been convicted in this or any other
state of a crime directly related to the practice of scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics;
(7) The owner or practitioner(s) has permitted scalp
micropigmentation and/or permanent cosmetics upon a person
under 18 years of age; or
(8) The operator has failed to prevent implants, branding and cutting
to be performed in a scalp micropigmentation and/or permanent
cosmetics establishment.
C. The following shall be cause for, at a minimum, a seven-day suspension:
(1) Failure to report to the health authority within 24 hours any
infection or injury requiring a medical referral;
(2) Failure to notify the health authority within 24 hours of any positive
biological indicator test result.
§ 596-55 UNION CODE § 596-56
593:990
ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
[Added 5-14-2018]
§ 596-57. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates, fails or neglects to comply with any provision of
this chapter or Code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 nor
more than $1,000 for each such violation.
§ 596-57 RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC § 596-57
593:991
Chapter 602
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
§ 602-1. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the authority contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 through 26:3-69.6,
or any amendments or supplements thereto, the Board of Health of this
Township does hereby adopt the new rules and standards governing
individual subsurface sewage disposal systems set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9A et
seq., as an ordinance operative within the Township of Union regulating
construction and use of individual subsurface sewage disposal systems
within this Township. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof by reference without full inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 602-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems" (N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1 et seq.) and is adopted in full.
§ 602-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk,
upon introduction of this chapter, and will remain on file there for use and
examination of the public, including any future amendments or supplements
thereto.
§ 602-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$5 nor more than $500.
Chapter 614
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 434. Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
602.
§ 614-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter requires all owners of nonresidential potable and nonpotable
wells within the Township to test their water annually for certain toxic
chemicals and report the laboratory test results to the Township Board
§ 596-57 UNION CODE § 614-1
602:992
of Health and also regulates the construction and certification of all new
potable water wells. The regulations provided in this chapter are intended
to:
§ 614-2. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases listed below, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
CERTIFIED LABORATORY — A laboratory certified by the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:18) to
conduct testing for individual hazardous contaminants.
NONPOTABLE WATER WELL — Any well that is not used for potable water
purposes. Examples of nonpotable wells include water used for cooling,
processing, irrigating and other uses.
NONRESIDENTIAL WELL — A well which is not used exclusively to provide
water for domestic purposes; a water supply system from which potable
water is supplied to consumers, including employees, members, guests
or the public at large. Examples of nonresidential water supplies include
commercial offices, industrial buildings, schools, commercial shops and
retail stores, hotels, motels, trailer camps, food establishments, gasoline
service stations, day-care facilities, houses of worship, boarding and
rooming homes, clubhouses, camps of all types, health-care institutions and
others.
PITLESS WELL ADAPTER — A device fabricated at the job site designed
for attachment to one or more openings through a well casing and so
constructed as to prevent the entry of contamination into the well or potable
water, conduct water from the well, protect the water from freezing or
extremes of temperature and provide access to water system components
within the well.
PITLESS WELL UNIT — A preassembled device which extends the upper
end of a well casing to above grade, provided with a pitless well cap and
so constructed as to prevent the entry of contamination into the well or
potable water, conduct water from the well, protect the water from freezing
or extremes of temperature and provide access to water system components
within the well.
POTABLE WATER — Any water used for drinking or culinary purposes.
RESIDENTIAL WATER SUPPLY — A water supply used for potable or
domestic purposes in a family residence.
A. Protect the health of consumers of well water in the Township of Union.
B. Provide information to enable the community to monitor groundwater
quality.
C. Assure that all new potable water wells meet certain construction and
water quality standards.
§ 614-1 WELLS § 614-3
614:993
§ 614-3. Testing for volatile organic compounds.
A. All owners of nonresidential wells in Union Township are required, at
their expense, to have a certified laboratory test their well water for the
following volatile organic compounds:
Benzene
Bromoform
Bromodichloromethane
Bromomethane
Carbon tetrachloride
Chlorobenzene
Chloroethane
1, 2-Dichloroethylene
trans,-1, 2-Dichloropropene
trans,-1, 3-Dichloropropene
1, 2-Dichloropropane
Ethylbenzene
Methylene chloride
1, 1, 2, 2-Tetrachloroethane
2-Chloroethyl vinyl ether
Chloroform
Chloromethane
cis-1, 3-Dichloropropene
Dibromochloromethane
Dichlorodifluoromethane
1, 1-Dichloroethane
1, 2-Dichloroethane
Tetrachloroethylene
Toluene
1, 1, 1-Trichloroethane
1, 1, 2-Trichloroethane
Trichloroethylene
Trichlorofluoromethane
Vinyl chloride
B. Other contaminants as may be determined by the local health agency or
as may be specified by the Director of Environmental Protection.
§ 614-3 UNION CODE § 614-4
614:994
§ 614-4. Testing by certified laboratory.
All tests shall be performed by a laboratory that is certified by the State of
New Jersey.
§ 614-5. Testing technique.
The laboratory technique to be used will be the "purge and trap" method
or any other method deemed acceptable by the appropriate Department of
Environmental Protection agency.
§ 614-6. Schedule of testing.
§ 614-7. Sample collection.
§ 614-8. Permits required for construction of potable water wells.
No water well, regardless of use, shall be located or constructed in the
Township of Union until a permit has been issued by the appropriate
Department of Environmental Protection agency and approved by the local
Board of Health.
A. Initial testing. Within 120 days upon adoption of this chapter, a copy of
the required written laboratory test results shall be furnished to the
Union Township Board of Health by all nonresidential well owners.
B. Frequency of testing.
(1) Wells shall be tested annually thereafter. A copy of written
laboratory test reports shall be provided to the Board of Health no
later than November 1.
(2) When, in the opinion of the Board of Health, a groundwater
problem occurs or exists, the Board of Health may require the
individual testing of potentially affected area wells.
A. Certification form required. Within the provisions of this chapter, any
person collecting a well water sample for submission to a laboratory
shall complete and sign a form to be approved and/or provided by the
Board of Health. The form shall include, among other things, a list of
instructions to be followed by the collector, sampling data and a
statement to be signed certifying as to the location of the sample. The
completed certificate shall be forwarded to the Board of Health with the
laboratory test result.
B. Collection requirements for handlers of volatile organics. Any person,
corporation or firm that transports, receives, stores or otherwise
handles volatile organic compounds shall be required to have his well
water sample collected by a representative from the laboratory
performing the analysis.
§ 614-4 WELLS § 614-9
614:995
§ 614-9. Standards for well construction.
All potable water wells shall be constructed in strict compliance with state
regulations as set forth and known as "Standards for Construction of Public
Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems" (N.J.A.C. 7:10-3.10 through
3.93 inclusive).
§ 614-10. Pitless adapters or units.
A pitless adapter or pitless unit shall be provided on every new potable
water well constructed.
§ 614-11. Certificates required for new wells placed in service.
No potable water well shall be placed in service until the Board of Health
is issued a written certificate of approval that the well water complies with
state and federal water quality standards.
§ 614-12. Requirements for approval.
§ 614-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a penalty of not more than $500. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct
offense.
Appendix
Chapter A620
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
A. Laboratory testing. Upon notification by the property owner, a
representative of a certified laboratory will collect well water samples
and submit the samples to a laboratory for testing. Tests shall include
those volatile organics as listed in § 614-3 and a bacteriological
examination.
B. Certification by the well driller. A written certificate of compliance shall
be provided by the driller to the Board of Health before any potable
water well can be placed into service. Said form shall require Board of
Health approval and will include a statement to be signed by the well
driller indicating that he or she has constructed the well in compliance
with all state standards as set forth in § 614-9 of this chapter.
C. Well water to meet state drinking water standards and guidelines. No
well water supply shall be approved by the Board of Health if the water
fails to meet current New Jersey drinking water quality standards or
guidelines.
§ 614-9 UNION CODE § A620-1
614:996
§ A620-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A620-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq. and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions.
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
Comcast of New Jersey 11, LLC.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Union, County of Union,
State of New Jersey.
§ A620-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company, were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
§ A620-1 WELLS § A620-3
614:997
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A620-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A620-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 3.5% of the gross revenues as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3 for
cable television reception service in the municipality or any higher amount
required by the Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A620-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A620-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as set
forth in the company's application. The company's line extension policy, as
set forth in the company's application, shall govern any extension of plant
beyond the primary service area.
§ A620-8. Construction requirements.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire on
April 29, 2027, 15 years from the date of expiration of the previous
certificate of approval issued by the Board.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
§ A620-3 UNION CODE § A620-8
614:998
§ A620-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
§ A620-10. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
B. Relocation. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A620-8 WELLS § A620-11
614:999
§ A620-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A620-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A620-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A620-14. Public, educational and governmental access.
§ A620-15. Commitments by company.
A. The company shall continue to provide a system-wide public access
channel maintained by the company. Qualified individuals and
organizations may utilize public access for the purpose of cablecasting
noncommercial access programming in conformance with the
company's published public access rules.
B. The company shall continue to provide a systemwide leased access
channel maintained by the company for the purpose of cablecasting
commercial access programming in conformance with the company's
guideline and applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
C. The company shall continue to provide two dedicated digital local
access channels and existing return lines maintained by the company
for the purpose of cablecasting noncommercial access programming in
conformance with the company's guideline and applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations.
D. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the access channels are carried without material
degradation and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the other
standard channels that the company transmits.
A. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service on one outlet at no cost to each school in the
municipality, public and private, elementary, intermediate and
§ A620-11 UNION CODE § A620-15
614:1000
§ A620-16. Emergency uses.
§ A620-17. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
secondary, and any additional authorized outlets, provided that the
school is within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials and
equipment, plus labor, basis by the school requesting service. Monthly
service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets.
B. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each police, fire,
emergency management facility and public library in the municipality
and any additional authorized outlets, provided that the facility is
located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials and
equipment, plus labor, basis by the municipality. Monthly service
charges shall be waived on all additional outlets.
C. Within six months of the issuance of the renewal certificate of approval
the company shall provide the municipality a one-time access related
need grant in the amount of $100,000.
D. The municipality shall have use of an existing fiber optics
interconnection between the municipal building located at 1776 Morris
Avenue and the municipal police headquarters building located at 981
Caldwell Avenue for the duration of this franchise. The company shall
be responsible to maintain the signal quality of this interconnection.
E. The company shall provide, free of charge, one nonnetworked cable
modem and monthly Internet service to each school in the municipality,
public and private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, and to the
public library. The Internet service provided for herein must be
available to student and patron use and cannot be limited to
administrative uses. All facilities must be located with 200 feet of active
cable distribution plant,
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System (EAS) rules
in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A620-15 WELLS § A620-18
614:1001
§ A620-18. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference, provided that same do not conflict with applicable state or
federal law.
§ A620-19. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A620-20. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A620-21. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Township Committee ordinances.
The following is a listing of ordinances adopted by the Township Committee:
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4810 1-27-2004 Fines Ch. 271
4811 1-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4812 2-24-2004 Handicap parking
amendment
NCM
§ A620-18 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1002
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4813 2-24-2004 Bond NCM
4814 3-9-2004 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4815 3-23-2004 Capital ordinance NCM
4816 4-13-2004 Bond NCM
4817 4-27-2004 Bond NCM
4818 4-27-2004 Bond NCM
4819 5-11-2004 Handicap parking
amendment
NCM
4820 5-25-2004 Handicap parking
amendment
NCM
4821 Capital ordinance NCM
4822 Capital ordinance NCM
4823 6-8-2004 Carnivals, circuses and
traveling shows
amendment
Ch. 216
4824 6-22-2004 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4825 6-22-2004 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4826 6-22-2004 Appropriation amendment NCM
4827 7-27-2004 Appropriation NCM
4828 7-27-2004 Emergency medical
services: third-party
payment plan
Ch. 260, Art. I
4829 9-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic:
schedules amendment
Ch. 266, Art. VII
4830 8-24-2004 Reappropriation NCM
4831 8-24-2004 Lease agreement NCM
4832 8-10-2004 Appropriation NCM
4833 8-24-2004 Appropriation NCM
4834 8-24-2004 Appropriation NCM
4835 8-24-2004 Traffic violation fines
amendment
Ch. 271
4836 9-14-2004 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4837 9-14-2004 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1003
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4838 9-28-2004 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4839 9-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4840 9-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4841 9-28-2004 Ord. No. 4776 repealer NCM
4842 10-26-2004 Adoption of Code by
Township Committee
Ch. 1, Art. I
4843 10-26-2004 Department of Recreation Ch. 121
4844 10-26-2004 Alcoholic beverages:
possession and
consumption by
underaged persons on
private property
Ch. 160, Art. III
4845 10-26-2004 Fire prevention: rapid
access key boxes
Ch. 285, Art. II
4846 10-26-2004 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4847 11-9-2004 Bond/appropriation NCM
4848 11-9-2004 Bond/reappropriation NCM
4849 11-9-2004 Bond/reappropriation NCM
4850 11-9-2004 Bond/reappropriation NCM
4851 11-23-2004 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4852 12-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4853 12-28-2004 Capital improvement NCM
4854 12-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4855 12-28-2004 Salaries NCM
4856 12-28-2004 Salaries NCM
4857 2-8-2005 Bond/appropriation NCM
4858 2-8-2005 Bond/appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1004
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4859 2-8-2005 Engineering Department
amendment
Ch. 47
4860 3-8-2005 Salaries NCM
4861 3-8-2005 Bond/appropriation NCM
4862 3-22-2005 Establishment of cap bank NCM
4863 4-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266
4864 4-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266
4865 4-26-2005 Brush, grass, weeds and
leaves amendment
Ch. 192
4866 4-26-2005 Bond/appropriation NCM
4867 5-10-2005 Noise repealer Ch. 378
4868 5-10-2005 Bond NCM
4869 5-10-2005 Sale of property NCM
4870 5-10-2005 Sale of property NCM
4871 5-24-2005 Bond NCM
4872 5-24-2005 Bond/appropriation NCM
4873 5-24-2005 Bond NCM
4874 5-24-2005 Bond NCM
4875 6-28-2005 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 4925
4876 6-28-2005 Bond NCM
4877 6-28-2005 Bond/appropriation NCM
4878 6-28-2005 Bond/appropriation NCM
4879 6-28-2005 Bond NCM
4880 6-28-2005 Sewer system user
charges amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
4881 6-28-2005 Affordable housing:
mandatory development
fees amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
4882 6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4883 6-28-2005 Handicap parking
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1005
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4884 6-28-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 406, Arts. 1
and 11
4885 6-28-2005 Sale of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 4894
4886 7-12-2005 Bond NCM
4887 7-26-2005 Appropriation amendment NCM
4888 7-26-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4889 8-23-2005 Sale of property NCM
4890 7-26-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4891 8-23-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4892 9-13-2005 Towing amendment Ch. 505
4893 9-13-2005 Rent control amendment Ch. 421
4894 9-13-2005 Sale of property repealer NCM
4895 9-13-2005 Sale of property NCM
4896 9-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4897 9-13-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4898 9-13-2005 Appropriation NCM
4899 9-13-2005 Bond NCM
4900 9-13-2005 Easement agreement NCM
4901 9-27-2005 Prosecutor amendment Ch. 92, Art. II
4902 9-27-2005 Public defender
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. IV
4903 9-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
4904 9-27-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4905 9-27-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4906 10-11-2005 Lease agreement NCM
4907 10-25-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1006
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4908 10-25-2005 Dog licensing and
regulations amendment
Ch. 168, Art. I
4909 10-25-2005 Illicit connections Ch. 497, Art. II
4910 10-25-2005 Wildlife feeding
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. III
4911 10-25-2005 Improper disposal of waste Ch. 497, Art. III
4912 10-25-2005 Littering amendment Ch. 358
4913 11-10-2005 Bond NCM
4914 11-10-2005 Special improvement
districts amendment
Ch. 471
4915 11-10-2005 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4916 11-22-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4917 11-22-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4918 11-22-2005 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 477
4919 11-22-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4920 12-13-2005 Appropriation NCM
4921 12-13-2005 Financial agreement NCM
4922 12-27-2005 Licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
4923 12-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4924 12-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4925 12-27-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 170
4926 12-27-2005 Appropriation NCM
4927 1-24-2006 Drug-free school zones
amendment
Ch. 254, Art. I
4928 1-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
4929 1-24-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1007
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4930 1-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4931 1-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4932 2-14-2006 Disorderly conduct Ch. 250
4933 2-14-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4934 2-14-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4935 3-14-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4936 3-14-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4937 3-14-2006 Appropriation NCM
4938 3-14-2006 Towing amendment Ch. 505
4939 3-14-2006 Appropriation amendment NCM
4940 3-28-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4941 3-28-2006 Department of Public
Safety amendment
Ch. 109
4942 4-11-2006 Sexually oriented
businesses
Ch. 437
4943 4-11-2006 Appropriation NCM
4944 4-11-2006 Appropriation amendment NCM
4945 4-25-2006 Appropriation NCM
4946 4-25-2006 Rental property:
registration and licensing
Ch. 419, Art. I
4947 4-25-2006 Sex offenders: residency
and loitering
Ch. 436, Art. I
4948 5-23-2006 Lease agreement NCM
4949 5-23-2006 Reappropriation NCM
4950 5-23-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4951 6-13-2006 Bond/appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1008
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4952 6-27-2006 Establishment of cap bank NCM
4953 6-27-2006 Bond/appropriation NCM
4954 6-27-2006 Appropriation NCM
4955 6-27-2006 Appropriation NCM
4956 6-27-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4957 6-27-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4958 6-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4959 6-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4960 6-27-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4961 6-27-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4962 6-27-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4963 7-11-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4964 7-25-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4965 8-22-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4966 9-12-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4967 9-12-2006 Appropriation amendment NCM
4968 9-12-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4969 9-26-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4970 9-26-2006 Bond/Appropriation NCM
4971 10-10-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4972 10-10-2006 Appropriation amendment NCM
4973 10-10-2006 Appropriation amendment NCM
4974 10-10-2006 Affordable housing:
mandatory development
fees amendment;
affirmative marketing plan
amendment
Ch. 150, Arts. I
and II
4975 10-10-2006 Affordable housing:
growth share plan
Ch. 150, Art. III
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1009
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4976 10-10-2006 Sexually oriented
businesses amendment
Ch. 437
4977 10-10-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4978 11-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4979 11-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4980 11-28-2006 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4981 11-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4982 11-28-2006 Towing amendment Ch. 505
4983 12-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
4984 12-12-2006 Sale of property NCM
4985 12-12-2006 Sale of property NCM
4986 12-26-2006 Appropriation repealer NCM
4987 12-26-2006 Salaries NCM
4988 2-13-2007 Appropriation NCM
4989 2-13-2007 Engineering costs
reimbursement for
drainage improvement
project
NCM
4990 2-13-2007 Engineering costs
reimbursement for
drainage improvement
project
NCM
4991 2-13-2007 Salaries amendment NCM
4992 2-27-2007 Appropriation amendment NCM
4993 3-13-2007 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
4994 3-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1010
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4995 3-27-2007 Sale of property NCM
4996 3-27-2007 Sale of property NCM
4997 3-27-2007 Sale of property NCM
4998 4-10-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
4999 4-10-2007 Committee meetings rules
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. I
5000 4-10-2007 Appropriation NCM
5001 4-24-2007 Appropriation amendment NCM
5002 4-24-2007 Appropriation amendment NCM
5003 5-8-2007 Appropriation NCM
5004 5-8-2007 Establishment of cap bank NCM
5005 6-12-2007 Sale of public fire hydrants NCM
5006 5-22-2007 Bond/appropriation NCM
5007 5-22-2007 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5008 5-22-2007 Affordable housing:
growth share amendment
Ch. 150, Art. III
5009 5-22-2007 Sexually oriented
businesses amendment
Ch. 437
5010 6-26-2007 Street vacation NCM
5011 6-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
5012 6-26-2007 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5013 7-24-2007 Appropriation NCM
5014 7-24-2007 Appropriation NCM
5015 7-24-2007 Street vacation NCM
5016 8-28-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 107
5017 8-28-2007 Dog licensing and
regulations amendment
Ch. 168, Art. I
5018 9-11-2007 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5019 9-11-2007 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1011
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5020 9-11-2007 Officers and employees:
Township personnel
enumerated amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
5021 9-11-2007 Capital improvements NCM
5022 9-11-2007 Appropriation amendment NCM
5023 9-11-2007 Appropriation amendment NCM
5024 9-11-2007 Cat licensing and
regulations amendment
Ch. 168, Art. II
5025 9-11-2007 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part I
5026 9-11-2007 Trailers and trailer camps
amendment
Ch. 510
5027 10-9-2007 Capital improvements
amendment
NCM
5028 10-9-2007 Appropriation amendment NCM
5029 10-9-2007 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5030 10-9-2007 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5031 10-23-2007 Bond/appropriation NCM
5032 11-27-2007 Raffle and bingo licensing Ch. 350, Art. III
5033 11-27-2007 Department of Public
Safety amendment
Ch. 109
5034 11-27-2007 Charter Commission 2008
general election ballot
question
NCM
5035 12-18-2007 Easement agreement NCM
5036 12-18-2007 Easement agreement NCM
5037 12-18-2007 Sale of property NCM
5038 1-22-2008 Bond/appropriation
amendment
NCM
5039 2-11-2008 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5040 2-11-2008 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5041 2-11-2008 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1012
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5042 3-11-2008 Easement agreement
amendment
NCM
5043 3-11-2008 Salaries NCM
5044 4-8-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5045 4-8-2008 Salaries NCM
5046 4-8-2008 Sale of property NCM
5047 5-13-2008 Bond NCM
5048 5-27-2008 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
5049 5-27-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 170
5050 6-10-2008 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5051 6-10-2008 Animals: wildlife feeding
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. III
5052 6-10-2008 Appropriation NCM
5053 6-10-2008 Sewer system user
charges amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
5054 6-10-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 170
5055 6-24-2008 Appropriation Repealed by Ord.
No. 5067
5056 6-24-2008 Appropriation NCM
5057 7-8-2008 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5058 8-26-2008 Bond/appropriation NCM
5059 8-26-2008 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5060 8-26-2008 Sewer system user
charges amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
5061 9-9-2008 Animals: dog and exotic
animal regulations
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. I
5062 9-9-2008 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5063 9-9-2008 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5064 9-9-2008 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1013
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5065 9-9-2008 Bond/appropriation NCM
5066 9-9-2008 Bond/appropriation NCM
5067 9-23-2008 Appropriation amendment NCM
5068 9-23-2008 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5069 9-23-2008 Sale of property NCM
5070 10-14-2008 Bond/appropriation NCM
5071 10-28-2008 Bond/appropriation
amendment
NCM
5072 10-28-2008 Bond/appropriation
amendment
NCM
5073 11-25-2008 Bond/appropriation NCM
5074 12-9-2008 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5075 12-9-2008 Personnel benefits:
Defined Contribution
Retirement Plan
Ch. 102, Art. VII
5076 12-9-2008 Township personnel
enumerated amendment;
Police Director; municipal
officials benefits
amendment
Chs. 93, Arts. I
and VI; 102, Art.
II
5077 12-9-2008 Salaries NCM
5078 12-9-2008 Department of Public
Safety: general provisions
amendment; Division of
Police amendment
Ch. 109, Arts. I
and II
5079 12-23-2008 Bond/appropriation NCM
5080 12-23-2008 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5081 1-27-2009 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
5082 1-27-2009 Salaries NCM
5083 1-27-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5084 1-27-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5085 2-10-2009 Brush, grass, weeds and
leaves amendment
Ch. 192
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1014
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5086 2-10-2009 Landscaping: permit
procedures repealer
Ch. 339,
reference only
5087 2-10-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
5088 2-24-2009 Property maintenance:
residential dwellings and
lots amendment
Ch. 406, Art. II
5089 2-24-2009 Animals: wildlife feeding
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. III
5090 2-24-2009 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 477
5091 2-24-2009 Purchase of property NCM
5092 2-24-2009 Sale of property NCM
5093 3-10-2009 Sexually oriented
businesses repealer
Ch. 437,
reference only
5094 3-24-2009 Bond/appropriation NCM
5095 4-14-2009 Appropriation NCM
5096 4-14-2009 Reappropriation NCM
5097 4-14-2009 Bond/appropriation NCM
5098 4-28-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5099 4-28-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5100 4-28-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5101 5-26-2009 Reappropriation NCM
5102 6-9-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5103 6-9-2009 Towing amendment Ch. 505
5104 6-9-2009 Parking lots amendment Ch. 266, Part 2
5105 6-9-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5106 6-9-2009 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5107 6-9-2009 Public nuisances Ch. 384
5108 7-14-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5109 7-28-2009 Solid waste; recycling:
refuse containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 462, Art. V
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1015
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5110 7-28-2009 Stormwater management:
storm drain inlet
retrofitting on private
property
Ch. 474, Art. IV
5111 7-28-2009 Affordable housing:
regulations
Repealed by Ord.
No. 5569
5112 7-28-2009 Towing amendment Ch. 505
5113 7-28-2009 Department of Public
Safety amendment
Ch. 109
5114 8-25-2009 Bond/appropriation NCM
5115 8-25-2009 Bond/appropriation NCM
5116 9-8-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5117 10-27-2009 Department of Public
Safety amendment
Ch. 109
5118 11-24-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5119 11-24-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5120 12-22-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5121 12-22-2009 Towing amendment Ch. 505
5122 12-22-2009 Bond/appropriation NCM
5123 2-9-2010 Sewer system use charges
amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
5124 2-9-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5125 2-9-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5126 2-9-2010 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5127 2-23-2010 Department of Public
Safety amendment
Ch. 109
5128 2-23-2010 Appropriation NCM
5129 3-23-2010 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 477
5130 3-23-2010 Salaries NCM
5131 4-13-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1016
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5132 4-13-2010 Recycling amendment Ch. 462, Art. III
5133 4-27-2010 Bond/appropriation
amendment
NCM
5134 4-27-2010 Bond/appropriation
amendment
NCM
5135 4-27-2010 Bond/appropriation NCM
5136 6-9-2010 Affordable housing:
mandatory development
fees
Repealed by Ord.
No. 5570
5137 6-9-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5138 6-9-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5139 6-9-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5140 7-13-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5141 8-10-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5142 8-10-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5143 8-10-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5144 8-10-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5145 8-10-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5146 8-10-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5147 8-10-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5148 8-10-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5149 8-10-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5150 8-10-2010 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5151 8-10-2010 Fees: tax sale redemption
calculation
Ch. 268, Art. III
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1017
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5152 8-10-2010 Third-party payroll
disbursement
Ch. 98, Art. I
5153 9-14-2010 Appropriation NCM
5154 9-14-2010 Bond/appropriation
amendment
NCM
5155 9-14-2010 Capital improvements/
bond
NCM
5156 9-28-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5157 9-28-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5158 9-28-2010 Street vacation NCM
5159 9-28-2010 Department of Public
Safety amendment
Ch. 109
5160 9-28-2010 Appropriation NCM
5161 9-28-2010 Alcoholic beverage
consumption in retail food
establishments
Ch. 160A
5162 9-28-2010 Appropriation for 2010
roadway improvements
NCM
5163 10-12-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5164 10-12-2010 Affordable housing:
regulations amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
5165 10-12-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5166 10-26-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5167 10-26-2010 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5168 10-26-2010 Bond/appropriation NCM
5169 12-21-2010 Appropriation NCM
5170 11-23-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5171 11-23-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5172 11-23-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1018
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5173 11-23-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5174 12-21-2010 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5175 1-25-2011 Amusement and
entertainment licensing
and regulation amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
5176 1-25-2011 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
5177 2-8-2011 Bond NCM
5178 2-8-2011 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5179 2-8-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5180 3-8-2011 Capital improvements/
bond amendment
NCM
5181 3-8-2011 Appropriations
amendment
NCM
5182 3-8-2011 Appropriation NCM
5183 3-22-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5184 4-12-2011 Animals amendment Ch. 168, Arts. I,
II, III and IV
5185 4-12-2011 Amusement and
entertainment licensing
and regulation
Ch. 164, Art. II
5186 4-26-2011 Bond NCM
5187 4-26-2011 Appropriation NCM
5188 5-10-2011 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5189 5-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
5190 5-10-2011 Retirement health benefits Ch. 102, Arts. III
(footnote only);
IV (footnote
only); and VIII
5191 5-10-2011 Municipal officials benefits
amendment
Ch. 102, Art. III
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1019
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5192 5-10-2011 Officers and employees:
Township personnel
enumerated amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
5193 5-24-2011 Bond NCM
5194 5-24-2011 Bond NCM
5195 5-24-2011 Appropriation NCM
5196 6-14-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5197 6-14-2011 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5198 6-14-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5199 6-28-2011 Capital improvements/
bond
NCM
5200 6-28-2011 Capital improvements/
bond
NCM
5201 6-28-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5202 7-26-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5203 7-26-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5204 7-26-2011 Appropriation NCM
5205 8-23-2011 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5206 8-23-2011 Five-year tax exemptions
in Special Improvement
District
Ch. 487, Art. II
5207 8-23-2011 Outdoor cafes amendment Ch. 390, Art. I
5208 8-23-2011 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5209 8-23-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Parts 1
and 2
5210 8-23-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5211 9-13-2011 Department of Public
Safety amendment
Ch. 109
5212 9-13-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1020
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5213 9-13-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5214 9-13-2011 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5215 9-13-2011 Alcoholic beverage
consumption in retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 160A
5216 9-27-2011 Appropriation amendment NCM
5217 9-27-2011 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 477
5218 9-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
5219 9-27-2011 Sale of property NCM
5220 10-11-2011 Bond amendment NCM
5221 10-25-2011 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5222 12-13-2011 Sewers system user
charges amendment
Ch. 343, Art. III
5223 12-27-2011 Secondhand dealers Ch. 432
5224 12-27-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 490
5225 12-27-2011 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 460, Art. I
5226 12-27-2011 Amusement and
entertainment licensing
and regulation amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
5227 1-24-2012 Bond NCM
5228 1-24-2012 Bond NCM
5229 2-14-2012 Bond NCM
5230 2-14-2012 Cable television franchises Ch. A620
5231 2-14-2012 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5232 2-14-2012 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5233 2-14-2012 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5234 3-13-2012 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1021
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5235 3-13-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 490
5236 3-27-2012 Cap bank NCM
5237 3-27-2012 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5238 4-10-2012 Alcoholic beverage
consumption in retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 160A
5239 4-24-2012 Recreational facilities
amendment
Ch. 415
5240 5-22-2012 Bond NCM
5241 5-22-2012 Bond NCM
5242 5-22-2012 Bond NCM
5243 6-26-2012 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5244 7-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
5245 7-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
5246 7-10-2012 Interference with retail or
wholesale practices
Ch. 424
5247 7-24-2012 Appropriation NCM
5248 8-28-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
5249 8-28-2012 Tax exemption NCM
5250 9-11-2012 Appropriation NCM
5251 11-8-2012 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5252 12-18-2012 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5253 12-18-2012 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5254 1-22-2013 Bond NCM
5255 1-22-2013 Bond NCM
5256 1-22-2013 Appropriation NCM
5257 2-26-2013 Sewer system user
charges amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1022
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5258 2-26-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5259 3-12-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5260 3-12-2013 Bond NCM
5261 3-12-2013 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5262 3-26-2013 Municipal officials benefits
amendment
Ch. 102, Art. III
5263 4-23-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5264 4-23-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5265 4-23-2013 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5266 5-14-2013 Bond NCM
5267 5-14-2013 Bond NCM
5268 5-28-2013 Street vacation NCM
5269 7-9-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5270 7-9-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5271 7-9-2013 Special improvement
districts amendment
Ch. 471
5272 7-9-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5273 7-9-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5274 8-27-2013 Establishment of energy
and natural gas
aggregation program
NCM
5275 8-27-2013 Appropriation NCM
5276 9-10-2013 Appropriation NCM
5277 9-10-2013 Appropriation NCM
5278 9-10-2013 Appropriation NCM
5279 10-8-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5280 10-22-2013 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1023
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5281 11-12-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5282 10-22-2013 Municipal officials benefits
amendment
Ch. 102, Art. III
5283 11-12-2013 Boards, committees,
agencies and commissions:
absenteeism
Ch. 12, Art. I
5284 11-26-2013 Donation clothing bins Ch. 252
5285 11-26-2013 Noise amendment Ch. 585
5286 12-17-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5287 2-11-2014 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5288 2-11-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
5289 2-11-2014 Bond NCM
5290 2-11-2014 Bond NCM
5291 2-25-2014 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5292 2-25-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 490
5293 2-25-2014 Limousines amendment Ch. 354
5294 3-25-2014 Sewer system user
charges amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
5295 3-25-2014 Redevelopment plan NCM
5296 4-8-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5297 4-22-2014 Bond NCM
5298 4-22-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5299 4-22-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5300 4-22-2014 Authorizing
reimbursement of utility
engineering costs
NCM
5301 4-22-2014 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5302 4-22-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1024
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5303 4-22-2014 Amusement and
entertainment licensing
and regulation amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
5304 4-22-2014 Tax exemption and
financial agreement
(Urban Renewal, LLC)
NCM
5305 5-27-2014 Bond amendment NCM
5306 5-27-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5307 5-27-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5308 5-27-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5309 6-10-2014 Bond NCM
5310 6-10-2014 Solid waste disposal
amendment
Ch. 462, Art. I
5311 6-24-2014 Recreational facilities
amendment
Ch. 415
5312 6-24-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5313 7-22-2014 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5314 7-22-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5315 7-22-2014 Bond NCM
5316 8-26-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5317 8-26-2014 Bond NCM
5318 8-26-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5319 9-23-2014 Tax exemption for certain
property
NCM
5320 10-28-2014 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5321 10-28-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1025
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5322 10-28-2014 Property maintenance:
vacant residential
properties during
foreclosure
Ch. 406, Art. III
5323 11-10-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5324 11-10-2014 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 130
5325 11-10-2014 Union Station
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
5326 12-9-2014 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5327 12-9-2014 Sports lights Ch. 416
5328 1-27-2015 Bond NCM
5329 1-27-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5330 1-27-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5331 1-27-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5332 2-10-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5333 2-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
5334 2-10-2015 Sale of property NCM
5335 2-24-2015 Sewer system user
charges amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
5336 3-10-2015 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5337 4-14-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5338 5-12-2015 Bond NCM
5339 5-26-2015 Recreational facilities: use
regulations amendment
Ch. 415, Art. I
5340 6-9-2015 Bond NCM
5341 6-23-2015 Bond NCM
5342 6-23-2015 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5343 6-23-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1026
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5344 6-23-2015 Smoking; tobacco
products: building
entrances and municipal
vehicles
Ch. 450, Art. IV
5345 7-28-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5346 8-25-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5347 8-25-2015 Appropriation NCM
5348 8-25-2015 Bond NCM
5349 8-25-2015 Bond NCM
5350 8-25-2015 Bond NCM
5351 8-25-2015 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5352 9-8-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5353 9-22-2015 Adoption of Stowe Street
Redevelopment Plan
NCM
5354 9-22-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5355 9-22-2015 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5356 10-27-2015 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5357 10-27-2015 Human Relations
Commission
Ch. 12, Art. II
5358 10-27-2015 Contracts: contractor
qualification and
performance standards
Ch. 24, Art. I
5359 12-8-2015 Bond NCM
5360 12-22-2015 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 130
5361 1-26-2016 Recreational facilities
amendment
Ch. 415
5362 2-23-2016 Sale of property NCM
5363 2-23-2016 Sale of property NCM
5364 2-23-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 477
5365 2-23-2016 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1027
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5366 2-23-2016 Bond NCM
5367 2-23-2016 Bond NCM
5368 2-23-2016 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer system
user charges amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
5369 3-8-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5370 3-8-2016 Bond NCM
5371 4-12-2016 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
5372 4-12-2016 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5373 4-26-2016 Bond NCM
5374 5-10-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
5375 5-24-2016 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 237
5376 5-24-2016 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5377 6-14-2016 Bond NCM
5378 6-14-2016 Bond NCM
5379 6-14-2016 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5380 Not adopted
5381 6-28-2016 Authorization of
reimbursement of utility
engineering costs
NCM
5382 6-28-2016 Emergency appropriation NCM
5383 7-26-2016 Bond ordinance recission
and cancellation
NCM
5384 7-26-2016 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5385 7-26-2016 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5386 7-26-2016 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 130
5387 8-23-2016 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1028
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5388 8-23-2016 Bond NCM
5389 8-23-2016 Bond NCM
5390 8-23-2016 Bond NCM
5391 8-23-2016 Bond NCM
5392 9-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5393 9-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5394 9-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5395 9-27-2016 Bond NCM
5396 9-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
5397 10-11-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 477
5398 10-11-2016 Bond NCM
5399 10-11-2016 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5400 10-25-2016 Street vacation NCM
5401 10-25-2016 Taxation: five-year tax
exemptions in special
improvement district
amendment
Ch. 487, Art. II
5402 10-25-2016 Rent control amendment Ch. 421
5403 10-25-2016 Appropriation NCM
5404 10-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5405 11-22-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 170
5406 11-22-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
5407 11-22-2016 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5408 12-20-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 170
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1029
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5409 12-20-2016 Officers and employees:
Township personnel
enumerated amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
5410 12-20-2016 Personnel benefits:
municipal officials benefits
amendment
Ch. 102, Art. III
5411 1-24-2017 Repeal of Ord. No. 5381 NCM
5412 2-14-2017 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5413 2-14-2017 Bond NCM
5414 2-14-2017 Appropriation NCM
5415 2-14-2017 Bond NCM
5416 2-28-2017 Bond NCM
5417 2-28-2017 Bond NCM
5418 2-28-2017 Rent control amendment Ch. 421
5419 2-28-2017 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 130
5420 2-28-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5421 3-14-2017 Special improvement
districts
Ch. 471
5422 3-21-2017 Approval of application for
long-term tax exemption
and authorization of
execution of financial
agreement
NCM
5423 3-21-2017 Bond NCM
5424 3-28-2017 Contracts: contractor
qualification and
performance standards
amendment
Ch. 24, Art. I
5425 4-11-2017 Redevelopment plan NCM
5426 4-25-2017 Establish cap bank NCM
5427 5-23-2017 Bond NCM
5428 5-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1030
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5429 5-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5430 6-13-2017 Bond NCM
5431 6-13-2017 Bond NCM
5432 6-27-2017 Bond NCM
5433 6-27-2017 Bond NCM
5434 8-22-2017 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 130
5435 9-12-2017 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5436 9-12-2017 Bond NCM
5437 9-12-2017 Bond NCM
5438 9-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5439 9-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5440 10-24-2017 Property maintenance:
registration and
maintenance of vacant and
foreclosing property
Ch. 406, Art. IV
5441 10-24-2017 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5442 11-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5443 11-13-2017 Fire prevention: non-lifehazard
uses
Ch. 285, Art. III
5444 12-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5445 12-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5446 12-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1031
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5447 12-26-2017 Handicapped parking
amendment
NCM
5448 12-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5449 12-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5550 12-26-2017 Hawkers, peddlers and
itinerant vendors:
hucksters, hawkers and
peddlers amendment
Ch. 317, Art. II
5551 12-26-2017 Temporary tax exemption
for certain property
NCM
5552 2-13-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5553 1-23-2018 Municipal Court
Amendment
Ch. 28
5554 1-23-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
5555 2-13-2018 Bond NCM
5556 2-13-2018 Bond NCM
5557 2-13-2018 Appropriation NCM
5558 1-23-2018 Handicapped Parking
Amendment
NCM
5559 2-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5560 2-27-2018 Bond NCM
5561 2-27-2018 Bond NCM
5562 2-27-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer System
User Charges Amendment
Ch. 434, Art. III
5563 3-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 266, Part 1
5564 3-13-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5565 3-13-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1032
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5566 3-13-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5567 3-13-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5568 3-13-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5569 3-13-2018 Affordable Housing:
Regulations
Repealed by Ord.
No. 5588
5570 3-13-2018 Affordable Housing:
Mandatory Development
Fees Amendment
Ch. 150, Art. II
5571 3-13-2018 Establish Cap Bank NCM
5572 3-13-2018 Bond NCM
5573 3-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Parking Lots Amendment
Ch. 266, Pt. 2
5574 3-13-2018 Handicapped Parking
amendment
NCM
5575 3-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 266, Pt. 1
5576 3-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 266, Pt. 1
5577 4-10-2018 Tax Exemption; Financial
Agreement
NCM
5578 4-10-2018 Department of Public
Safety Amendment
Ch. 109
5579 4-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 266, Pt. 1
5580 4-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 266, Pt. 1
5581 5-8-2018 Handicap Parking
Amendment
NCM
5582 5-8-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5583 5-22-2018 Bond NCM
5584 5-22-2018 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1033
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5585 5-22-2018 Bond NCM
5586 6-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5587 6-12-2018 Bond NCM
5588 6-26-2018 Affordable Housing:
Regulations
Ch. 150, Art. I
5589 6-26-2018 Lease NCM
5590 6-12-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
5591 6-12-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
5592 7-24-2018 Handicap Parking
Amendment
NCM
5593 7-24-2018 Bond NCM
5594 8-28-2018 Bond NCM
5595 8-28-2018 Bond NCM
5596 8-28-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5597 8-28-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 170
5598 8-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5599 8-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5600 8-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5602 8-29-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
5603 8-28-2018 Bond NCM
5604 9-11-2018 Cranes Repealed by Ord.
No. 5644
5605 9-11-2018 Sale of Property NCM
5606 9-11-2018 Handicapped Parking
Amendment
NCM
5607 9-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5608 9-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5609 9-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1034
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5610 9-11-2018 Engineering Costs
Reimbursement for
Overhead Directional Sign
Structures
NCM
5611 9-11-2018 Appropriation Amendment NCM
5612 9-11-2018 Bond NCM
5613 9-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5614 10-23-2018 Bond NCM
5615 10-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5616 10-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5617 11-8-2018 Bond NCM
5618 11-8-2018 Handicapped Parking
Amendment
NCM
5619 12-18-2018 Towing Amendment Ch. 505
5620 12-18-2018 Agreement NCM
5621 2-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5622 2-11-2019 Handicapped Parking
Amendment
NCM
5623 2-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5624 2-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266
5625 2-26-2019 Sale of Property NCM
5626 2-26-2019 Sale of Property NCM
5627 2-26-2019 Handicapped Parking
Amendment
NCM
5628 2-26-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM
5629 2-26-2019 Bond NCM
5630 3-12-2019 Mayor's Alliance Against
Drug Abuse
Ch. 86
5631 3-12-2019 Budget Appropriations NCM
5632 3-12-2019 Agreement NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
614:1035
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
5633 3-26-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266 46
5634 5-14-2019 Handicapped Parking
Amendment
NCM 46
5635 5-14-2019 Handicapped Parking
Amendment
NCM 46
5636 5-28-2019 Street Vacation NCM 46
5637 6-11-2019 Bond NCM 46
5638 6-25-2019 Bond NCM 46
5639 6-25-2019 Exchange of Lands NCM 46
5640 6-25-2019 Bond NCM 46
5641 7-23-2019 Sale of Property NCM 46
5642 7-23-2019 Public Safety,
Department of
Amendment
Ch. 109 46
5643 7-23-2019 Bond NCM 46
5644 7-23-2019 Cranes Amendment Ch. 240 46
5645 8-27-2019 Handicapped Parking NCM 46
5646 8-27-2019 Bond NCM 46
5647 8-27-2019 Bond NCM 46
5648 8-27-2019 Bond NCM 46
5649 8-27-2019 Appropriation NCM 46
5650 9-10-2019 Bond NCM 46
5651 9-10-2019 Bond NCM 46
5652 9-10-2019 Salaries and
Compensation
See Ch.
130
46
5653 9-24-2019 Appropriation NCM 46
5654 10-22-2019 Handicapped Parking NCM 46
5655 11-26-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 266 46
5656 11-26-2019 Lease NCM 46
5657 11-26-2019 Handicapped Parking NCM 46
5658 11-26-2019 Handicapped Parking NCM 46
5659 12-23-2019 Bond NCM 46
5660 12-23-2019 Street Vacation NCM 46
§ DL-1 UNION CODE § DL-1
614:1036
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
5661 12-23-2019 Street Vacation NCM 46
5662 12-23-2019 Bond NCM 46
5663 2-11-2020 Redevelopment Plan NCM 46
§ DL-2. Board of Health ordinances.
The following is a listing of ordinances adopted by the Board of Health:
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance 10-8-2003 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 563
Ordinance 3-10-2004 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 563
Ordinance 5-11-2005 Noise Ch. 585
Ordinance 6-8-2005 Public health nuisances
code amendment
NCM
Ordinance 10-11-2006 Housing Ch. 577
(reference only)
Ordinance 3-29-2007 Prevention of diseases Ch. 560
Ordinance 6-13-2007 Recreational bathing
places
Ch. 593
Ordinance 12-17-2009 Board of Health fees
amendment; sanitary
standards amendment
Chs. 563; 596
Ordinance 2-9-2011 Animals Ch. 551
Ordinance 12-14-2011 Animals amendment Ch. 551
Ordinance 12-14-2011 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 563
Ordinance 9-12-2012 Board of Health salaries NCM
Ordinance 4-25-2016 Animals amendment Ch. 551
Ordinance 11-9-2016 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 563
Ordinance 12-14-2016 Animals amendment Ch. 551
Ordinance 2-8-2017 Board of Health salaries NCM
Ordinance 2-8-2017 Board of Health
amendment (recording,
taping or photography)
Ch. 70
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-2
614:1037
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance 5-14-2018 Board of Health Fees
Amendment
Ch. 563
Ordinance 5-14-2018 Sanitary Standards
Amendment
Ch. 596
Land Development
Chapter 170
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing; mandatory development
fees — See Ch. 150, Art. I.
Amusements; adult uses — See Ch. 164.
Animals — See Ch. 168.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 221.
Condominium and cooperative
conversions — See Ch. 233.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 237.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 254.
Gasoline and automobile service
stations — See Ch. 298.
Miniature golf — See Ch. 302.
Junkyards — See Ch. 324.
Landscaping — See Ch. 339.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 350.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 373.
Outdoor cafes; outdoor displays — See Ch.
390.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 406.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 434.
Site improvements — See Ch. 443.
Soil removal — See Ch. 456.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 462.
Special improvement districts — See Ch. 471.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 477.
Theaters — See Ch. 499.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 510.
Trees — See Ch. 516.
§ DL-2 UNION CODE § DL-2
614:1038
Part 1
Purpose; Definitions
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 170-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Development Ordinance of the
Township of Union."
§ 170-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall, in general and where applicable to local
conditions in the Township of Union, be the purposes of the Municipal Land
Use Law, Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975, as set forth in Section 2
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2) of said law, as amended and supplemented.
§ 170-3. Scope.
§ 170-4. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than imposed or required
by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations, resolutions or
ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where other laws,
rules, regulations, ordinances or resolutions require greater restrictions
than are imposed or required by this chapter, the provisions of such other
laws, rules, regulations, ordinances or restrictions shall control.
§ 170-4.1. New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
[Added 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575]
The New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards effective on June
3, 1997, and prepared pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.4, as contained in the
New Jersey Administrative Code under N.J.A.C. 5:21, are hereby adopted by
reference.
A. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically or impliedly repealed by this
chapter, or any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant,
deed or other private agreement unless repugnant hereto.
B. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage or
requires greater lot area or longer yards or other open spaces than are
imposed or required by such rules, regulations, or permits or by such
private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 170-1 WELLS § 170-4.1
614:1039

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 170-5. Definitions; word usage.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
singular number include the plural number and vice versa; the word
"used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "lot"
includes the words "plot", "premises" and "tract"; the word "building"
includes the words "structure," "dwelling" or "residence"; the word
"shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. Any word or term not
defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage.
Moreover, whenever a term is used in the chapter which is defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such term is intended to have the meaning as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. unless specifically defined to the
contrary in this chapter.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, certain phrases and words are herein
defined as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, trailer or equipment which
satisfies any of the following criteria:273[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 4181]
ACADEMIC SUBJECTS — Traditional educational subjects pertaining
primarily to liberal or classical studies and to subjects normally
associated with state-required primary and secondary school education
and with educational schools of higher learning.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building or
structure on the same lot with a main building, or a portion of the main
building, exclusively occupied as or devoted to an accessory use. Where
an accessory building is attached to a principal building in a substantial
Said item remains in violation of the accessory parking or storage
requirements of this chapter, upon due notice of the Zoning Officer.
(1)
The vehicle is not currently registered in this or any other state or
the actual ownership cannot be established.
(2)
If properly registered, the owner of said vehicle fails to
acknowledge, cease and desist said zoning violation.
(3)
(4) Is not insured against liability and property claims.
Is nonoperable and/or does not retain its as-constructed integrity,
thereby directly or indirectly creating a detriment to the public
welfare as an attractive nuisance.
(5)
(6) Does not demonstrate by established routine, its active use.
273. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 523, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1041
manner by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered
part of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use naturally and normally incident and
subordinate to the principal use of a structure or lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Engineer of the Township
of Union, in the County of Union, New Jersey, shall be the
administrative officer for the Planning Board and an administrative
officer for Article XIII, Flood Damage Prevention, § 170-105,
Administrative officer. The Construction Code Official and Secretary of
the Board of Adjustment of the Township of Union, in the County of
Union, New Jersey, shall be the administrative officer for the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. Each shall serve as an alternate in the absence of
the other. In the event of an absence by both, the Township Committee
shall designate the administrative officer for both Boards.274[Amended
12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations creating, imposing,
aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory
conditions on a subdivided property or off-tract property, such as but
not limited to improper circulation and drainage, rights-of-way,
inadequate drainage facilities, insufficient street widths, unsuitable
street grades, unsuitable street locations to accommodate prospective
traffic or coordinate and compose a convenient system, locating lots in
a manner not adaptable for the intended purposes without danger to
health or peril from flood, fire, erosion or other menace or providing
for lots of insufficient size and neither providing nor making future
allowance for access to the interior portion of the lot or for other
facilities required by this chapter.
ALTERATION OF BUILDING — A change in the supporting members of
a building, an addition to or diminution of a building, a conversion of a
building or a part thereof or removal of a building from one location to
another or a change in use of a building.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
ANTENNA — A transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or
capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 4532]
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit located on one floor of a building
containing similar units, adjoining said similar units above, below or
274. Editor's Note: The definitions of "adult bookstore" and "adult motion-picture theater,"
added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181, which previously followed this definition, were deleted
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1042
to the side, which units may share in common facilities, such as
entryways, hallways and utility systems.
APPLICANT — The landowner or the agent, optionee, contract
purchaser or other person authorized to act for and acting for the
landowner submitting an application under this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application or appeal forms
and all accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval
of a subdivision plot, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance or direction or the issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable
story and the roof rafters.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/
or long-distance providers, or the public switched telephone
network.[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
BANNER — A temporary sign displayed on cloth or pliable material.
BASEMENT — A portion of the building beneath the first floor, partly
underground but having less than 1/2 of its clear height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground and intended to be use for
storage and mechanical equipment incidental to the use and operation
of the building. (See "cellar.")
BOARDER or ROOMER — An individual other than a member of the
family occupying the dwelling unit or a part thereof who, for a
consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and may be
furnished meals or other services as part of the consideration.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns, walls or
similar structural parts, used or intended to be used for the housing,
enclosure or shelter for persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The portion of a lot covered by buildings,
expressed as a percentage of the lot area.
CAMPER — See "recreation equipment."
CELLAR — A portion of the building beneath the first floor, partly
underground, having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear height below the
average grade of adjoining ground and intended to be used for storage
and mechanical equipment incidental to the use and operation of the
building. (See "basement.")
CEMETERY — Property used for the interring of the dead.
CHANGE IN USE — The use of a building or land which is in any
manner different from the previous use by way of function, operation,
extent, products sold or manufactured and the like, but not including
a change in ownership or occupancy unless the nature of the use, as
described above, is changed.
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1043
CHECK CASHING ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment providing
the services that require licensing by the State of New Jersey under
the provisions of the Check Cashers Regulatory Act of 1993, and any
subsequent changes to the Act (N.J.S.A. 17:15A-30).[Added 1-26-1999
by Ord. No. 4575]
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A private establishment enrolling four or
more children up to five years of age and where tuition fees or other
forms of compensation for the care of the children are charged, and
which is licensed or approved to operate by the state as a child-care
center.
CHURCH — A building used for common, organized religious services.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any commercially licensed motor vehicle
intended to be driven on the highways and used for the transportation
of goods, wares, merchandise, equipment or other materials and
including any commercially licensed motor vehicles of the passenger
car type which contain advertising material exposed to view.
COMMON FACILITIES — Common facilities shall include but not be
limited to facilities for the common use of two or more dwelling units,
such as roads, sidewalks, swimming pools, playgrounds, trees, greens,
fairways and parking areas.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Ownership of two or more contiguous
parcels or real property by one person or by two or more persons
owning such property as joint tenants, as tenants by the entirety or as
tenants in common.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977,
c. 448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal
guidance under such supervision, as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in a community,
and shall include but not be limited to group homes, halfway houses,
intermediate-care facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements
and hostels.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of the
Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A.
30:14-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance,
personal guidance and other services to not more than 15 persons who
have been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such
victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
protect their physical or psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as
specified by this chapter and the rules and regulations of the municipal
agency and all accompanying documents required by this chapter for
approval of the application for development, including, where
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1044
applicable, but not limited to a site plan or subdivision plat, provided
that the municipal agency may require such additional information
not specified in the chapter or any revisions in the accompanying
documents as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision
as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zone district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization
therefor by the Planning Board, all in accordance with the provisions of
Article XV.
CORNER LOT — A lot at the junction of and having frontage on two or
more intersecting streets, or a lot bounded on two more sides by the
same street.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alternation, relocation or enlargement of any building or other
structure, or any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change
in use of any building or other structure or land or extension or use of
land, for which permission may be required.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2).
DISPLAY — As regulated by this chapter, the positioning of any item(s)
or group of item(s), whether similar or dissimilar in nature, description
or use, in line-of-sight view from any public street, sidewalk or walkway,
driveway or driving aisle, adjacent lot or building, for the promotional
or exhibitory reason or purpose of the displayer, which is not otherwise
restricted or prohibited by this chapter or any other municipal, county
or state law.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
DRAINAGE AND UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater and sanitary sewers, water
pipes or drainage ditches and other utilities or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof used as
the residence of and providing complete living facilities for a family,
as defined in this chapter, and which is self-contained and independent
from any other unit.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing more than two
dwelling units and including apartments, as defined herein.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building under one ownership,
containing two dwelling units.
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1045
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other
legal means to permit the use of land by the public, corporation or
particular persons for specific uses.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Underground gas, electrical, telephone,
telegraph, sanitary sewer collection systems or water transmission or
distribution systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables and normal aboveground appurtenances such as fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, light standards, poles, traffic signals and
hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
by public utilities or municipal or other government agencies for the
public health or safety or general welfare. Essential services shall
not be deemed to include wireless telecommunications towers and
antennas.[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.[Added 12-23-1997 by
Ord. No. 4532]
FAMILY — A person or any number of persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.[Added 12-23-1997
by Ord. No. 4532]
FENCE — A vertical structure erected as a barrier, enclosure or
screening and extending or suspended between posts or other
supports. As used in this chapter, the term "fence" shall include the
term "wall."
FLEA MARKET — An indoor operation involving the display and sale of
retail merchandise by two or more independent merchants or vendors
in a common area and involving no permanent separation between the
independent sales and display operations.
FLOOD or FLOODING — These and other related terms are defined in
Article XIII.
FLOOR AREA —
As it applies to a dwelling or dwelling unit, the total area of all
floors of a dwelling computed by measuring the outside dimensions
of the outside walls of the dwelling, excluding the floors of the
following: crawl spaces, basements, cellars, porches, breezeways,
patios, terraces, garages and carports. The floor area of a finished
second floor room or attic shall be included if the ceiling height
is at least seven feet six inches, notwithstanding that the room or
attic has minor ceiling slopes, provided that the knee walls are at
least five feet in height.
(1)
As it applies to nonresidential buildings, the total area of all floors
of a building computed by measuring the outside walls of the
building, including basement and cellar floors, unless such floors
(2)
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1046
GARAGE — A building or structure used for the parking of one or more
motor vehicles. The sale of new or used vehicles, trailers, equipment
and/or other items is not a permitted use.[Amended 3-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 4181]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage which is maintained as an accessory
use and limited to use by residents, owners, employees, customers and
clients of the principal use.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, or portion thereof, other than a private
customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used
for the parking of motor vehicles and available to the general
public.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building in which is conducted a business
involving the providing of a retail service, specifically mechanical repair
of motor vehicles, and excluding the retail sale of motor vehicle
fuels.[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A place where gasoline or other
mode of fuel is offered for sale to the public and where deliveries
are made directly into motor vehicles and which may provide for the
maintenance, service and light mechanical repair of motor vehicles or
the sale of equipment accessories. The sale of new or used vehicles or
the washing of cars is not a permitted use or accessory use as part of a
gasoline service station. "Gasoline service station" is also referred to as
"motor vehicle service station."
GYMNASIUM — A room used for various indoor sports and athletic
activities, along with locker and shower rooms, office space and similar
accessory functions.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those elements and compounds,
including petroleum products, defined by the Department of
Environmental Protection after a public hearing, included on the list
of hazardous substances found in Appendix A of N.J.A.C. 7:1E. The
definition consists of hazardous substances and hazardous wastes.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any hazardous material or hazardous
waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste substances required to be reported
to the Department of Environmental Protection on the special waste
manifest pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-7.4 or designated as a hazardous
waste pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-8. Hazardous waste shall be allowed as
an accessory use only.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public
or private, principally engaged in providing inpatient or outpatient
services for health maintenance and the treatment of mental or physical
conditions. Health care facilities may include general or special
hospitals, diagnostic labs and centers, treatment centers, rehabilitation
are and remain unfurnished and unused except for storage or
utility purposes.
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1047
centers, extended care facilities, residential health care facilities, longterm
care facilities, outpatient clinics, Alzheimer centers, sub-acute
care centers, post-surgery facilities, sleep centers, nursing homes,
medical boarding homes (Class C), hospice care, medical spa, and
similar types of health care facilities. Health care facilities may include
ancillary uses integral to the primary use, such as gift shops, flower
shops, which may include sale of personal care items, snacks, and
sundries; cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants; laundries; dispensaries;
laboratories; and medical and administrative offices.[Added
11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5173]
HEALTH CARE SERVICES — Establishments providing support to
medical professionals and their patients, such as medical and dental
laboratories, blood banks, and miscellaneous types of medical supplies
and services. Health care services may include pharmacies, surgical
supply stores, respiratory equipment sales and rentals, amputee device
clinics, social work offices, behavioral health services, counseling
services, physical and occupational therapy, fitness and wellness
centers (not including health clubs and gymnasiums), and similar
services.[Added 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5173]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — The vertical distance from
the average ground elevation around the foundation or at any uniform
distance within 15 feet of the foundation to the highest point of the
structure. Average elevation shall be the average of the highest and
lowest elevations along the finished grade at the foundation or at
any uniform distance within 15 feet of the foundation.[Amended
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office of a doctor, dentist,
architect, engineer, lawyer, real estate agent, insurance broker, stateaccredited
teacher or similar state-accredited professional occupation
maintained in, incidental to and as part of a detached one-family
dwelling.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and
medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental
conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related
facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
HOTEL — A building containing hotel units, each having its only access
from an interior corridor, designed and intended to be used as
overnight sleeping accommodations for transient guests, which
building has a public lobby and full-time management serving the
guests and which may contain ancillary services and facilities, such as
restaurants, shops and boutiques, recreation facilities, meeting rooms
and convention facilities which shall be accessible from the interior
of the building.[Added 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 4155; amended
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
HOTEL UNIT — A room or suite of rooms in a hotel which shall
consist of bedroom, a bathroom and closet or closet area, and which
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1048
may include not more than one additional room for sitting or sleeping
purposes.[Added 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 4155; amended 3-10-1992
by Ord. No. 4181]
HOT TUB — See "swimming pool, private."[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 4181; amended 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Pavement of other land improvements
which prevent normal groundwater absorption, including
buildings.[Amended 11-22-2005by Ord. No. 4919]
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey; in the case of a civil proceeding or
any administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any person,
whether residing within or without the municipality, whose right to use,
acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property
under this chapter or any other law of this state or of the United States
have been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with
a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or material.
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions as
delineated on the current Tax Atlas of the Township of Union.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot, not
including any portion of a street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — See "corner lot."
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot
line and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the midpoint
of the rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — See "interior lot."
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot
lines measured at the setback line.
LOW INCOME — Total gross household income equal to 50% or less
of the median household income for households of the same size and
using the median income data for household size prepared by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
or equally reliable source of the housing region which includes the
Township of Union.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, major."
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1049
MANUFACTURING — The fabrication, construction, processing,
assembly, treatment or conversion of finished or unfinished materials,
articles or products for use other than on the premises where any of the
foregoing activities may be performed.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality, which
shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MAUSOLEUM — A permanent structure or building used for the
entombment of human remains in crypts, vaults or niches.
MAUSOLEUM, FAMILY — A building or structure for the interment of
the dead, having less than 10 crypts.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — An approved facility or
institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing
registered qualifying patients with usable marijuana and related
paraphernalia in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey
Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq. A
medical marijuana dispensary shall not include the manufacture or
cultivation of marijuana, nor shall it include the retail sale of marijuana
for other than medical purposes.[Added 8-28-2018 by Ord. No.
5596]
MENTALLY ILL PERSON — A person who is afflicted with a mental
illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.2, but shall not include a person
who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be
tried on a criminal charge.[Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
MINOR SITE PLAN — See "site plan, minor."
MINOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, minor."
MODERATE INCOME — Total gross household income between 50%
and 80% of the median household income for households of the same
size and using the median income data for household size prepared
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) or equally reliable source for the housing region which includes
the Township of Union.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
MOTEL — A building or complex of buildings, other than a hotel,
containing not more than 25 units, said unit consisting of a single
room and private bathroom facilities, designed and intended to be used
as overnight sleeping accommodations for transient guests. Said use
shall include a public lobby/office and full-time management and staff
(24 hours, seven days), sufficient to operate said use while providing
the normal incidental housekeeping services for guests in addition to
property maintenance of the site.[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No.
4181]
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A building or premises in
which or upon which is conducted a business primarily involving the
retail sale and direct delivery to motor vehicles of gasoline and motor
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1050
oil, which business may or may not include facilities for lubricating,
but not including facilities for body repair work or painting or the
mechanical repair of motor vehicles.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
the governing body or any agency created by or responsible to one or
more municipalities when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A structure, the
size, dimension or location of which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.[Amended
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located.[Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use occupying a building or structure
which does not conform to the use regulations for the zone in which it
is located.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building devoted to offices for the performance
of professional, executive, administrative or sales functions.
PARKING — An accessory use, other than storage which is not
accessory parking and therefore regulated in other portions of this
chapter, relating to the parking of motor vehicles as permitted and
regulated by this chapter; which said accessory parking use requires
the daily removal of said motor vehicle(s) for a period of no less than
eight continuous hours from the approved parking area as a matter of
routine.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or other public
way, used for the parking of motor vehicles, including access drives and
aisles, and available for public use, whether for a fee or as a service or
privilege for clients, customers, suppliers or residents.
PARKING, SHARED — Joint utilization of a parking area for more
than one use in which parking spaces are used at different times by
different uses resulting a lower peak demand for parking than would
otherwise result from a cumulative addition of the individual parking
requirements of all permitted uses on site.[Added 5-10-2011 by Ord.
No. 5188]
PARKING SPACE — An accommodation for the off-street parking of a
motor vehicle and having an area required by this chapter.
PAWNBROKER — Any establishment providing the services that
require licensing by the State of New Jersey Pawnbroking Law (N.J.S.A.
45:22-1 et seq.).
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter which may he accepted in lieu of a
requirement that certain improvements be made, including
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1051
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — An area to be developed according to
a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas.[Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380]
POOL, ABOVEGROUND — Any private pool with a water level a
minimum of 24 inches deep and a maximum of 52 inches above grade.
The base of the pool shall not extend more than four inches below
grade.[Added 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630]
POOL, IN-GROUND — Any private pool that exceeds 24 inches in depth
and does not extend more than 12 inches above grade at its highest
point.[Added 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630]
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure arranged, adapted or designed
for the predominant or primary use for which a lot may be used.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of the premises.
PUBLIC PURPOSE USES — The use of land or buildings by the
governing body of the Township or any officially created authority or
agency thereof.
RECREATION EQUIPMENT — The following items, if currently
registered and in good repair:
RECREATION TRAILER — A trailer used to carry a boat, bicycle,
motorcycle or some other similar item of recreation equipment or
vehicle.
(1)
HOUSE OR TRAVEL TRAILER — A portable structure mounted
on or part of a trailer for use as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation or vacation and having a maximum body length of 35
feet and a maximum body width of eight feet when factoryequipped
for the road.
(2)
PICKUP CAMPER — A portable structure designed to be mounted
on a pickup or other truck for travel, recreation or vacation uses,
but not including pickup caps which do not extend more than
12 inches above the standard cab of the pickup. Pickup trucks
equipped with such caps shall be considered light vehicles.
(3)
MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle designed for use as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation or vacations, but not including
standard vans which are light vehicles and usable only for sleeping
purposes. Such vans shall be considered light vehicles.
(4)
CAMP TRAILER — A folding or rigid portable structure mounted on
or part of a trailer and designed for travel, recreation or vacation
uses.
(5)
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1052
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or complex of buildings in
which is conducted investigation, analysis, testing, design,
experimentation, product development or related activity in the
natural, physical or social science, but not including the manufacturing
of products.
RESTAURANT — An establishment in which public patrons seated at
tables or counters are served food and drink for consumption in the
building.[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages in readyto-
consume individual servings, for consumption either within the
restaurant building or for carry-out, and where either:[Added
11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 4357]
ROOMER — See "boarder or roomer."
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — An apparatus which is designed to
receive television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals and
which is characterized by a round, dish-type structure.
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed
or used for education or instruction by a branch of knowledge.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE — Any school providing primary or
secondary education in accordance with subjects under state-mandated
curricula, county colleges and state colleges and universities, but not
including private business and commercial schools operated for
profit.[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
SERVICE, RETAIL — A business activity involving the sale of a service
to the ultimate consumer as opposed to the sale of a product.[Added
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel with a street line or lot line at
the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line.
SHOP, RETAIL — A building or part thereof in which or from which a
service is rendered directly to the ultimate consumer.
SIGHT EASEMENT AT INTERSECTION — A triangular-shaped area,
established in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, in
which no grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained,
except for street signs, fire hydrants and light standards.
(6) BOAT — Any kind of boat, float or raft.
Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in paper,
plastic or other disposable containers and where customers are
not served their food, frozen desserts or beverages by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter where the items are
consumed; or
(1)
The establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service
facility or offers curb service.
(2)
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1053
SIGN — Any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any
person when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general
public or when of a permanent nature and placed within the window of
a commercial or other structure so as to be visible to persons from the
outside for the purpose aforesaid.
SIGN, AREA OF — The product of the largest horizontal width and
the largest vertical height of the lettering, illustration, display or
background. This shall not be construed to include the supporting
members of any sign which are used solely for such purpose. If the
letter, illustration, display or background is attached directly to the face
of a building, the height or width of the sign shall be the height or width
of the largest letter, illustration, display or background, whichever
is the greater. For signs with two display faces, the maximum area
requirement shall be permitted on each side.
SIGNS, BILLBOARD — A panel supported by uprights or braces placed
in the ground designed to carry off-site advertising, political, religious
and similar messages.[Added 1-28-2003 by Ord. No. 4760]
SIGN, DIFFUSED LIGHTED — Any sign which spreads light over the
sign surface from a source located within the sign and behind a
translucent sign surface and wherein the direct source of light is not
visible.
SIGN, ERECTION OF — The building, construction, attachment,
placing, suspension or affixing of a sign, including the painting of wall
signs and the painting of signs or displays on the exterior surface of
a building or structure. Any change in the size, structural parts or
materials used in the construction of a sign shall be considered as the
erection of a new sign.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by uprights or braces
placed upon or in the ground, not attached to any building, the display
area of which is located above normal eye level.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed
upon or in the ground, not attached to any building, the display area of
which is located at or approximately at normal eye level.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or an outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as
part of the sign proper.
SIGN, INDIRECTLY LIGHTED — Any sign which reflects light from
a source intentionally directed upon it for example for means of
floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or externally mounted fluorescent
light fixtures.
SIGN, WALL — A sign which is affixed parallel to or painted on an
exterior wall of any building.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP — Ownership by one person or by two or more
persons, whether jointly, as tenants by the entirety or as tenants in
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1054
common, of a separate parcel of real property not adjacent to land in
the same ownership.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:
SITE PLAN, MINOR — The development plan of a single lot which:
SPA — See "swimming pool, private."[Added 4-25-2000 by Ord. No.
4630]
STORAGE — As regulated by this chapter, the accumulation and
placement of any item(s) or group of item(s), whether similar or
dissimilar in nature, description or use, excluding accessory parking
which is not storage and therefore regulated in other portions of this
chapter, or which, by interpretation of the Board of Adjustment, has
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
floodplains, marshes and waterways;
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs; and
(2)
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination concerning the adequacy of the
plan in accordance to the requirements of this chapter.
(3)
Proposes new development within the scope of development
specifically permitted by this chapter as a minor site plan.
(1)
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension
or any off-tract improvement.
(2)
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination as to whether the requirements
established by this chapter for approval of a minor subdivision have
been met.
(3)
Shall be limited to the following classes of development:
A change in use involving no building construction other than
interior modification or interior structural alteration and
creating not more than five additional off-street parking
spaces.
(a)
Minor structural changes, such as entry enclosures, porticoes
and other structural appurtenances, including roof
appurtenances.
(b)
Building additions or accessory buildings not exceeding 100
square feet in ground coverage, provided that the same do
not invade upon any required parking area or setback area or
otherwise violate any requirements of this chapter.
(c)
(4)
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1055
been determined to be a valid storage accessory use which does not
impair the intent or purpose of this chapter or the Master Plan and
which can therefore be continued without detriment to the public
welfare and safety, which may be maintained as permitted by this
chapter in the proper manner on a lot(s) or portion thereof or within
any structure(s) on said lot, provided that said lot(s) and structure(s)
conform to the requirements of this chapter and that said storage is not
otherwise restricted or prohibited by this chapter or other municipal,
county or state law.[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
STORE, RETAIL — A building or part thereof in which or from which
merchandise is sold directly to the ultimate consumer.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it. For the purpose of this chapter, the interior of the roof shall not be
considered a ceiling.
STREET —
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the
adopted Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between
the street and a lot.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
such location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings,
fences, tanks, towers, signs, advertising devices and swimming pools.
The term "structure" shall include the term "building."
SUBDIVISION —
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which is:
(a) An existing state, county or municipal roadway;
(b) Shown upon a plat heretofore approve pursuant to law;
(c) Approved by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.; or
Shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a
Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to
review plats.
(d)
(1)
Includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street line.
(2)
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
(1)
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1056
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any division of land containing an aggregate
of not more than two lots (one new lot and the remaining parcel),
each fronting on an existing street or streets; not involving any new
street or the installation of any street improvements or the extension
of Township facilities; not involving any street(s) requiring additional
right-of-way width as specified in the Master Plan or Official Map and
the street requirements of this chapter, unless such additional right-ofway
width, either along one or both sides of said street(s), as applicable,
shall be deeded to the development of the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision of the Master
Plan, Official Map or this chapter; not being a further division of an
original tract of land for which previous minor subdivision(s) have been
approved by the Township and where the combination of the proposed
and approved minor subdivision(s) constitutes a major subdivision; and
not being deficient in those details and specifications required of minor
subdivisions as specified in this chapter. The original tract of land shall
be considered any tract in existence at the time of the adoption of
the chapter of which this is a revision, as shown on the Township Tax
Maps. Any readjustment of lot lines resulting in no new lots shall be
classified as a "minor subdivision," provided that such subdivision does
not involve:
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size.
(a)
(b) Divisions of property by testamentary or interstate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure.
(c)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(d)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform
to the requirements of the municipal development regulations
and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or
parcels on the tax map or atlas of the municipality.
(e)
(2) The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision".
(1) A planned development;
(2) Any new street; or
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1057
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any structure that contains water over
24 inches or more in depth and which is used, or intended to be used,
for swimming or recreational bathing in connection with an occupancy
in a residential use group and which is available only to the family and
guests of the householder.[Added 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630]
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE (TRC) — An advisory committee
which may be established at the discretion of the Planning Board
for the purpose of determining the completeness of applications for
development, reviewing such applications and performing such other
functions as the Board may designate. The TRC shall be appointed by
the Chairman of the Planning Board and shall consist of at least two
members of the Board and such other municipal officials as deemed
appropriate.
TOWER — See the definition of "wireless telecommunications
tower."[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
TOWER HEIGHT — When referring to a wireless telecommunications
tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished
grade to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the
base pad and any antenna. (See also the definition of "height of building
or structure.")[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Union, in the County of Union, a
municipal corporation of the State of New Jersey.
TRACT — A designated parcel or area of land, including a lot, which is
the subject of an application for development and which includes any
contiguous portions of street rights-of-way in which the developer has
property rights.[Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380]
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings
or reproduction thereof.
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this chapter authorized by
the appropriate municipal agency in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
VEHICLE, LIGHT — Pedal-operated vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds and
other similar vehicles; the following light motor vehicle classes as
recognized by the United States Environmental Protection Agency:
The extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is
to be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of the statute (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42).275
(3)
(1) Cars, including station wagons.
Pickup trucks, but only those with a gross vehicular weight which
does not exceed 8,600 pounds. Pickup trucks with a gross vehicular
(2)
275. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "swimming pool, permanent," "swimming pool,
portable" and "swimming pool, private residential," as amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No.
4181, which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 4-25-2000 by Ord. No.
4630.
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1058
VEHICLE, MOTOR — A self-propelled device which is licensed as a
motor vehicle by the State of New Jersey.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that
is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication
purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term includes the
structure and any support thereto.[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No.
4532]
YARD — An open space, unoccupied except by a structure or use as
specifically permitted by this chapter, measured, respectively, from all
points on the abutting street right-of-way line, side lot line and rear line
to the foundation wall of the principal structure. All measurements are
to be made at right angles to straight portions and to tangents of curved
portions.
weight exceeding 8,600 pounds may be classified as "light
vehicles," provided that the length, width and height are the same
as those of a comparable vehicle with a gross vehicular weight
of 8,600 pounds or less, as produced by the same manufacturer
during the same model year.
Vans, but only those with a gross vehicular weight which does not
exceed 8,600 pounds. Vans with a gross vehicular weight exceeding
8,600 pounds may be classified as "light vehicles," provided that
the length, width and height are the same as those of a comparable
vehicle with a gross vehicular weight of 8,600 pounds or less, as
produced by the same manufacturer during the same model year.
(3)
Special purpose vehicles, but only those with a gross vehicular
weight which does not exceed 8,600 pounds. Special purpose
vehicles with a gross vehicular weight exceeding 8,600 pounds may
be classified as "light vehicles," provided that the length, width
and height are the same as those of a comparable vehicle with a
gross vehicular weight of 8,600 pounds or less, as produced by the
same manufacturer during the same model year. This term does
not include any omnibus, school bus or school vehicle as defined by
Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
(4)
FRONT YARD — A yard situated between the principal structure
and the street right-of-way line, extending across the full width of
the lot.
(1)
SIDE YARD — A yard situated between the principal structure and
a side line of the lot, extending between the front yard and the rear
yard.
(2)
§ 170-5 WELLS § 170-5
614:1059
REAR YARD — A yard situated between the principal structure and
the rear lot line, extending across the full width of the lot.
(3)
§ 170-5 UNION CODE § 170-5
614:1060
Part 2
Administration
ARTICLE III
Planning Board
§ 170-6. Board established; membership.
The Planning Board heretofore created is continued and is hereby
established consisting of nine members and two alternates of the following
four classes:
§ 170-7. Terms of office.
A. Class I: The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
[Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
B. Class II: One of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that, if
there is an Environmental Commission,276 the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class
II Planning Board member if there is both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among
the Class IV members or alternates.
C. Class III: A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member unless there shall be among the Class IV
members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the
member of the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be the
Class II member of the Planning Board.
A. The term of the Mayor shall correspond with his official tenure, or, if the
member is the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor, the
designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
276. Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Environmental Commission.
§ 170-6 WELLS § 170-7
614:1061
§ 170-8. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 170-9. Organization; staff.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV. The Board shall also employ such other staff as it
deems necessary, within the restriction of the budget appropriated by the
Township Committee.
§ 170-10. Funds.
The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
§ 170-11. Planning Board Attorney.
The office of Planning Board Attorney is hereby created. The Planning
Board may annually appoint to such office and fix the salary and/or rate of
compensation of such attorney. The term of office of said attorney shall be
for one year from January 1 of each year.
§ 170-12. Alternate members.
Two alternate members shall be appointed to the Planning Board in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1 (Section 13 of P.L. 1979, c. 216).
§ 170-13. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall be governed by and shall have such powers as are
conferred upon it by P.L. 1975, c. 291, Section 16 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25). The
Planning Board shall:
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever occurs first. [Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 4532]
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of all Class IV members shall be for four years, provided that
nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion
of the terms of four years, except as otherwise herein provided. All
terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
was made.
A. Prepare, adopt and from time to time amend or revise a Master Plan.
§ 170-7 UNION CODE § 170-13
614:1062
§ 170-14. Referral powers.
B. Exercise control over the review of subdivisions and site plans in
accordance with Part 4.
C. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Board of Adjustment:
(1) Variances, pursuant to § 170-26C of this chapter.
(2) Direction, pursuant to § 170-26F(1) of this chapter, for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood-control basin or public area.
(3) Direction, pursuant to § 170-26F(2) of this chapter, for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure on a lot not abutting a street.
D. Exercise such other duties as may be assigned to it by ordinance or
resolution of the governing body and perform such other functions as
may be authorized by P.L. 1975, c. 291,277 and other state statutes and
administrative regulations.
A. Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, revision, or
amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall make and transmit to the
governing body, within 35 days after referral, a report including
identification of any provisions in the proposed development regulation,
revision or amendment which are inconsistent with the Master Plan and
recommendations concerning these inconsistencies and any other
matters as the Board deems appropriate. The governing body, when
considering the adoption of a development regulation, revision or
amendment thereto, shall review the report of the Planning Board and
may disapprove or change any recommendation by a vote of a majority
of its full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the
reasons for not following such recommendation. Failure of the Planning
Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period provided
herein shall relieve the governing body from the requirements of this
subsection in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision
or amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as diminishing the application of the
provisions of Section 23 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32) to any
Official Map or an amendment or revision thereto or of Subsection a of
Section 49 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62) to any zoning
ordinance or any amendment or revision thereto.278
B. The governing body may, by ordinance, provide for the reference of any
matter or class of matters to the Planning Board before final action
thereon by a municipal body or municipal officer having final authority
277. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
278. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-13 WELLS § 170-14
614:1063
§ 170-15. Time periods for decisions.
Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan or
conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant to § 170-13D of this
chapter, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application
within 95 days after submission by a developer of a complete application to
the Secretary of the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval
herein required and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer
for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 170-16. Simultaneous review.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses, variances or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer's being required to make further
application to the Planning Board or the Planning Board's being required to
hold further hearings. The longest time for action by the Planning Board,
whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall
apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer
pursuant to this subsection, notice of the hearing of the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use, variance or site plan.
thereon, except of any matter under the jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment. Whenever the Planning Board shall have made a
recommendation regarding a matter authorized by law to another
municipal body, such recommendation may be rejected only by a
majority of the full authorized membership of such other body.279
C. Any request made to the Township Committee involving the removal of
a Township-imposed deed restriction, or the grant, removal or
modification of the use of any easement, shall be referred to the
Planning Board for a report and recommendation in accordance with
Subsection A above before action on the request is taken by the
Township Committee. The Planning Board shall conduct a public
hearing with notice given pursuant to § 170-39A. Any request made to
the Township Committee involving the change of any condition or
restriction of approval incorporated in any resolution of the Planning
Board (or Board of Adjustment), or any alteration of a buffer area
incorporated in any approved application for development, shall be
referred to the Board of origin, which shall conduct a public hearing for
amendment of said resolution or approved application for development,
with notice given pursuant to § 170-39A. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 4181]
279. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-14 UNION CODE § 170-17
614:1064
§ 170-17. Citizens Advisory Committee. [Amended 3-9-1993 by Ord.
No. 4232]
After the appointment of a Planning Board, the Mayor may appoint one
or more persons as a Citizens Advisory Committee to assist or collaborate
with the Planning Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall
have no power to vote or take other action required of the Board. Such
person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. They shall show
exceptional expertise in Planning Board issues; have served on a land use
board, commission or agency for at least two years; have a demonstrable
record of public service; and possess a relevant and/or appropriate
educational background.
§ 170-18. Referrals to Environmental Commission.
Whenever an Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development submitted to
the Planning Board. Failure of Planning Board to make such informational
copy available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding. These same provisions shall apply to the Board of
Adjustment when acting on an application for development.
§ 170-19. Review of capital projects.
Whenever the Planning Board shall adopt any portion of the Master Plan,
the governing body or other public agency having jurisdiction over the
subject matter, before taking action necessitating the expenditure of any
public funds, incidental to the location, character or extent of such project,
shall refer the action involving such specific project to the Planning Board
for review and recommendation in conjunction with such Master Plan and
shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until 45 days have
elapsed after such reference without receiving such recommendation. This
requirement shall apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special
district or other similar public agency, state, county or municipality.
§ 170-17 WELLS § 170-19
614:1065

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 170-20. Board established; membership; terms.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment heretofore created is continued and is
hereby established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law280 as the Board
of Adjustment for the municipality. It shall consist of seven members, who
shall be appointed by the governing body for terms of four years, each
computed from January 1 of the year of their appointment, except that full
terms filled for the first time under this section shall be so fixed (for four
or fewer years) and so arranged that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of all terms will be distributed evenly over the first four years
after the initial appointment.
§ 170-21. Vacancies.
Any vacancy on said Board occurring other than by expiration of term shall
be filled by appointment by the governing body to serve for the unexpired
term of the member whose term shall become vacant. A member may, after
public hearing if he requests it, be removed by the governing body for
cause.
§ 170-22. Organization; staff.
Yearly, the Board of Adjustment shall organize by selecting from among
its regular members a Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Board shall also
employ such other staff as it deems necessary, within the restrictions of the
budget appropriated by the Township Committee.
§ 170-23. Funds.
The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Board of Adjustment.
§ 170-24. Board of Adjustment Attorney.
The office of the Board of Adjustment Attorney is hereby created. The Board
of Adjustment may annually appoint to such office and fix the salary and/or
rate of compensation of such attorney. The term of office of said Attorney
shall be for one year from January 1 of each year.
§ 170-25. Alternate members.
A. Two alternate members to said Board of Adjustment shall be appointed
by the governing body and shall be designated at the time of
appointment as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2.
280. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 170-20 WELLS § 170-25
614:1067
§ 170-26. Powers and duties.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
B. The terms of alternate members shall be for two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more
than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the governing body for the
expired term only. All appointments of alternates, regardless of the date
of appointment, shall run from January 1 of the year of appointment.
C. Alternates appointed to said Board of Adjustment shall receive a salary
as provided by ordinance for each meeting at which they are required
to participate in their capacity as an alternate.
A. Error or refusal. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by an administrative officer based on or made in the
enforcement of Part 3, Zoning.281
B. Exceptions or interpretations. Hear and decide requests for
interpretation of the Zoning Map282 or Part 3, Zoning, or for decisions
upon other special questions upon which such Board is authorized to
pass by any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance, in accordance with this
chapter.283
C. Variance of area or yard requirements.284
(1) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property, or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any regulation pursuant to Part 3, Zoning, would result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon, the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from
such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship.
(2) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property, the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by a
deviation from the zoning requirements and the benefits of the
281. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
282. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Township Clerk.
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-25 UNION CODE § 170-26
614:1068
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to Part 3,
Zoning, of this chapter; provided, however, that the fact that a
proposed use is an inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive
of a decision on a variance under this subsection and provided that
no variance from those departures enumerated in Subsection D of
this section shall be granted under this subsection; and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use,
in conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to review
a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
D. Variance of use regulations. In particular cases for special reasons,
grant a variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to Part 3,
Zoning, of this chapter to permit a use or principal structure in a
district restricted against such use or principal structure; an expansion
of a nonconforming use; deviation from a specification or standard
pursuant to Section 54 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67)
pertaining solely to a conditional use; an increase in the permitted floor
area ratio as defined in Section 3.1 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-4); an increase in the permitted density as defined in Section
3.1 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4), except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling unit
buildings, which lot or lots either an isolated undersized lot or lots
resulting from a minor subdivision; or a height of a principal structure
which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum height permitted in the
district for a principal structure. A variance under this subsection shall
be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five members.285
E. General provision. No variance or other relief may be granted under the
terms of this section, including a variance or other relief involving an
inherently beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other
relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and will not substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone
plan and Part 3, Zoning. In respect to any airport safety zones
delineated under the Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983, P.L. 1983, c.
260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted
under the terms of this section, permitting the creation or
establishment of a nonconforming use which would be prohibited under
standards promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a
permit by the Commissioner of Transportation. An application under
this section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its
report; provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.286
F. Other powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have such other powers as
prescribed by law, including but not limited to the following:
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-26 WELLS § 170-26
614:1069
(1) Direct issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
building or structure within the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area, as shown on a duly
adopted Official Map ordinance of the municipality, whenever one
or more parcels of land within said bed cannot yield a reasonable
return to the owner unless a building permit is granted. The Board
may grant such relief only by an affirmative vote of a majority of the
full authorized membership of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
ensuring that such relief will tend to cause a minimum change of
the Official Map and will not significantly add to the cost of opening
any proposed street. The Board shall impose reasonable
requirements as a condition of granting the building permit so as to
promote the health, morals, safety and general welfare of the
public.
(2) Direct issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
building or structure on a lot not abutting a street which is shown
on a duly adopted Official Map of the municipality or which is an
existing state, county or municipal street or highway; a street
shown upon a plat approved by the municipal Planning Board; or a
street on a plat duly filed in the office of the County Recording
Officer. The Board may grant such relief only where the
enforcement of the statute requirement that a building lot abut a
street would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship or
where the circumstances of the case do not require the building or
structure to abut a street. The Board shall impose requirements or
conditions that will provide adequate access for fire-fighting
equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary
for the protection of the health and safety and will protect any
future street layout shown on the Official Map or on the general
circulation plan element of the municipal Master Plan.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Part 4 of this chapter
whenever the proposed development requires approval by the
Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to Subsection d of
Section 57 of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
(a) The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision of site
plan. The separate approval of the variance shall be
conditioned upon the granting of all required subsequent
approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone
plan and Part 3, Zoning. The number of votes of Board
members required to grant any such subsequent approval shall
§ 170-26 UNION CODE § 170-26
614:1070
§ 170-27. Appeals and applications.
be as otherwise provided in the act for the approval in
question, and the special vote pursuant to the aforesaid
Subsection d of Section 57287 shall not be required.
(b) Whenever an application for development requests relief
pursuant to Subsection b of Section 57 of the Municipal Land
Use Law,288 the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by
a developer of a complete application to the administrative
officer or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. In the event that the developer elects to submit
separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall
apply to the application for approval of the variance. The
period for granting or denying any subsequent approval shall
be as otherwise provided in the act. Failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application and certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the
County Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision
plats.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party
affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the municipality
based on or made in the enforcement of Part 3, Zoning, or the Official
Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of
appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, specifying the
grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
immediately transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, without prior application to the administrative officer,
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. At
the time of filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10
days prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot
plans, maps and other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
chapter or any rule of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. An applicant
shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, who shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to
institute proceedings and of the meeting dates of the Board.
C. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action in respect of which the decision appealed
287. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
288. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
§ 170-26 WELLS § 170-27
614:1071
§ 170-28. Time periods for decisions.
§ 170-29. Reversal or modification of decisions.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and may make such other requirement,
decision or determination as should be made, in its opinion, and to that end
the Board shall have all the powers of the administrative officer from whom
the appeal was taken.
§ 170-30. Expiration of variance.
from was made, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on application or
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
A. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
§ 170-26F(3), the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the Secretary of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant.
B. In the event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for
approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter or in
the Municipal Land Use Law.
C. Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate
of the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued upon the request of the applicant and shall
be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required, and such certificate shall be so accepted by
the County Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
A. Any variance hereafter granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or
permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation
unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced, within one
year from the date of entry of the determination of the Zoning Board of
§ 170-27 UNION CODE § 170-30
614:1072
§ 170-31. Referral to other agencies.
An application under this article may be referred to any appropriate person
or agency, including the Planning Board, pursuant to Section 17 of P.L.
1975, c. 291,289 for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend
the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
§ 170-32. Voting.
The final disposition of any matter by the Board shall require the concurring
vote of a majority of a quorum, except as provided in § 170-26D and as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 and 40:55D-34.
§ 170-33. Written inquiries; responses.290
Inquiries as to whether a proposed land use is permissible under Part 3,
Zoning, or the Official Zoning Map291 shall be submitted in writing to the
administrative officer, who shall issue a written response within 10 days.
Adjustment; provided, however, that the running of the period of
limitation hereby established shall be tolled from the date of the filing
of an appeal from the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to a
court of competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of
such appeal or proceeding. [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575]
B. Whenever any variance hereafter granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Planning Board is related to subdivision or site plan
approval, such variance shall remain in effect so long as the related
final subdivision or final site plan approval remains in effect in
accordance with the provisions of § 170-224, whereupon such variance
shall expire by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall
have been actually commenced on each and every structure permitted
by said variance or unless such permitted use has actually been
commenced.
289. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26.
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
291. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 170-30 WELLS § 170-33
614:1073

ARTICLE V
Administrative Procedures
§ 170-34. Rules and regulations.
Every municipal agency shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with this chapter for the administration of its
functions, powers and duties and shall furnish a copy thereof to any person
upon request and may charge a reasonable fee for such copy. Copies of all
such rules and regulations and amendments thereto shall be maintained in
the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 170-35. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the municipal agency shall act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever
any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter,
he shall not continue to sit with the agency on the hearing of such matter or
participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 170-36. Meetings.
A. Every municipal agency shall by its rules fix the time and place for
holding its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by
such agency. Regular meetings of the municipal agency shall be
scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
B. The municipal agency may provide for special meetings at the call of
the Chairman or on the request of any two of its members, which shall
be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with
municipal regulations.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at
the meeting, except as otherwise provided by Sections 23, 25, 49 and
50 and Subsections 8e, 17a and 57d or Section 5 of P.L. 1975, c. 291.292
E. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meeting Law, Chapter 231 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975.293
F. All applicants must be represented by legal counsel if he or she is a
corporation or partnership.
292. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32, 40:55D-34, 40:55D-62, 40:55D-63, 40:55D-17e,
40:55D-26a, 40:55D-70d and 40:55D-9, respectively.
293. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 170-34 WELLS § 170-37
614:1075
§ 170-37. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the municipal agency
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the municipal
agency, the findings, if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The
minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Planning Board. Any interested
party shall have the right to compel reproduction of the minutes for use as
evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of such
minutes. Such interested party may be charged a reasonable fee for the
reproduction of the minutes for his use, as provided in the rules of the
agency.
§ 170-38. Hearings.
A. When required. The Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, shall hold a hearing on each application for development.
The Planning Board shall also hold a hearing on the adoption, revision
or amendment of a Master Plan. The governing body shall hold a
hearing on the adoption or amendment of a development regulation, an
Official Map or a Capital Improvements Program.
B. Documents. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a
hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10
days before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the administrative officer. The applicant may produce other
documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or
clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
C. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as he may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the
parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law, P.L. 1958, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
D. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
F. Records. The municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim recording
of the proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic
means. The municipal agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate
§ 170-37 UNION CODE § 170-38
614:1076
§ 170-39. Public notice of hearings.
recording in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his
expense. The municipal agency, in furnishing a transcript of the
proceedings to any interested party at his expense, shall not charge
such interested party more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A.
2A:11-15.294 Every transcript shall be certified in writing by the
transcriber to be accurate.
A. Notice of hearing on application for development.
(1) Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following
applications for development:
(a) Any request for a variance.
(b) Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed
of a mapped street or public drainageway or on a lot not
abutting a street. [See §§ 170-13C(2) and 170-26F(1) and (2).]
[Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575]
(c) Any request for site plan approval.
(d) Any request for preliminary subdivision approval.
(e) Any request for a zone change.
(2) The Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least
two weeks prior to the public hearing at which the application will
be discussed. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be
given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing in the following manner:
(a) By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality.
(b) To all owners of real property, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of the hearing, which notice shall
be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner, as
shown on the current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of
the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to
the property owner at his address as shown on said current tax
duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be obtained.
Notice is deemed complete upon mailing. (See N.J.S.A.
40:55D-14.)
(c) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner; notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, vice president, secretary or other
294. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15 was repealed by P.L. 1991, c. 119, § 4. See now N.J.S.A.
2B:7-4.
§ 170-38 WELLS § 170-39
614:1077
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium
association, horizontal property regime, community trust or
homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which
is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner
as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners
or homeowners on account of such common elements
or areas.
(d) To the Clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities
when the property involved is located within 200 feet of said
adjoining municipality or municipalities, which notice shall be
given by personal service or certified mail.
(e) To the County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the County Official Map or the
County Master Plan or adjoins other county land.
(f) By personal service or certified mail to the Commissioner of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey when the property
abuts a state highway.
(g) By personal service or certified mail to the State Planning
Commission when the hearing involves an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500
dwelling units, in which case the notice shall include a copy of
any maps or documents required to be on file with the
administrative officer. [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No.
4575]
(h) By personal service or certified mail to all public utilities and
cable television companies that own land or any facility or that
possess a right-of-way or easement within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of the hearing.
[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(3) Upon the written request of an applicant, the Tax Assessor shall,
within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the Township
to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The applicant
shall be charged $10 for said list and shall be entitled to rely upon
the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to
any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for
giving proper notice to all property owners pursuant to Subsection
A(2)(b) above who do not reside within the Township.
(4) The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
§ 170-39 UNION CODE § 170-39
614:1078
(5) The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and
the nature of the matters to be considered, and an identification of
the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or
by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's Office, and the location
and times at which any maps or documents for which approval is
sought are available for inspection.
B. Notice concerning Master Plan. The Planning Board shall give notice of
a hearing on the adoption, revision or amendment of a Master Plan as
follows:
(1) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the Township at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of any adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption,
revision or amendment of a Master Plan involving property situated
within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior
to the date of any such hearing.
(3) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of the Municipal Master Plan at least 10 days prior to
the date of the hearing; such notice shall include a copy of any such
proposed Master Plan, or any revision or amendment thereto, and
the adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan not more
than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment; such notice shall include a copy of the Master Plan or
revision or amendment thereto.
C. Notice of hearing on development regulation ordinance; notice of action
on Capital Improvement Program or Official Map.
(1) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
Clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption,
revision or amendment of a development regulation involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at
least 10 days prior to the date of any such hearing.
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of any development regulation at least 10 days prior to
the date of the hearing. Any notice provided hereunder shall
include a copy of the proposed development regulation, the
Municipal Official Map or the Municipal Capital Program or any
proposed revision or amendment thereto, as the case may be.
(3) Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to
be considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section
shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 170-39 WELLS § 170-39
614:1079
D. Notice of hearing on amendment to the zoning section proposing a
change to the classification or boundaries. [Amended 1-26-1999 by
Ord. No. 4575295]
(1) Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the zoning section of this
chapter proposing a change to the classification or boundaries of a
zoning district, exclusive of classification or boundary changes
recommended in a periodic general reexamination of the Master
Plan by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89, shall be
given at least 10 days prior to the hearing by the Township Clerk to
the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
duplicates, located, in the case of a classification change, within the
district and within 200 feet in all directions of the boundaries of the
district, and in the case of a boundary change, within 200 feet in all
directions of the proposed new boundaries of the district which is
the subject of the hearing.
(2) A notice pursuant to this section shall state the date, time and place
of the hearing, the nature of the matter to be considered and an
identification of the affected zoning districts and proposed
boundary changes, if any, by street names, common names or other
identifiable landmarks and by reference to lot and block numbers
as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Township Tax
Assessor's Office.
(3) Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate, or his agent in
charge of the property, or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail
and regular mail to the property owner at his address as shown on
the said current tax duplicate.
(4) The Township Clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of
the notices required by this section and shall keep the affidavits on
file along with the proof of publication of the notice of the required
public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance change. Costs of
the notice provision shall be the responsibility of the proponent of
the amendment.
(5) Notice to a partnership, corporate owner, condominium
association, horizontal property regime, community trust or
homeowners' association shall be in conformance with
§ 170-39A(2)(c) above.
E. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice by certified mail shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
F. A corporation or a partnership applying to the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment under any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in
the instance of a corporation, list the names and addresses of all
295. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
and E as Subsections E and F, respectively.
§ 170-39 UNION CODE § 170-39
614:1080
§ 170-40. Decisions on applications.
stockholders owning more than 10% of the stock thereof, as well as the
names and addresses of all officers and directors of said corporation. In
the instance of a partnership, the names and addresses of all individual
partners shall be listed. If a corporation or a partnership owns 10% or
more of the stock of a corporation or 10% or more of a partnership,
that corporation or partnership shall list the names and addresses of
all of its stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or more than a
ten-percent interest in the partnership, as the case may be, and, in the
instance of a corporation, the names and addresses of all of its officers
and directors.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to
writing as provided by law and shall include findings of facts and
conclusions based thereon.
B. Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive
the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed an action
denying the application.
C. The municipal agency may provide such written decision and findings
and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which the
municipal agency takes action to grant or deny approval or at the
meeting at which such action is taken occurs within the final 45 days of
the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application
for development, within 45 days of such meeting, by the adoption of a
resolution of memorialization setting forth the decision and findings
and conclusions of the municipal agency thereon. An action resulting
from the failure of a motion to approve an application shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, notwithstanding the
time at which such action occurs within the applicable time period for
rendering a decision on the application.
D. The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this
subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time period for
rendering a decision on the application for development. Such
resolution shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the members of the
municipal agency who voted for the action previously taken, and no
other member shall vote thereon. The vote on such resolution shall be
deemed to be a memorialization of an action of the municipal agency
and not to be an action of the municipal agency, except that failure to
adopt such a resolution within the forty-five-day period shall result in
the approval of the application for development, notwithstanding any
prior action taken thereon.
E. Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this section, the date of such adoption shall constitute the date of
the decision for purposes of the mailing, filings and publications
required by law and this chapter.
§ 170-39 WELLS § 170-40
614:1081
§ 170-41. Appeals to Superior Court. [Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 4532]
All appeals from any final decisions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
be made to the Superior Court of New Jersey in accordance with applicable
law.
§ 170-42. Vote following absence.
A member of a municipal agency who was absent from one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter
upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from
one or more of the meetings, provided that such member has available to
him the transcript or recording of all of the hearing from which he was
absent and certifies, in writing, to the municipal agency that he has read
such transcript or listened to such recording.
§ 170-43. Exclusive authority of Boards.
Any power expressly authorized by this act to be exercised by the Planning
Board or the Board of Adjustment shall not be exercised by any other body,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 170-44. Duration of period of approval.
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by any
F. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant or appellant or, if
represented, then to his attorney without charge, and, for a reasonable
charge, to any interested party who requested it, not later than 10 days
after the date of the decision.
G. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there is one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Township Clerk, the Secretary of the Planning Board or
the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, provided
that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the
applicant from arranging such publication if he so desires. The
municipality may make a reasonable charge for its publication. The
period of time in which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run
from the first publication of the decision, whether arranged by the
municipality or the applicant.
H. A copy of the decision and all submitted documents of record shall be
filed with the administrative officer, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party for a reasonable fee and
available for public inspection at his office during reasonable hours.
§ 170-40 UNION CODE § 170-44
614:1082
state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public health
and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health or
welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to proceed
with said development, the running of the period of approval under this
chapter or under any act repealed by this chapter, as the case may be, shall
be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or such
directive or order is in effect.
§ 170-45. Conditional approvals.
§ 170-46. Filing of provisions.
This chapter or any revision or amendment thereof shall not take effect until
a copy thereof has been filed with the County Planning Board. An Official
Map shall not take effect until filed with the County Recording Officer.
Copies of this chapter and any revisions or amendments thereto shall be
filed and maintained in the office of the Township Clerk.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by
directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare,
the municipal agency shall process such application for development in
accordance with this act and municipal development regulations, and, if
such application for development complies with municipal development
regulation, the municipal agency shall approve such application
conditioned on the removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the municipal agency, the municipal agency shall, in appropriate
instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency, provided that the municipality shall make a
decision on any application for development within the time period
provided in this act or within an extension of such period as has been
agreed to by the applicant, unless the municipal agency is prevented or
relieved from so acting by the operation of law.
§ 170-44 WELLS § 170-46
614:1083

Part 3
Zoning
ARTICLE VI
Districts; Zoning Map; Schedules
§ 170-47. Districts established. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No.
4155; 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842;
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5141]
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Union is hereby divided
into 19 zone districts as follows: [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No.
5564; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5565; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5566;
3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5567; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5568]
RA Residential — One-Family
RB Residential — Two-Family
RC Residential — Multifamily
RD Residential — Senior Housing
RM Residential — Single-Family Attached
BA Business — Office
BB Business — Retail
BC Business — Retail
I Industrial
IO Industrial/Office
OB Office Building
UCBD Union Center Business District
UCBDII
Union Center Business District-II
US Union Station
US-1 Union Station-1
C Cemetery
MH Medical/Health
HOD Historic Overlay District
MUOD Mixed-Use Overlay District
MUOD-2Mixed-use Overlay District-2
IOR Inclusionary Overlay Residential District
AH-1 Affordable Housing District-1
AH-2 Affordable Housing District-2
AH-3 Affordable Housing District-3
§ 170-47 WELLS § 170-47
614:1085
§ 170-48. Zoning Map. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181;
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 4287; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 4314;
7-26-1994 by Ord. No. 4339; 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380; 4-9-1996
by Ord. No. 4433; 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 4470; 1-26-1999 by Ord.
No. 4575; 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 4875; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
4925; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 5049; 6-10-2008 by Ord. No. 5054;
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5141; 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 5165;
11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 5405; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5564;
3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5565; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5566; 3-13-2018
by Ord. No. 5567; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5568]
The boundaries of the foregoing zone districts are established on the map
entitled, "Zoning Map, Township of Union, Union County, New Jersey," as
amended by T & M Associates on August 10, 2010, which map accompanies
and is hereby made part of this chapter.296
§ 170-49. Zone boundaries. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181;
7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
The zone boundary lines shown on the Zoning Map297 are intended to
coincide with property lines or the center lines of streets, railroads or
streams as they existed at the time of adoption of this chapter or they may
be designated on the Zoning Map by figures or dimensions. Any dimensions
shown shall be in feet and measured horizontally and, when measured from
a street, shall be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the
center line of that street is used for the location of a zoning district line. In
the case of the BA and BB Districts, the zone boundary shall be located 120
feet from and parallel to the street line unless it is clearly evident from the
Zone Map that a greater depth of the district boundary is intended, and/or
where a mapped boundary splits a lot, the district shall be extended toward
the rear property line a distance not to exceed 200 feet in depth from the
street line. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line
shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment. The zoning standards,
controls and designations apply to every structure, lot and use within each
district, and the district lines extend vertically in both directions from
ground level. In addition to these provisions, any property that currently
has a buffer zone, deed restriction or covenant placed upon it as a result
of a condition or restriction incorporated in a resolution of approval from
either the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to
the continuance of said buffer, restriction or covenant in perpetuity unless
amended by subsequent action of said Board by way of a new application,
notice and public hearing.
B. Portions of the foregoing zone districts are further included in Flood
Hazard Area Zones, which are defined and regulated in Article XIII.
296. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map, and ordinances amending the Zoning Map, are on file and
available for inspection in the office of the Township Engineer.
297. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Township Engineer.
§ 170-47 UNION CODE § 170-50
614:1086
§ 170-50. Schedule of Zoning Requirements. [Amended 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. 5142; 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5143; 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. 5144; 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5145]
The schedule entitled "Schedule of Zoning Requirements, Land
Development Ordinance, Township of Union, Union County, New Jersey," as
amended herein is hereby made a part of this chapter.298
§ 170-51. Schedule of Limitations.
The schedule entitled "Schedule of Limitations, Land Development
Ordinance, Township of Union, Union County, New Jersey," as amended
herein is hereby made a part of this chapter.299
298. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zoning Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
299. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Limitations is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-50 WELLS § 170-51
614:1087

ARTICLE VII
Multifamily Dwellings in RC District
§ 170-52. Area and density requirements.
§ 170-53. Setback requirements.
No principal building shall be located within 25 feet of a public street or
within 20 feet of any property line.
§ 170-54. Distance between buildings.
There shall be a minimum distance between dwelling structures of 25
feet plus 1/2 foot for each foot of opposing building wall length up to a
maximum of 75 feet. This provision shall apply to walls of the same building
facing one another, such as in a courtyard formed by a U-shaped building.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever a driveway is located between
buildings, the minimum distance between building walls shall be 50 feet.
§ 170-55. Building requirements.
§ 170-56. Dwelling unit requirements.
A. Minimum area. Each development shall have a minimum area of two
acres.
B. Maximum density. There shall be no more than 20 dwelling units per
acre.
C. Maximum coverage. The total ground floor area of all buildings shall
not exceed 35% of the lot area of the apartment development. The total
area of all impervious surfaces, including buildings, shall not exceed
65% of the lot area of the apartment development.
A. Height. No building shall exceed a height of 32 feet. Main roofs shall
have a minimum grade of five inches per foot. [Amended 8-28-2007
by Ord. No. 5016]
B. Units per building. No building shall contain less than four or more than
24 dwelling units.
A. Each dwelling unit shall contain, as a minimum, a separate living room,
a separate bedroom, a separate bath and a kitchen, which kitchen
facility shall be located separate and apart from other rooms in the unit,
with the exception of the dining room.
B. Minimum floor area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor
area of 450 square feet plus 150 square feet for each habitable room
other than a living room, dining room or kitchen.
§ 170-52 WELLS § 170-56
614:1089
§ 170-57. Accessory buildings.
§ 170-58. Off-street parking and internal roadways.
Off-street parking and internal roadways shall conform to the provisions of
§ 170-239.
C. There shall be no living quarters in any basement, cellar or attic. No
attic shall be used for storage or for any purpose other than radio or
television antennas.
A. Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall meet the street and property line
setbacks of the principal building and shall be at least 25 feet from a
principal building and 15 feet from another accessory building.
Detached garages shall be at least 15 feet from a principal building or
from another garage or accessory building, provided that, for each foot
of building wall overlap in excess of 30 feet, the minimum average
distance between buildings shall be increased by one foot. Clubhouses,
swimming pools and recreation facilities shall be at least 50 feet from a
principal building or property line.
B. Height. The maximum height of an accessory building shall be 15 feet,
except for clubhouses, which shall not exceed 27 feet in height.
C. Design. Architectural design and materials used in the construction of
accessory buildings shall conform to or complement those used in the
construction of principal buildings.
§ 170-56 UNION CODE § 170-58
614:1090
ARTICLE VIII
Senior Citizen Housing in RD District
§ 170-59. Purpose.300
The purpose of this article is to permit housing for senior citizens of low
and moderate incomes. This section is adopted to facilitate development
of senior citizens' housing consistent with the declaration of policy set
forth in N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq., known as the "New Jersey Housing and
Mortgage Finance Agency Law of 1983." For purposes of this chapter, a
"senior citizen" shall be a person 62 years of age or older. Except for the
spouse of a senior citizen tenant or a person whose presence is essential
to the physical care of the senior citizen tenant, only senior citizens shall
occupy such housing.
§ 170-60. Area and density requirements.
§ 170-61. Setback requirements.
No principal building shall be located within 20 feet of a public street or
within five feet of any property line. No principal building exceeding one
story shall be located within 50 feet of a public street or 25 feet of any
property line.
§ 170-62. Distance between buildings.
The requirements of § 170-54 shall be complied with.
§ 170-63. Height. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
No building shall exceed a maximum of three stories and 35 feet in height
to the top of the roof slab except for architectural ornamentation, such as
but not limited to mansard roofs, cupolas and balustrades not to exceed 10
feet in height above the 35 feet in height.
§ 170-64. Floor area.
Every senior citizen dwelling unit shall have a minimum livable floor area
that complies with the following schedule:
A. Minimum area. Each townhouse development shall have a minimum
area of two acres.
B. Maximum density. There shall be no more than 40 dwelling units per
acre.
C. Maximum coverage. The total ground floor area of all buildings shall
not exceed 25% of the lot area. The total area of all impervious surfaces,
including buildings, shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
300. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-59 WELLS § 170-64
614:1091
Type of Dwelling Unit
Minimum Required Usable Finished
Floor Area per Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Efficiency 400
1-bedroom 550
2-bedroom 700
§ 170-65. Accessory buildings.
The requirements of § 170-57 shall be complied with.
§ 170-66. Off-street parking and internal roadways.
Off-street parking and internal roadways shall conform to the provisions of
§ 170-239.
§ 170-67. Occupancy preference.
Where consistent with law and regulations of the New Jersey Housing
Finance Agency and the Federal Housing and Urban Development Agency,
occupancy shall be with preference for senior citizens and others who
qualify under HFA and HUD guidelines, as therein defined, with preference
to be given to residents of the Township of Union.
§ 170-68. Certificate of occupancy required.
A certificate of occupancy shall be required as a prerequisite to initial
occupancy of each separate apartment unit.
§ 170-69. Facilities provided for residents and guests.
The following facilities may be provided for the exclusive use of residents of
this zone and their guests but shall not be for general public use:
§ 170-70. Landscaping; walks; open areas.
Housing with preference for senior citizens shall be provided with liberal
and functional professional landscaping schemes. Pedestrian walks shall be
provided with shade trees. Open spaces adjacent to buildings and border
strips along the sides of pedestrian walks shall be graded and seeded
A. Meeting rooms, hobby and craft rooms and other recreation facilities.
B. Community room, including kitchen facilities and a small stage.
C. Laundry rooms with coin-operated equipment.
D. A commissary-type convenience store.
E. Medical, dental and nurses offices and facilities.
§ 170-64 UNION CODE § 170-70
614:1092
to provide a thick stand of grass or other plant material. Approaches to
apartment dwelling structures and entrances to areas shall be provided
with trees and shrubs. All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a stable
and well-kept condition. Screening or buffers, consisting of planting strips
or fences, shall be required around outdoor utility and refuse disposal
areas and around any other similar areas. Clothes-drying yards shall not be
permitted.
§ 170-70 WELLS § 170-70
614:1093

ARTICLE IX
Industrial District Limitations
§ 170-71. Manufacturing processes.
Manufacturing processes shall be conducted entirely within the confines of
a building; shall be confined to the making of finished products or parts
thereof from component parts and semifinished products; shall not involve
the reduction, conversion or manufacturing of primary raw materials,
except for drugs and pharmaceuticals; and shall not involve the production
of nuclear or toxic chemical materials or wastes of any kind.
§ 170-72. Research laboratories.
Research laboratories shall be located within completely enclosed buildings
and shall not produce noticeable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat
or glare outside of the buildings and shall not involve any of the processes
prohibited in § 170-71 above.
§ 170-71 WELLS § 170-72
614:1095

ARTICLE X
New Tenants or Occupants in the BA and BB Districts
§ 170-73. New certificate of occupancy required.
On and after the effective date of this supplement, a new certificate of
occupancy shall be required for any new tenant or occupant of any structure
in a BA or BB District to be occupied as a mercantile establishment taking
possession after a prior tenant or occupant has vacated the premises.
§ 170-74. Exterior design approval required; Screening Committee.
[Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355301]
§ 170-75. Intent and purpose; exterior design.
It is the intention and purpose of this article to endeavor to have all exterior
designs throughout the area herein set forth to be representative of the type
and nature of business structure in existence during the Colonial Era, to the
end that, with the passing of time, a Williamsburg facade will be existent in
all BA and BB areas of the Township of Union.
§ 170-76. Certain doors and gates prohibited.
The installation of sliding, folding or rolling doors or gates on storefronts is
prohibited.
A. On and after the effective date of this supplement, no such new
certificate of occupancy or building permit, in the event one is required,
shall be issued unless and until the proposed exterior design of said
premises shall have first been submitted to a Screening Committee
composed of three members appointed by the Township Committee.
Said Screening Committee shall review all said plans and shall indicate
approval or disapproval on a copy of said plans to be submitted to the
Construction Code Official with a copy to be delivered to the applicant.
B. A separate Screening Committee for the Special Improvement District
shall be composed of five members, including the Mayor, the Township
Construction Code Official and three members of the Special
Improvement District appointed by the Special Improvement District
Board of Trustees.302
301. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
302. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 471, Special Improvement Districts.
§ 170-73 WELLS § 170-76
614:1097

ARTICLE XI
Cemetery District Limitations
§ 170-77. Height of mausoleums and churches; setbacks.
Mausoleums and churches shall not exceed 35 feet and shall meet the
following minimum setbacks:
§ 170-78. Office and maintenance buildings.
Office buildings and maintenance buildings shall not exceed 20 feet in
height and shall be located at least 100 feet from a property line.
§ 170-79. Height and location of family mausoleums.
Family mausoleums shall not exceed 15 feet in height and shall be located
at least 50 feet from a property line.
§ 170-80. Tombstones and monuments.
Tombstones and monuments shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall be
located at least 25 feet from a property line.
§ 170-81. Size of mausoleums.
Mausoleums shall contain at least 10 and not more than 5,000 crypts, vaults
or niches.
A. One hundred fifty feet from a street right-of-way.
B. Two hundred feet from a residential district.
C. Two hundred feet from a business district or OB District.
D. One hundred feet from an Industrial District.
§ 170-77 WELLS § 170-81
614:1099

ARTICLE XII
Dwellings in RM District
§ 170-82. Permitted uses; definitions.
§ 170-83. Area and density requirements.
§ 170-84. Setback requirements.
No principal building shall be located within 35 feet of a public street or
property line or within 25 feet of a curbline or edge of pavement of any
internal roadway or parking area.
§ 170-85. Distance between buildings.
There shall be a minimum distance between buildings of 30 feet, except that
one-story building projections may be a minimum of 25 feet apart.
§ 170-86. Building requirements.
A. This zone district permits single-family attached dwelling units.
B. For the purpose of administering this zone, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling
accommodation containing more than one but not more than six singlefamily
dwelling units, provided that each separate dwelling unit is
attached to other similar dwelling units by one or more party walls or
portions thereof extending from the foundation to the roof.
A. Minimum area. Each development shall have a minimum of five acres.
B. Maximum density. There shall be no more than 10 dwelling units per
acre.
C. Maximum coverage. The total ground floor area of all buildings shall
not exceed 35% of the lot area of the apartment development. The total
area of all impervious surfaces, including buildings, shall not exceed
65% of lot area of the apartment development.
A. Height. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet. The main roof shall
have a minimum grade of five inches per foot.
B. Units per structure. No structure shall contain more than six singlefamily
attached dwelling units.
C. Architecture and construction.
(1) From a design and construction standpoint, a single-family
attached residence structure shall be designed and constructed
with appropriately different single-family attached residence
§ 170-82 WELLS § 170-86
614:1101
§ 170-87. Dwelling unit requirements.
§ 170-88. Accessory buildings.
setbacks and rooflines so as to reflect the combination of more than
one but not more than six single-family attached residences.
(2) The architecture employed shall be aesthetically in keeping with
the theme of the development and the surrounding area and shall
be subject to approval by the Planning Board. All buildings shall be
constructed in accordance with the Uniform Construction Codes
and shall comply with the following requirements:303
(a) The exterior of each building wall of single-family attached
residence shall be of wood, brick or stone facing, solid brick or
stone, aluminum or vinyl siding or some other acceptable
durable material. Asbestos shingle and cinder of concrete
block as exterior finishes are prohibited. The applicant shall
submit to the Planning Board, in addition to any and all other
documents required by this chapter, floor plans, elevation
drawings and color rendering.
(b) There shall be between single-family attached residences a
sound-conditioned fire-rated wall conforming to requirements
of the Uniform Construction Codes and exhibiting a soundtransmission
classification (STC) of not less than 52, based on
the laboratory test procedures specified in the ASTM's
(American Society of Testing Materials) latest standard.
A. Each dwelling unit shall contain, as a minimum, a separate living room,
a separate bedroom, a separate bath and a kitchen, which kitchen
facility shall be located separate and apart from other rooms in the unit
with the exception of dining or family rooms.
B. Minimum floor area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor
area of 600 square feet plus 150 square feet for each habitable room
other than a living room, dining room or kitchen.
C. There shall be no living quarters in any cellar or attic. No attic shall be
used for storage or for any purpose other than radio or television
antennas.
A. Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall meet the street and property line
setbacks of the principal building and shall be at least 25 feet from a
principal building and 15 feet from another accessory building.
Clubhouses and swimming pools shall be at least 50 feet from a
principal building or property line.
B. Height. The maximum height of an accessory building shall be 15 feet,
except for clubhouses, which shall not exceed 27 feet in height.
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-86 UNION CODE § 170-88
614:1102
§ 170-89. Off-street parking.
A minimum of 2 1/2 parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided
in the form of paved parking spaces or garages. Parking stall sizes shall
conform to the provisions of § 170-239, and landscaped area required under
§ 170-239 may be provided in the form of landscaped common open space
in lieu of islands within parking areas.
§ 170-90. Internal roadways and drives.
All roads and drives within the development shall be private roads at least
24 feet wide and be contained by Belgian block curb on both sides. All
roads and drives shall be constructed and maintained by the developer or
subsequent association pursuant to specifications prepared by the Township
Engineer and subject to approval by the Planning Board.
§ 170-91. Master deed.
The developer shall furnish to the Township as a condition of site plan
approval such guaranties, covenants, master deed or builders' agreement
as shall satisfy the requirements of the Planning Board for the construction
and maintenance of common areas, landscaping, recreational areas, public
improvements and buildings.
§ 170-92. Common open space and items in common use.
C. Design. Architectural design and materials used in the construction of
accessory buildings shall conform to or complement those used in the
construction of principal buildings.
A. The developer of single-family attached units shall make provision for
the establishment of an organization which shall own and maintain all
common open space, recreational structures and areas, roadways and
drives, parking areas, landscaping, lighting, signage and all other items
in common use for the benefit of owners within the development. Such
organizations shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any of the
aforementioned, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the aforementioned
specified items in common use for the benefit of said development.
B. In the event that said organization shall fail to maintain the
aforementioned specified items in reasonable order and condition, the
Township Committee may serve written notice upon said organization
or upon the owners of the development setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common use items in
a reasonable condition. The notice shall include a demand that
deficiencies in maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof.
Failure to correct the deficiencies within the specified period, the
Township may enter upon and maintain said common use items. The
cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed pro rated
against the properties within the development in accordance with the
§ 170-88 WELLS § 170-92
614:1103
value at the time of imposition of the lien and shall become a lien and
tax on said properties and be added to and be part of the taxes to be
levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected with interest
by the same offices and in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 170-92 UNION CODE § 170-92
614:1104
ARTICLE XIIA
Union Station
[Added 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575; amended 10-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 4696; 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 4824]
§ 170-92.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the development of a passenger rail
station and compatible office, commercial and service uses at Union Station
located on the New Jersey Transit Valley Line at Morris Avenue.
§ 170-92.2. Design standards.
The design of commercial, office and service uses shall be in a colonial or
neo-colonial style to complement the architecture of the Historic District
Overlay Zone on Morris Avenue. There shall be a unified architectural motif
for the Union Station complex. Uses permitted in the Union Station complex
are encouraged to be compatible with passenger rail service requirements,
such as uses which have off-peak parking requirements, uses which will
encourage the use of the passenger rail facilities and which will
complement the adjacent Kean University campus complex facilities.
§ 170-92.2.1. Corporate suites.
A. One or more buildings containing suites/occupancy units available to
the public, with or without meals. The suites/occupancy units may be
contracted for occupancy on a transient and nontransient basis. The
minimum size for such suite/occupancy units shall not be less than 350
heated square feet and shall include facilities for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation. No such suite/occupancy unit shall have
more than two bedrooms. Corporate suites may also contain accessory
structures, uses and facilities, including, without limitation, cafe,
maintenance facilities, commercial laundry, parking lots and garages,
mail facilities, swimming pool and a business center, which may contain
a computer center, video conferencing facilities, telecommunication
facilities, copy/production facilities, theater with permanent seating for
not more than 35 people, multimedia presentation facilities, meeting
rooms and conference facilities, fitness center, not more than 1,000
square feet of retail space and other business support areas, all of
which are facilities intended for the exclusive use of staff, occupants
and their guests.
B. Maximum number of suites/occupancy units: 260.
C. Off-street parking requirements for corporate suites.
(1) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be 1.2
spaces for each suite/occupancy unit.
(2) All parking stalls shall measure a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet.
§ 170-92.1 WELLS § 170-92.2.1
614:1105
D. Other provisions.
(1) Corporate suites developments may have a fence and/or gates
surrounding the development not exceeding eight feet in height
and which may be placed within setback areas to within one foot of
property lines.
(2) Signage for corporate suites may sit in setback areas, and the total
aggregate square footage of sign area shall not exceed two times
the principal street frontage.
E. Site plan required. All applications for corporate suites require site plan
approval. The site plan submission shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(1) Proposed site layout showing all buildings and improvements on a
property survey.
(2) Existing conditions.
(3) Parking and circulation.
(4) Utilities.
(5) Grading and drainage.
(6) Landscaping and lighting.
(7) Floor plans.
(8) Architectural building elevations (proposed building facade
design).
(9) Traffic study.
(10) Stormwater management plan.
(11) Pedestrian circulation and access plan.
(12) Signage plan.
(13) Engineering details.
§ 170-92.2.1 UNION CODE § 170-92.2.1
614:1106
ARTICLE XIIA-1
Union Station-1 District
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5142]
§ 170-92.2.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the development of land uses that
are complementary to Union Station and to provide a variety of personal
services to station users and Kean University students and staff.
§ 170-92.2.3. Design standards.
The design of commercial, office and service uses shall be in a style to
complement the architecture of the Historic District Overlay Zone and
the Union Station Zone. Uses permitted in the Union Station-1 Zone are
encouraged to be compatible with passenger rail service requirements, uses
which will encourage the use of existing passenger rail facilities and which
will complement the adjacent Kean University campus complex facilities.
§ 170-92.2.2 WELLS § 170-92.2.3
614:1107

ARTICLE XIIB
Industrial/Office District
[Added 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575]
§ 170-92.3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the development of offices, corporate
training centers and related corporate office service facilities within the
Industrial/Office Zone, including the redevelopment of industrial uses to
permitted office uses.
§ 170-92.4. Design standards.
The design of new office and corporate office facilities that are located
across the street from residential development or adjacent to residential
development are to be designed to include street trees, planted buffers and
landscape treatment to provide aesthetic compatibility with the adjacent
residential neighborhood and to screen parking lots, loading areas, trash
receptacles, utility services and accessory buildings.
§ 170-92.3 WELLS § 170-92.4
614:1109

ARTICLE XIIC
Union Center Business District
[Added 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575; amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
5144
§ 170-92.5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create a zoning district which mirrors the
boundaries of the Special Improvement District and facilitates its goals and
objectives in maintaining Union Center as a viable business area.
§ 170-92.6. Design standards.
The design of retail sale, commercial and service uses shall comply, as
closely as possible, with a colonial style to complement the improvements
initiated by the Township and the Special Improvement District.
§ 170-92.7. Mixed-use development within the UCBD Zone.
Mixed-use development consisting of a combination of residential and
nonresidential uses shall be permitted in the UCBD Zone, and shall be
governed by the bulk and yard requirements of the UCBD Zone. Mixeduse
development within the UCBD Zone shall comply with the following
provisions.
A. Residential uses are prohibited on the ground floor of any building or
structure in the UCBD Zone.
B. Residential units within the UCBD Zone shall conform to the minimum
dwelling unit floor area standards based on dwelling unit type as
follows: [Amended 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 5374]
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size: UCBD Zone
Dwelling Unit Type
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
Studio/efficiency apartment 500
One-bedroom apartment 650
Two-bedroom apartment 900
Apartments with three or more
bedrooms
1,150 plus 150 for each additional
bedroom
C. Residential units within the UCBD Zone shall have a minimum ceiling
height of 10 feet. Commercial units shall have a minimum ceiling height
of 12 feet. [Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 5369]
§ 170-92.5 WELLS § 170-92.7
614:1111

ARTICLE XIID
Union Center Business District II
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5145]
§ 170-92.8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create a zoning district that provides an
appropriate transition between the development patterns present in the
UCBD and BB Zones.
§ 170-92.9. Design standards.
The design of retail sale, commercial and service uses shall comply, as
closely as possible, with a style that complements the improvements
initiated by the Township and the Special Improvement District.
§ 170-92.8 WELLS § 170-92.9
614:1113

ARTICLE XIII
Flood Damage Prevention
[Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842; 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4940;6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 4956]
§ 170-93. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of
Union, in the County of Union in the State of New Jersey, does ordain as
follows.
§ 170-94. Findings of fact.
§ 170-95. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Union are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
§ 170-93 WELLS § 170-95
614:1115
§ 170-96. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 170-97. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator interpretation
of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on a
community's Flood insurance Rate Map with a 1% or greater chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
G. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, strewn channels, and
natural protective harriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 170-95 UNION CODE § 170-97
614:1116
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within an area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD CONTROL APPEAL BOARD — A group of five voting members
consisting of a member of the governing body, Administrator, Assistant
Administrator, Zoning Officer, and Public Works Superintendent.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 170-97 WELLS § 170-97
614:1117
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a buildings lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreation vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 170-97 UNION CODE § 170-97
614:1118
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
A.
§ 170-97 WELLS § 170-97
614:1119
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this article which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
article.
§ 170-98. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Union, Union County, New Jersey.
§ 170-99. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 170-100. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the "Township of Union
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Union, Community
No. 340477, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Union
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 20, 2006.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Union County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel number(s) 0004, 0005,
0011, 0012, 0013, 0021, 0022, 0023; whose effective date is
September 20, 2006.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this article. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at
Municipal Bldg., Engineering Department, 1976 Morris Ave., Union, NJ
07083.
§ 170-97 UNION CODE § 170-101
614:1120
§ 170-101. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and
other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 170-102. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
§ 170-103. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 170-104. Establishment of development permit.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This article does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Union, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 170-99. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and
the location of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
§ 170-101 WELLS § 170-104
614:1121
§ 170-105. Designation of local administrator.
The Township Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this article by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 170-106. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 170-109B; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this article have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 170-110A are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 170-99,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the local
administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 170-109A, Specific standards,
residential construction, and § 170-109B, Specific standards,
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 170-104C.
§ 170-104 UNION CODE § 170-106
614:1122
§ 170-107. Variance procedure.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this article.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection - Land Use Regulation Program and Dam
Safety and Flood Control prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of firm boundaries. Make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual filed conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 170-107.
A. Flood Control Appeal Board.
(1) The Flood Control Appeal Board as established by the governing
body of the Township of Union shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this article.
(2) The Flood Control Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this article.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Flood Control Appeal Board,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Municipal Court,
as provided by statute.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Flood Control Appeal Board
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this article, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
§ 170-106 WELLS § 170-107
614:1123
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(1) through (k)
and the purposes of this article, the Flood Control Appeal Board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this article.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
Subsection A(1) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
§ 170-107 UNION CODE § 170-107
614:1124
§ 170-108. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 170-107A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
§ 170-107 WELLS § 170-108
614:1125
§ 170-109. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 170-99, Basis for establishing areas of special
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 170-108 UNION CODE § 170-109
614:1126
flood hazard, or in § 170-106B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
(2) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall;
(1) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(3) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(4) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 170-106C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 170-108A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
§ 170-109 WELLS § 170-109
614:1127
§ 170-110. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 170-99 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 170-111. (Reserved)
§ 170-112. (Reserved)
§ 170-113. (Reserved)
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 170-110A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with § 170-108, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 170-109 UNION CODE § 170-113
614:1128
ARTICLE XIV
Provisions Applicable to All Districts
§ 170-114. Applicability.
Each of the sections and provisions of this article shall apply to all zone
districts unless otherwise stated.
§ 170-115. Conformance required.
No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged,
added to, moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be
designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in any manner
except in conformity with this chapter. Where a lot is formed from part of
a lot already occupied by a building, such subdivision shall be effected in
such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements of this chapter
with respect to the existing building and all yard and other open space
in connection therewith and so that all resulting lots have adequate
dimensions consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located and so that all lots have frontage on a street.
§ 170-116. Nature and extent of uses of land.
The control and regulation of the uses of buildings and structures as herein
provided shall equally apply to the nature and extent of the use of the land.
§ 170-117. Time for compliance.
All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use of the principal use
and shall apply to the entire structure or structures whether or not the
entire structure or structures were involved in the erection, enlargement,
alteration, moving or change in use.
§ 170-118. Nonconforming lots.
A. Whenever title to two or more contiguous lots is held by the same
owner, regardless of whether or not each of said lots may have been
approved as portions of a subdivision or acquired by separate
conveyance or by other operation of law, and one or more of said
individual lots should, by reason of exceptional shallowness,
topographical conditions, substandard area or yard space or similar
measurements, not conform with the minimum lot area and dimension
requirements for the zone in which it is located, the contiguous lots of
said owner shall be considered as a single lot.
B. Whenever the owner of a lot existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter has dedicated or conveyed land to the Township in order to
meet the minimum street width requirement of the Official Map or
Master Plan of the Township, the Construction Code Official and
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment shall issue building and
§ 170-114 WELLS § 170-118
614:1129
§ 170-119. Nonconforming structures and uses. [Amended
7-28-2015 by Ord. No. 5345]
Any destruction of a nonconforming structure or use shall comply with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
§ 170-120. Requirements to be met on lot and within zone district.
All yards, open spaces and off-street parking must be contained on the lot
and within the zone district in which the use is located.
§ 170-121. Reduction of required area or space.
No lot, yard, parking, area or other space shall be so reduced in area
or dimension as to make said area or dimension less than the minimum
occupancy permits for the lot whose depth and/or areas are rendered
substandard in area only because of such dedication and where the
owner has no other adjacent lands to provide the minimum
requirements.
C. Any existing lot on which a building or structure is located and which
lot does not meet the minimum lot size, or a structure which violates
any yard requirements, may have additions to the principal building
and/or construction of an accessory building without an appeal for
variance relief, provided that: [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No.
4575]
(1) The existing use(s) on the lot are permitted use(s) for the lot in
question.
(2) The total permitted building and/or addition does not violate any
other requirements of this chapter, such as but not limited to
height, setback and parking.
D. Any vacant lot existing at the effective date of adoption of this chapter,
whose area or dimensions do not meet the requirements of the district
in which the lot is located, may have a building permit issued by the
Construction Code Official for a detached dwelling and its permitted
accessory uses without an appeal for variance relief, provided that:
[Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(1) Single-family detached dwellings are a permitted use in that
district; the lot width is 35 feet or more; and the lot depth is not less
than 1/2 of the average depth for the lots on the block face and in
no case less than 70 feet;
(2) The building coverage conforms to an increased limit of 40%;
(3) Parking requirements are met; and
(4) All other requirements including the yard, height provisions and all
other applicable provisions of this chapter are met.
§ 170-118 UNION CODE § 170-121
614:1130
required under this chapter. If already less than the minimum required
under this chapter, said area or dimension shall not be further reduced.
§ 170-122. Yards cannot be used by another building.
No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes of
complying with the front, side, rear or other yard provisions of this chapter
shall be considered as providing the yard provisions for another principal
building.
§ 170-123. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly permitted by this chapter are prohibited. In
particular, the following uses are specifically prohibited anywhere in the
Township:
A. Abortion clinics.
B. Narcotics clinics and the sale or display of narcotics paraphernalia.
C. Massage parlors.
D. Establishments of any nature whatsoever displaying, selling or
otherwise exhibiting photographs, prints, obscene and indecent
material, advertisements, circulars, motion-picture films or providing
live entertainment in all of which the dominant appeal thereof is to the
prurient interest and is patently offensive and affronts contemporary
community standards relating to sexual matters and which is so
obscene that it is without redeeming social value.304
E. Animal hospitals.
F. Flea markets.
G. The storage, use or manufacture of liquefied petroleum gases,
hydrogen gas or other material whether in liquid or gaseous phase,
which is flammable or explosive when mixed with air in sufficient
proportions or which may be toxic or poisonous if inhaled by any
person, except for such storage, use or manufacture by a public utility
regulated by the Bureau of Public Utilities or for the installation of a
natural gas fueling station (CNG) when such installation is located in a
industrial zone district and complies with all national, state and local
safety regulations and is used to comply with the requirements of the
Clean Air Act Amendment (CAAA) of 1990 and the Energy Policy Act of
1992 (EPACT) by providing an alternative fuel to vehicles owned or
leased by the owner or lessee of the real property where said fueling
station is located; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to prohibit the use as fuel for domestic purposes of
liquefied petroleum gases when stored in cylinders constructed in
accordance with regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission
304. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 164, Amusements; Adult Uses.
§ 170-121 WELLS § 170-123
614:1131
§ 170-124. Principal buildings.
and located on the exterior of the building supplied; and provided,
further, that the systems in connection with said cylinders are listed
by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. The existing storage and use of
anhydrous ammonia as of the effective date of this chapter shall be and
the same is authorized to continue. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No.
4181; 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 4364]
H. Towing business, whether the principal or ancillary use, and the
outdoor parking or storage of tow trucks or flatbed car hauling trucks in
any zone.305
I. Tattoo parlors and establishments of any nature whatsoever which
utilize needles for the purpose of making indelible markings upon the
body by the insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of
scars. [Added 10-8-1991 by Ord. No. 4165]
J. The unregulated parking, unregulated storage, unregulated display
and/or abandonment of any class, type or description of motor vehicle,
trailer, recreational and/or other types of equipment, item(s) including
but not limited to supplies, merchandise, materials, etc., whether
similar or dissimilar in nature, description or use, is strictly prohibited
in all zones.306 [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
K. The operation of recreational or medicinal marijuana cultivation
facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing
facilities, and retail marijuana stores, except that a medicinal marijuana
dispensary as defined in this code and is distinguished shall be
permitted in the BC District only, provided that: [Added 8-28-2018 by
Ord. No. 5597]
(1) No medicinal marijuana dispensary may be located within 3,500
feet of a lawfully existing one.
(2) No medicinal marijuana dispensary shall be located within 1,500
feet of the RA Zone or RM Zone. This prohibition shall not apply to
the RA Zone that contains wetlands.
A. Only one principal building may be erected on a lot, except for related
buildings forming one principal use and limited to the following:
[Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(1) Multifamily dwelling complexes.
(2) Public, fraternal or institutional building complexes.
(3) Retail shopping, office, research and industrial building complexes.
305. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 505, Towing.
306. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 523, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 170-123 UNION CODE § 170-124
614:1132
§ 170-125. Accessory structures.
No accessory structure shall be erected on a lot that contains no principal
building. Unless otherwise provided, these regulations shall apply to both
accessory buildings and to accessory structures other than accessory
buildings. In addition, these regulations shall not apply to signs and fences,
which are regulated elsewhere in this chapter.
(4) Multistory parking garages for the above complexes which shall be
subject to the requirements for principal buildings where their
height is in excess of 15 feet.
B. Unless otherwise permitted by regulations in this chapter, no building
shall be located closer to another building on the same lot than the
height of the taller building, but in no event less than 15 feet.
C. Structural alterations shall be permitted to accommodate the needs of
individuals with disabilities which do not conform to the requirements
of this code, provided that a deed restriction is recorded preventing the
transfer of title until such altered structures are restored or made to
conform. Exterior structures shall be limited to open structures and
may vary from requirements only to the minimum degree necessary.
[Added 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
D. Accessory residential quarters may be provided for occupants in
addition to the primary housekeeping unit within a dwelling unit and,
except as provided in this section, not more than one family (or
housekeeping unit) may occupy a dwelling unit. [Added 7-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 4340]
(1) Occupancy of accessory quarters shall be limited to live-in
household employees.
(2) Accessory quarters may occupy an area not in excess of 300 square
feet.
(3) Structural alterations shall not be made to create a separate
dwelling unit.
A. Accessory structures in residential districts.
(1) No accessory structure shall exceed a height of 14 feet, except for
accessory structures regulated in Subsection A(11) below.
(2) An accessory structure shall be located at least 10 feet from a
principal building situated on the same lot unless an integral part
thereof and shall be at least six feet from any other accessory
structure.
(3) Accessory structures on corner lots may not be erected nearer to
the street than the front yard requirements on the adjacent lot.
§ 170-124 WELLS § 170-125
614:1133
(4) No accessory building shall be located in any required front yard or
closer to the front street line than the principal building.
(5) Accessory structures built within the side yard shall meet the side
yard setback requirements for the principal building.
(6) An accessory structure located in a rear yard shall be located at
least three feet from a property line.
(7) Residential toolsheds or similar storage buildings shall not exceed
100 square feet in ground coverage.
(8) Attached and detached garage floor elevations shall be at least one
foot above the street center line. The interior dimensions of any
private garage shall be not less than 10 feet in width and 22 feet in
length. There shall be at least one garage for each dwelling unit in
a one- or two-family dwelling. Any existing garage located in Zone
A as delineated on FIRM Flood Map as certified by the Township
Engineer and less than the aforementioned elevation requirement
may, upon application to the Building Department, be abandoned;
provided, however, that the owner abandoning the garage provide
one off-street parking space per dwelling unit. [Amended
9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 4472]
(9) Garages for the same building shall be contiguous in RA and RB
Zones.
(10) The total ground coverage of all accessory structures, including the
water surface area of a swimming pool located in the rear yard,
shall not exceed 25% of the rear yard area. [Amended 3-9-2004
by Ord. No. 4814]
(11) The total ground coverage of all accessory structures, excluding
swimming pools, shall not exceed the lesser of: [Amended
3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 4814]
(a) Ten percent of the lot area; or
(b) Forty percent of the ground coverage of the principal building.
(12) Noncommercial communication antennas and towers, exclusive of
satellite dish antennas, shall, in addition to the foregoing
regulations, not extend more than 75 feet above the ground level,
whether attached to the building or erected on the ground. In
addition, said structures shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Said structures shall be erected and used only by a duly
licensed radio transmitting and receiving station of the
Amateur Radio Service. Evidence of said license shall be
submitted to the Construction Code Official.
§ 170-125 UNION CODE § 170-125
614:1134
(b) If erected on the ground, said structure shall be enclosed by a
four-foot-high fence.
(c) Except for radio and television reception antennas attached to
a building and not extending more than 20 feet above the
highest point of the building, such structures shall be subject
to the inspection and approval of the Construction Code
Official to ensure safe construction and proper anchoring and
shall require a building permit.
(d) Satellite dish antennas shall be considered accessory
structures and be governed by the following specific
regulations:
[1] The antenna shall be screened from view with dense
evergreen shrubs of at least equal height to the antenna
and planted so as to minimize visibility from the street and
adjacent properties.
[2] It shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be located
at least 10 feet from all side and rear lot lines.
[3] The overall point from the mean ground level to the
highest point of the antenna shall not be more than 14
feet.
[4] Power, control and signal cables leading from the antenna
to the served building shall be buried in accordance with
applicable codes and regulations.
[5] The maximum diameter of the reflective dish shall not
exceed eight feet.
[6] The antenna shall only be used by the residents or tenants
of the principal structure.
[7] No part of such antenna shall be permitted above the
roofline.
[8] Only receiving satellite dish antennas shall be permitted.
[9] Only one such antenna shall be permitted on a lot.
[10] Existing satellite dish antennas shall conform to the
screening requirements specified herein.
[11] The applicant shall submit to the Construction Code
Official a current survey of the property upon which the
antenna, landscaping and cabling location has been
delineated, together with specifications of the antenna and
landscaping.
B. Accessory structures in nonresidential districts.
§ 170-125 WELLS § 170-125
614:1135
§ 170-126. Yards.
(1) Accessory structures shall not exceed the height limitations
applicable to principal buildings, except for structures regulated in
Subsection B(4) below.
(2) An accessory structure shall not be located closer to another
structure than the height of the taller structure, but in no event less
than 15 feet.
(3) Accessory structures shall conform to all yard requirements for
principal buildings.
(4) Communication antennas and towers shall, in addition to the
foregoing regulations, not extend more than 75 feet above the
ground level, whether attached to a building or erected on the
ground. In addition, said structures shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Said structures shall not be located closer to any property line
than the height of the structure.
(b) If erected on the ground, said structure shall be enclosed by a
four-foot-high fence and suitable plant screening.
(c) Said structures shall be subject to inspection and approval of
the Construction Code Official to ensure safe construction and
proper anchoring and shall require a building permit.
C. Excepting height limitations, the provisions of Subsections A and B
above shall not apply to the following: [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 4181]
(1) Flagpoles, lampposts, cooking grills and similar ornamental or
utility fixtures.
(2) Decks, patios, sidewalks and similar installations when not
elevated more than one foot above grade. Such structures,
however, are subject to ground coverage limitations. Such
structures elevated more than one foot above grade are subject to
the provisions of Subsections A and B.
(3) Statues, monuments, flower boxes and similar ornamental or
landscaping objects. Such objects, however, shall be located a
distance of not less than the height of the object from any property
line.
A. Required yards. Every lot must provide front, side and rear yards as
required for its zone. All front yards must face upon a dedicated public
street or private street approved by the Township Committee.
§ 170-125 UNION CODE § 170-126
614:1136
§ 170-127. Height exceptions.
The height provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the erection of
church spires, belfries, towers designed exclusively for ornamental
purposes, chimneys, flues or similar appurtenances not exceeding the
height limit by more than 10 feet. The height provisions shall, moreover, not
apply to bulkheads, elevator enclosures, water tanks or similar accessory
structures occupying an aggregate of 10% or less of the area of the roof
on which they are located, and further provided that such structures do not
exceed the height limit by more than 10 feet. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the erection above the height limitation of a parapet wall or cornice
extending above such height limit not more than three feet.
§ 170-128. Parking of trucks and other vehicles.
B. Front yards on streets less than 50 feet wide. On streets less than 50
feet in width, the depth of the required front yard shall be increased by
1/2 the difference between the width of the street and 50 feet.
C. Yards for corner lots. A structure erected on a corner lot shall meet the
front yard requirement along the narrower frontage of the lot, and the
minimum rear yard requirement shall be met in the yard lying opposite
the narrower frontage of the lot.
D. Traffic visibility on corner lots. On a corner lot, a fence structure or
planting over 30 inches in height above the curb or edge of the roadway
shall not be erected or maintained closer than 25 feet to the
intersecting street right-of-way lines.
E. Projections into required yards. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, the following may project into any front, side or rear yard
required in the various zones: uncovered steps leading to the first floor
of a building; chimneys; and portions of a building, including but not
limited to eaves, bay windows, oriels, balconies, overhangs and
coverings over steps, provided that no such portion of a building shall
project more than 18 inches into any required front, side or rear yards
or exceed eight feet in width.
F. In all zones, all free ground area in front, rear and side yards shall be
suitably graded and stabilized with appropriate ground cover, such as a
grass lawn, pachysandra, ivy and spreading evergreen, supported by at
least four inches of topsoil, as approved by the Township Engineer.
Mulch, stone and similar ground cover may be used only as secondary
accent material. Paver blocks shall likewise not be used as primary
ground cover, but may be used for walkways and accent purposes.
Stone, gravel and mulch must be prevented from spreading beyond the
areas they are intended to cover. All primary ground cover shall consist
of material vegetation. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
A. Parking in residential zones.
§ 170-126 WELLS § 170-128
614:1137
(1) Only one currently registered operational, commercial or
noncommercial light vehicle not exceeding seven feet by seven feet
by 20 feet or 8,600 pounds' gross vehicle weight (GVW) may be
parked on any property in a residential zone, provided that the
vehicle is parked on a paved driveway leading to a garage. The
following vehicles are also permitted:307
(a) One commercial vehicle used by the occupant, if garaged.
(b) Unregistered or nonoperational light vehicles not exceeding
seven feet by seven feet by 20 feet or 8,600 pounds' gross
vehicle weight (GVW) owned by the occupant, if garaged.
(c) Two items of recreation equipment belonging to the applicant,
if garaged. Any recreation item or item(s) affixed on a
recreation trailer as for travel shall, together with the trailer,
be considered as one item of recreation equipment. In lieu of
being garaged, recreation equipment may be kept on the
premises in accordance with the following standards:
[1] It shall be located in the rear yard.
[2] It shall be screened by fencing or shrubbery from public
streets and residential property.
[3] It shall not impede vehicular entrance or exit to any
garage or parking area.
(d) Any vehicles, other than light vehicles, not exceeding seven
feet by seven feet by 20 feet or 8,600 pounds' gross vehicle
weight (GVW) used by an occupant in connection with a
conditional use, if garaged. In lieu of being garaged, such
vehicles may be kept on the premises in a manner approved by
the Construction Code Official in accordance with the following
standards:
[1] It shall be located in the rear yard only.
[2] It shall be screened by fencing or shrubbery from public
streets and residential property.
[3] It shall not impede vehicular entrance or exit to any
garage or parking area.
(e) Vehicles being used in connection with a service, pickup or
delivery being provided at the property.
(2) Pickup trucks and similar vehicles permitted under this chapter
shall not be used for the storage of grass clippings, refuse, debris,
etc.
307. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-128 UNION CODE § 170-128
614:1138
§ 170-129. Outdoor storage. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181;
7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(3) Driveways without a garage are not permitted.
(4) The parking or storage of disabled or nonoperable vehicles and all
dump trucks are prohibited in residential areas.
B. Parking in BB, BC and I Districts. The overnight storage, parking and/or
display of motor vehicles in the BB and BC zone districts is prohibited.
In the I Zone District, overnight storage, parking and/or display of
motor vehicles is permitted, provided that any boundary with a
residential zone district shall be screened by special plantings and a
fence as approved by the Construction Code Official.308
C. Tow trucks. The parking and/or storage of tow trucks in streets or on
property in all zones is prohibited, except that in gas stations one tow
truck is allowed to be used to service the station's customers and not to
be used as a towing business.
A. In residence districts, outdoor storage is prohibited except for storage
of items normally kept out of doors, including but not limited to lawn
furniture, firewood for use on the premises and the temporary storage,
not exceeding two weeks, of recyclable materials, trash and garbage
when kept in suitable containers and awaiting collection. All such
storage shall be limited to side and rear yards.
B. Except for recyclables, trash and garbage kept in suitable containers
and awaiting collection, outdoor storage is prohibited in the BA, OB, H
and C Districts.
C. In BB, BC and I Districts, no article or material shall be kept stored or
displayed outside the confines of the building unless the same is
screened by special planting or a fence as approved by the Construction
Code Official. No storage shall be located in a front yard or in a side
yard adjoining a street. Said storage shall meet the setback
requirements from property lines for accessory buildings. However, by
resolution of the Township Committee, occasional outdoor display and
sales of goods and merchandise only may be authorized in the BB and
BC Districts.309
D. All dwellings for three or more dwelling units shall provide closed
containers for the storage of refuse and recyclable materials. The
capacity of said containers shall be consistent with anticipated
accumulation and removal rates. Storage areas shall be designed to
protect against the spread of litter, infestations of vermin, persistent
odors, saturation by precipitation or flooding and the theft of valuable
materials. Storage areas shall be situated to provide unobstructed
308. Editor's Note: See also § 266-22, Parking of trailers, tractors, omnibuses, commercial and
noncommercial vehicles.
309. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 390, Art. II, Outdoor Displays.
§ 170-128 WELLS § 170-129
614:1139
§ 170-130. Houses with uniform exterior appearances.
§ 170-131. Attics.
In one- and two-family dwellings only, the attic portion of the dwelling may
be used for habitable purposes other than kitchens. A habitable attic shall
have a full stairway as a means of ingress and egress and a ceiling of at
least seven feet four inches. Each attic room shall have a minimum area of
access. Appropriate directional signage and labeling shall be provided
with containers for recyclable materials clearly distinguished from
those for refuse.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, in all residential areas designated
on development maps consisting of four or more building lots hereafter
accepted and approved for filing by the Planning Board of the Township
of Union, not more than one building permit shall hereafter be issued
for any dwelling to be erected in said housing development on any lot
on any one side of a street if it is substantially alike in exterior design
and appearance to any dwelling situated on a lot on the same side of the
street within 150 feet of a dwelling in existence on a lot or for which a
building permit has been issued or is pending, or on a lot within 50 feet
of such lot on the opposite side of the street. The distance herein
specified shall be construed to mean:
(1) When the lots are on opposite sides of the street, the distance
between the nearest sidelines of the respective lots if extended
across the street at right angles to the street property line
measured along the street property line.
(2) When the lots are on the same side of the street, the distance
between the nearest sidelines of the respective lots measured
along the street property line.
B. Houses within such specified distances from each other shall be
considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have any
one of the following characteristics:
(1) The same basic roofline, exterior design, height and materials are
used without substantial differentiation.
(2) The size, type and location of windows and doors in the front
elevation are without substantial differentiation.
C. In addition to the requirements specified in Subsection B above, there
shall be not less than three separate basic house designs in every
housing development consisting of eight to 14 houses, and not less than
four separate basic house designs in every housing development
consisting of 15 to 24 houses, and not less than five separate basic
house designs in every housing development consisting of 25 houses or
more on any one development map accepted for filing.
§ 170-129 UNION CODE § 170-131
614:1140
90 square feet and shall have openable windows equal to 1/10 of the floor
area.
§ 170-132. Basements and cellars.
Basements or cellars shall not be occupied as habitable rooms except in
dwelling units, where they may be used for recreational purposes. The
minimum height of a basement or a cellar shall be 7 1/2 feet. A crawl space,
if provided, shall be at least 18 inches deep.
§ 170-133. Recreational vehicles.
In residential districts, recreational vehicles and equipment, such as boats,
trailers and campers, shall be parked or stored in a side or rear yard only
and shall be subject to the following:
§ 170-134. Required improvements.
A. Only one such vehicle or piece of equipment shall be parked or stored
on a lot.
B. The vehicle or piece of equipment shall not exceed eight feet in width
and 24 feet in length.
C. The vehicle or piece of equipment shall be screened along any side that
faces a street or adjoining property.
D. No such vehicle or piece of equipment shall be used for temporary or
permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
E. The area devoted to such parking or storage shall not be counted in
determining allowable building coverage.
A. Prior to the issuance of a construction permit for any lot(s) the street
right(s)-of-way contiguous to said lot(s) shall be suitably improved with
pavement, curbing, sidewalks and drainage in accordance with the
improvement standards established in this Part 4 of this chapter and, if
applicable, Article XXIX, Stormwater Management and Control, and
plot grading approval obtained from the Township Engineer for any
development of said lot. The Township Engineer is hereby authorized to
promulgate regulations required in this regard. [Amended 3-28-2006
by Ord. No. 4940]
B. Existing pavement, curbing, sidewalks and drainage may be required to
be reconstructed and/or relocated when, in the opinion of the Township
Engineer, said pavement, curbing, sidewalks or drainage is
deteriorated, does not meet the requirements of Township
specifications or is located improperly or not in conformance with the
purpose and intent of this chapter.
§ 170-131 WELLS § 170-135
614:1141
§ 170-135. Chimney coverings. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
Exposed sections of metal chimneys shall be enclosed within
noncombustible materials such as brick, siding or similar noncombustible
material generally in harmony with the building materials used in the
principal structure.
§ 170-136. Storage for multifamily units.
All multifamily units, whether rental or condos, shall provide a minimum of
600 cubic feet of storage area for each tenant or owner outside of the living
area of the dwelling unit.
§ 170-136.1. Parking for one- and two-family dwellings. [Added
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling
unit in a one- or two-family dwelling. One required space for each dwelling
unit shall be in an enclosed garage, and garages for the same building in the
RA and RB Zones shall be contiguous. In addition, the following conditions
for driveways and parking shall be met:
A. No driveway or parking area shall be located in the minimum required
side yard or rear yard setback.
B. All parking shall take place in driveways and designated parking areas.
Sidewalks serving one- and two-family dwellings shall not be used for
parking.
C. All driveways or aprons shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous
concrete.
D. The maximum width for any driveway shall be as follows: [Amended
1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575]
(1) Garage, one-car: 12 feet.
(2) Garage, one-car, with allowance for additional off-street parking
not in front of main structures: 18 feet.
(3) Garage, two-car: 24 feet.
E. A driveway shall have a minimum length of 22 feet.
F. Whenever possible, apron cuts for driveways on opposite sides of a
street shall have a center-line offset of at least 25 feet.
G. The maximum gradient for driveways shall be no more than 7% (a
seven-foot rise in 100 feet), with a near-level area from 12 to 16 feet
long in front of the garage it services.
§ 170-135 UNION CODE § 170-136.2
614:1142
§ 170-136.2. Occupancy limitations. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No.
4181]
§ 170-136.2.1. Certificate of continued occupancy. [Added
10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 4754]
A. No dwelling unit shall be occupied by more than one person for the first
100 square feet of floor space, exclusive of kitchens, baths and
basements, plus 75 square feet of floor space for each additional
occupant. See §§ 170-131 and 170-132.310
A. No building or structure shall be occupied or used in whole or part
unless and until a certificate of continued occupancy has been issued by
the Construction Code Official of the Township of Union. The
Construction Code Official shall not issue such certificate unless he
determines, after inspection, that there are no violations of any
applicable laws, ordinances or orders pending at the time of issuing the
certificate. The certificate shall be issued upon written request from the
owner or his authorized agent.
B. A certificate of continued occupancy shall be applied for and obtained
prior to the use or occupancy of the whole or any part of any building
undergoing a change in ownership; undergoing a change of occupancy,
except that this provision shall not apply to a change in the occupancy
of less than the whole number of dwelling units contained within a
building containing more than one dwelling unit when the change of
occupancy of such dwelling unit or units occurs within 90 days of the
issuance of a prior certificate of continued occupancy for such unit or
units. Upon receiving an application for a certificate of continued
occupancy, the Construction Code Official or his authorized
representative shall make an inspection of the building or part thereof
for which the certificate is requested and shall forthwith issue the
certificate of continued occupancy if the use and occupancy thereof
shall be in conformity with the Code of the Township of Union or other
applicable ordinances of the Township and if the building is safe and
does not constitute a nuisance or hazard likely to result in injuries to
persons or damages to property; in case the Construction Code Official
shall decline to issue a certificate of continued occupancy, his reasons
for doing so shall be stated to the applicant, and a written statement
thereof shall be transmitted to the applicant on request.
C. A certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest who shall be held responsible
for any violations on the premises. A record of all certificates shall be
kept on file by the Construction Code Official.
310. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Continued occupancy, added 12-8-1992 by Ord. No.
4225, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-8-2002 by Ord. No.
4754. See now § 170-136.2.1, Certificate of continued occupancy.
§ 170-136.2 WELLS § 170-136.2.1
614:1143
§ 170-136.3. Drainage. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
D. A fee of $50 shall be charged and paid to the Township for each original
certificate of continued occupancy.
E. Any owner-occupant of a building, structure or premises, or any
architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person employed in
connection therewith, who violates this section or assists in the
commission of such violation shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
§ 170-265.
F. A temporary certificate of continued occupancy may be issued, if, in the
opinion of the Construction Code Official, a time period is needed to
conform to the requirements as set forth in the inspection of said
structure or dwelling. The temporary certificate of continued
occupancy may be issued by the Construction Code Official for a period
of not less than 30 days nor more than 120 days.
G. If a person, firm, corporation or entity wishes to assume the obligations
of the responsibility to comply with this chapter, said person, firm,
corporation or entity shall sign a document, on a form to be prepared by
the Construction Code Official, with the list of deficiencies attached.
Said person, firm, corporation or entity can be issued a temporary
certificate of continued occupancy in accordance with this section,
Subsection F.
H. In the event any person, firm, corporation or entity fails to conform
within the time frame set forth in this section when a temporary
certificate of continued occupancy is issued, they will be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 170-249.311
A. An existing lot or tract shall not alter property grades so as to divert
surface runoff from its natural or preexisting pattern without first filing
a topographical contour map indicating existing and proposed property
grades with and receiving approval of the Township Engineer.
B. The leader pipes and/or roof drains of any preexisting use in any zone
shall be directed towards the street gutter or storm drainage facility
and shall not be directed towards adjacent properties.
C. All new nonresidential site construction, with a disturbance of less than
one acre, in any zone shall conform to the requirements of § 170-239I of
this chapter. All new residential subdivision construction shall conform
to the requirements of § 170-239F and G of this chapter. [Amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4940]
D. All new and expansion, one- and two-family residential construction,
shall provide seepage pits which capture stormwater from leader pipes
311. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, which contained a penalty for violation of
§ 170-136.2.1, which previously followed this subsection, was deleted 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 4842. See now § 170-265, Violations and penalties.
§ 170-136.2.1 UNION CODE § 170-136.3
614:1144
§ 170-136.4. Gymnasiums in BB District. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 4181]
Any sport, athletic, exercise, group instruction or other activity conducted
in a gymnasium in the BB District shall not involve the participation of more
than 50 individuals during any period of time.
§ 170-136.5. Parking and storage of certain vehicles, boats and
equipment. [Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380]
Facilities wherein residents may park or store commercial vehicles used
for their daily livelihood, recreational vehicles, trailers, boats and other
vehicles and equipment not otherwise permitted on their properties may be
permitted in the I Industrial District in accordance with this section and
other applicable ordinances.
and/or roof drains via a system of underground pipes, of a size and
material approved by the Township Engineer. The seepage pit shall be
designed for one inch of rainfall over the entire roof area and provide
an overflow outlet to the street gutter. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No.
4940]
A. Any such use shall meet the minimum lot size requirement of the zone
district.
B. Any building, parking garage, parking deck or other parking structure
shall meet all ordinance requirements applicable to principal buildings
in the zone.
C. All lots used for such parking and storage shall be completely enclosed
by a six-foot-high fence equipped with an electronic security gate
system restricting ingress/egress to authorized individuals only.
Unpaved areas shall be suitably landscaped, and the grounds shall be
adequately lighted for security purposes.
D. Design provisions of drive aisles, parking spaces, dimensions, etc., must
reflect the oversized nature of the vehicles for which the use is created.
WB-50 design standards shall be the minimum when articulated
vehicles will have access to the site.
E. All parking and paved areas shall meet the setback requirements
established in § 170-239E.
F. The storage of commercial vehicles, trailers and/or equipment is strictly
prohibited. The lessee must demonstrate active use of the
aforementioned item(s) by the routine removal from said site of said
item(s) no less than once in any consecutive five-day period (excluding
weekends) for a period of no less than eight consecutive hours.
§ 170-136.3 WELLS § 170-136.6
614:1145
§ 170-136.6. Animal hospitals. [Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380]
Animal hospitals, where permitted, shall comply with the following
regulations:
A. Veterinary medical services shall be provided under the direct
supervision of a New Jersey licensed Doctor of Veterinary Medicine.
B. Boarding of animals may take place in not more than 30% of the gross
floor area.
C. All parts of any facility shall be not less than 200 feet from any
residential district.
§ 170-136.6 UNION CODE § 170-136.6
614:1146
ARTICLE XV
Conditional Uses
§ 170-137. Power to grant; application; requirements.
Pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,312 the Planning Board may grant conditional
uses wherever hereinafter permitted in this Part 3. Application for a
conditional use shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Part 4 for preliminary site plan approval, and the Planning Board shall
act on the application in accordance with said procedures for preliminary
site plan approval. Application for a conditional use shall be granted if the
same will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
the community, is not likely to involve unusual risks of traffic safety or
traffic congestion and is reasonably necessary for the convenience of the
community. Requirements for conditional uses provided for in this chapter
shall be as follows.
§ 170-138. Public and private schools teaching academic subjects.
§ 170-139. Home professional offices.
A. No building shall exceed the height limit of its zone district except as
provided in § 170-127.
B. There shall be minimum lot area of two acres measured within 450 feet
of the front street right-of-way.
C. All buildings shall be located at least 50 feet from a street property line,
at least 25 feet from a side property line and 50 feet from a rear
property line.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with § 170-239. All
parking areas and driveways shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street, building or property line.
E. There shall be a minimum distance between buildings of 25 feet, but not
less than the height of the taller building.
A. The property shall meet the minimum lot size requirement of the zone
district.
B. The professional person shall reside on the premises.
C. The office shall be located on the main floor or in the basement of the
dwelling.
D. Not more than two persons not resident in the dwelling shall be
employed in the office.
312. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 170-137 WELLS § 170-139
614:1147
§ 170-140. Repair garages and motor vehicle service stations.
[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
E. Not more than 900 square feet of floor area shall be devoted to such
use, and, if located on the main floor, not more than 1/2 the floor area of
the main floor shall be devoted to such use.
F. The professional office shall not usurp any part of the minimum floor
area required for the dwelling.
G. The residential character of the lot and building shall not be changed.
H. No occupational sound shall emanate from the building.
I. No such use shall cause interference with radio and television reception
in neighboring residences.
J. In addition to off-street parking required for the dwelling, at least three
off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each 200 square feet of
floor area devoted to office use.
K. Off-street parking areas shall be located at least five feet from a
building, 10 feet from an adjoining property, 10 feet from a street rightof-
way line and at least 25 feet from the point of intersection of any two
street right-of-way lines.
L. There shall be no outdoor storage or display of any kind in connection
with the use.
M. Only one sign, as regulated in § 170-153B, shall be permitted.
N. Except for the sign as permitted above, there shall be no exterior
evidence of the professional use being conducted in the building.
A. The lot or parcel of land shall meet the minimum lot size requirements
for its zone district.
B. The lot or parcel of land so to be used shall have a street frontage of at
least 150 feet.
C. The walls of the building or structure shall be set back at least 25 feet
from every property line and at least 40 feet from a street line.
D. The nearest boundary line of the lot or parcel of land so to be used shall
be at least 300 feet from any boundary line of property which is used as
or upon which is located:
(1) A public building.
(2) A church or other place of worship.
(3) A public park or playground.
§ 170-139 UNION CODE § 170-140
614:1148
§ 170-141. Public utility buildings and facilities.
E. The nearest boundary line of the lot or parcel of land so to be used shall
be at least 300 feet on either the same or opposite side of the street
from any residential district boundary line.
F. The nearest boundary line of the lot or parcel so to be used shall be at
least 1,500 feet from another repair garage or service station, except,
however, that this limitation shall not apply where the garage or service
station is located on the opposite side of a street or highway of four or
more lanes, which is divided by a median or barrier.
G. Gasoline pumps and other apparatus shall be so located as to permit
safe and convenient traffic circulation. Every gasoline or oil tank, pump
or other device, appliance or apparatus shall be located at least 25 feet
from a street right-of-way line, at least 50 feet from a residential zone
boundary and at least 25 feet from any property line.
H. No part of any automotive service station operation or paved area shall
be conducted within 25 feet of a residential zone boundary. A six-foothigh
unpierced fence shall be installed along any residential zone
boundary.
I. All paved areas within the property shall be at least 10 feet from a
property line or a street right-of-way line.
J. Adequate parking for automobiles of employees and patrons shall be
provided.
K. There shall not be outdoor storage of supplies, materials or automobile
parts, whether for sale, storage or waste, nor shall any trailers or
temporary structures be used for storage or otherwise be located on the
site.
L. Excepting incidental, minor repair work, such as installing windshield
wipers, replacing light bulbs and lenses and routine maintenance
checks, repairs shall be conducted entirely within the confines of the
building, and all repair or service apparatus shall be located within the
building.
M. It shall be unlawful to park tractors, trailers or trucks outdoors in a
gasoline service station overnight. Not more than five passenger
vehicles awaiting repairs or parts shall be stored outdoors in a gasoline
service station for more than three days.
N. Repair garages and motor vehicle service stations shall be a conditional
use in the BC and I Zones only and not a permitted use in any other
zone.
O. All of the aforementioned provisions of this section and others as may
apply shall apply to any said use whether nonconforming or conditional.
§ 170-140 WELLS § 170-141
614:1149
§ 170-142. Community residences and community shelters.
Community residences for the developmentally disabled or community
shelters for victims of domestic violence shall be those that house greater
than six but fewer than 15 developmentally disabled persons, mentally ill
persons or victims of domestic violence as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2
and statutes cited therein.
A. The minimum lot area for the zone district in which the use is located
shall be met.
B. All yard and setback requirements of the zone district shall be met;
provided, however, that no yard shall be less than the height of the
facility, nor shall any facility be located within 100 feet of a residential
district boundary line.
C. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. Parking areas and
driveways shall meet the parking setback requirements of the zone
district.
A. Narrative. All applications shall include a narrative setting forth the full
particulars of the building and/or use and which shall contain the
following information as a minimum:
(1) Street address of property and tax lot and block number.
(2) Lot dimension, lot area.
(3) Number and type of residents proposed and number of staff
proposed to reside on the property, including the maximum number
of persons licensed by the state to reside in the home and a precise
description of the residents proposed for the home, which shall
include but not be limited to such facts as age range, sex and type
of disability or handicap, if known.
(4) Number, dimensions and area of all proposed bedrooms.
(5) Number, dimensions and area of all bathrooms.
(6) Dimensions, area and proposed use of all other rooms.
B. Minimum lot area. One thousand five hundred square feet of lot area for
each developmentally disabled person and employee housed at the
residence, but not less than the minimum lot as required in § 170-50.
C. Minimum gross habitable floor area. Two hundred forty square feet
shall be required for each developmentally disabled person and
employee housed at the residence.
D. Limit on number of residences. No conditional use permit shall be
granted if the number of developmentally disabled persons residing at
existing community residences or community shelters within the
Township exceeds 50 persons or 0.5% of the population of the
§ 170-141 UNION CODE § 170-142
614:1150
§ 170-143. Banks and financial institutions.
Township, whichever is greater. In making such computation, persons
residing in shelters housing six persons or fewer shall also be included.
E. One use on a lot. No community residences for the developmentally
disabled shall be located upon a lot containing any other use, nor shall
any structure or facility on the site be utilized to provide services for
any persons not residing on the site, provided that nothing herein shall
be construed to prevent a private lunchroom for staff or the service of
meals to visitors.
F. Height and living floors. No community residences for the
developmentally disabled shall exceed a maximum of two living floors,
exclusive of basement, or 27 feet in height, whichever is less. Basement
areas shall not be utilized to house persons but may be used for
recreation areas.
G. Proof of licensing. Each community residence for the developmentally
disabled shall submit proof of licensing by the Department of Human
Services of the State of New Jersey.
H. Separation requirements. No community residence for the
developmentally disabled shall be located within 1,500 feet of any other
such community residence for the developmentally disabled, including
those shelters housing six persons or fewer.
I. Parking required. Each community residence for the developmentally
disabled shall provide one off-street parking space for each employee
on the shift employing the largest number of persons, plus one off-street
parking space for each five developmentally disabled persons or
fraction thereof residing on the site. The required off-street parking
shall be subject to the provisions of Article XXVIII of this chapter.
J. Harmonious design. No building utilized as a community residence for
the developmentally disabled shall be constructed or altered so as to be
inharmonious with the residential character of adjacent structures in
the residential zone. Fire escapes are permitted but must be located in
the rear of the structure or as approved by the Fire Subcode Official.
K. Fencing. The rear yard of a community residence for the
developmentally disabled shall be enclosed with a fence at least four
feet in height.
L. Signs. No signs shall be permitted in connection with a community
residence for the developmentally disabled except those permitted in
the residential zone.
A. The lot or parcel of land shall meet the minimum lot size requirements
for its zone district.
B. All yard and setback requirements of the zone district shall be met.
§ 170-142 WELLS § 170-143
614:1151
§ 170-144. Nursing homes and long-term congregate health care
facilities. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 5173]
§ 170-144.1. Nonrestaurant on-site food and drink consumption.
[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
There shall be allowed in the BB and BC Zone Districts the nonrestaurant
on-site consumption of food and drink in a retail sales establishment whose
primary activity is the preparation or distribution of food and drink for offsite
consumption, subject to the following limitations:
C. All parking requirements of Article XXVIII shall be met.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NURSING HOME AND LONG-TERM CONGREGATE HEALTH CARE
FACILITY — A nursing, congregate-care or convalescent home licensed
by the State of New Jersey and primarily designed to furnish lodging or
nursing care or required supervised care to persons by reason of their
being aged, sick, infirm, convalescent, invalid, bedfast, handicapped or
impaired, but not designed to serve the mentally ill or those suffering
from a communicable disease or those addicted to narcotics or alcohol.
B. There shall be a minimum lot area of two acres measured within 400
feet of the front street right-of-way of 250 feet.
C. All buildings shall be located at least 50 feet from a street property line,
at least 25 feet from a side property line and 50 feet from a rear
property line.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with § 170-239. All
parking areas and driveways shall be located at least 10 feet from a
street, building or property line.
E. No building shall exceed three stories in height or 35 feet.
F. Building coverage shall not exceed 50% of the area of the lot.
G. No building shall be constructed as a nursing home and long-term
congregate health care facility which contains fewer than 30 units for
the accommodation of residents.
A. Table or counter service shall be limited to the public area of said
establishment.
B. The public area shall be a minimum of 200 square feet to be considered
for on-site consumption.
C. Tables seating a total of 12 or counter areas seating 12, or any
combination thereof, shall be permitted within the public areas
specified in Subsection B. [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4379]
§ 170-143 UNION CODE § 170-144.1
614:1152
§ 170-144.2. Stores and shops for retail sales of goods and
service.313 [Added 6-18-1996 by Ord. No. 4444]
§ 170-144.3. Houses of Worship
(Reserved)
§ 170-144.4. through § 170-144.8. (Reserved)
D. The public area shall be limited to a maximum of 20% of the gross floor
area of the establishment.
E. Compliance with all applicable codes, statutes and regulations is
required.
F. No additional off-street parking shall be required for the table or
counter service herein authorized.
A. There shall be allowed in I Zone District stores and shops for retail sales
of goods and service, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The lot on which the use is to be located in adjacent to and has an
adjoining property line to a lot or lots in the BC Zone District.
(2) Customer vehicular access is solely from and to New Jersey State
Highway Route 22, either directly or by means of a street or an
access drive through another lot or lots. Such street or access drive
shall not connect to any other street and shall not permit access
through other drives or parking areas to any other street.
(3) Truck and delivery access may be provided through streets other
than as limited in Subsection A(2) above, provided that such access
is to and from New Jersey State Highway 22, the site is designed to
prohibit truck access to and from any residential zone and there is
no on-site interconnection between the customer drives and
parking areas with the truck and delivery areas.
(4) The size of any particular parcel used for any such conditional use
shall not exceed 15 acres.
B. The above-referenced specific conditions shall constitute the definite
specifications and standards required to establish the conditional use
as permitted in the I Zone District. In all other respects, the use shall be
regulated pursuant to the standards in the BC Zone District to which it
is adjacent, which standards shall be the bulk standards applied to this
conditional use.
313. Editor's Note: Former § 170-144.2, Parking and storage of certain vehicles, boats and
equipment, added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181, was repealed 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380.
See now § 170-136.5.
§ 170-144.1 WELLS § 170-144.9
614:1153
§ 170-144.9. Commercial reuse of underutilized industrial districts.
[Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380]
Industrial buildings may be used for any activity permitted in the Business
BB or BC District where the following conditions are satisfied:
A. Retail sales and service uses may occupy not more than 2,500 square
feet or 20% of gross floor area (GFA), whichever is less. [Amended
12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 4490]
B. Retail sales and services shall be limited to the building occupant.
C. Ninety percent of material to be retailed shall be regularly sold,
manufactured or distributed by the building occupant, with the
remaining 10% being incidental or accessory to the main use.
D. Alterations to the facility shall allow for reversion to other Industrial I
District uses.
E. Parking shall be provided as required in the Business BB and BC
Districts.
F. Lighting, landscaping and signs shall be upgraded to conform with the
requirements of the Business BB and BC Districts.
G. Peak traffic generation shall not coincide with the industrial traffic peak
hour.
§ 170-144.9 UNION CODE § 170-144.9
614:1154
ARTICLE XVI
Fences and Walls
§ 170-145. Height restricted; use in yard areas. [Amended
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181; 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. 4445]
On any lot in any district other than the I Industrial Zone, no wall or fence
shall be erected or altered so that said wall or fence shall be over six
feet in height in side yard areas and six feet in height in rear yard areas.
In residential zones, fences may be constructed in side and rear yards
no closer than two inches to a property line subject to other applicable
provisions of this article. Fences shall be prohibited in front yard areas of all
zones. On corner lots, a twelve-foot side yard setback shall be maintained
within 15 feet of the rear property line when the same abuts a front yard or
when necessary to provide adjacent property sight distance. This provision
may be waived or modified by the Construction Code Official if, in his
determination, a sight distance concern does not exist.
§ 170-146. Barbed wire and metal spikes.
No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, topped with metal spikes or
constructed of any material or in any manner which may be dangerous to
persons or animals, except that fences permitted for industrial uses may be
topped by a barbed wire protective barrier not less than eight feet in height.
Fences shall not be permitted to extend closer than the minimum required
front setback line in any industrial zone.
§ 170-147. Dog runs and privacy areas.
A dog run or privacy area may have fencing a maximum of six feet in height,
provided that such area is located in rear yard areas only and is set back
from any lot line at least 15 feet.
§ 170-148. (Reserved)314
§ 170-149. Tennis court areas.
A tennis court area, located in rear yard areas only, may be surrounded by
a fence a maximum of 15 feet in height, said fence to be set back from any
lot line the distance required for accessory buildings.
§ 170-150. Finished side to face adjacent property.
The finished side of all fences, walls or other structures in the nature of a
fence shall face towards the property adjacent to the property upon which
said fence, wall or other structure in the nature of a fence has been erected.
314. Editor's Note: Former § 170-148, Private residential swimming pools, was repealed
4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630. See Art. XVIII for regulations on swimming pools.
§ 170-145 WELLS § 170-150
614:1155

ARTICLE XVII
Signs
§ 170-151. Permit required; application; applicability.
All signs shall be under the jurisdiction and subject to inspection by the
Construction Code Official of the Township of Union. Before any sign, fixed
awing, canopy or projecting object is altered or erected upon, above or
below any building or structure in the Township of Union, a permit shall
first be obtained from the Construction Department, for which a fee shall
be paid in accordance with the fee schedule of the Township of Union for
sign permits. Before any permit shall be issued, an application, with two
sets of plans showing the proposed construction of the sign and a statement
of method of attachment, shall be filed in the office of the Construction
Code Official. The requirements of this article shall be applicable to both
temporary and permanent signs.
§ 170-152. General regulations.
A. Other than billboard signs as defined by this chapter, no sign may be
placed on or attached to a building or erected independently for any
purpose other than to advertise a permitted business or use conducted
on the same premises, and/or for uses permitted in residential zones as
provided for in § 170-153, subject to the provisions of said section.
[Amended 1-28-2003 by Ord. No. 4760; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No.
4971]
B. No sign of any type shall be permitted to obstruct driving vision, traffic
signals, traffic directional and identification signs, other places of
business, other signs or windows of the building on which they are
located.
C. No sign shall be attached to trees, fence posts, stumps, utility poles or
other signs, but signs shall be freestanding or attached to buildings in
an approved manner.
D. (Reserved)315
E. Each sign shall have prominently displayed a permit number as
assigned by the Construction Department indicating approval for
erection.
F. No fee shall be charged for a driveway directional sign.
G. Temporary safety, traffic, directional and warning signs approved by the
governing body, not exceeding four square feet, shall be permitted in all
zones.
315. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Construction and contract work, as amended, was
repealed 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340. See now Subsection N.
§ 170-151 WELLS § 170-152
614:1157
H. Moving, fluttering or rotating signs, including streamers, pennants and
similar displays, are prohibited in all zones.
I. Signs which are required by any provision of law may be located in any
zone.
J. All illuminated signs shall be either indirectly lighted or of the diffusedlighting
type. No sign shall be lighted by means of flashing, LED, or
intermittent illumination; however backlit signs may be illuminated
with LED lights. This shall include all lights used for the illumination of
buildings or the areas surrounding them or for the illumination or
display of merchandise or products as they are in the view of vehicular
traffic using the roads or roads abutting such business properties.
Floodlights used for the illumination of said premises or of any sign
thereon, whether or not such floodlights are attached to or separate
from the building, shall not project light above the highest elevation of
the illuminated wall of the building. Nonflashing neon signs are
permitted in windows only, said signs limited to two colors plus white
with their bulbs being adequately covered. Said neon signs must not
exceed four square feet per window and not more than one neon sign
per 100 square feet of street front window. Use of LED lighting shall be
prohibited from any window or door, and shall not be affixed to other
areas of any structure or building, except when used as properly
shielded backlighting for signs. [Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No.
4355316; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 5408]
K. Any illuminated tubing or strings of lights outlining the rooflines or wall
edges of any building are prohibited, except Christmas decorations
displayed during the period from November 15 to January 15 of any
given year. Nonflashing white illumination shall be prohibited,
consistent with the limitations identified in Subsection J above.
[Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355317; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
5408]
L. Any sign that uses the words "stop" or "danger" or otherwise presents
or implies the need or requirement of stopping or caution or the
existence of danger or which is likely to be confused with any sign
displayed by public authority is prohibited.
M. (Reserved)318
N. The following exemptions shall apply only to the requirement for a sign
permit and shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign
from the responsibility for its erection and maintenance in good and
safe condition:
316. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
317. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
318. Editor's Note: Former Subsection M, regarding banner-type signs, was repealed 7-12-1994
by Ord. No. 4340. See now Subsection N.
§ 170-152 UNION CODE § 170-152
614:1158
(1) Memorial tablets or signs, names of buildings and date of erection,
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed in bronze
or other noncombustible materials.
(2) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger signs and such temporary emergency signs as may be
erected by governmental or public utility employees in carrying out
their official work.
(3) Names on mailboxes.
(4) Banner-type signs in celebration of public events or to call
attention to dates of holidays of public significance when erected
by the Township itself or authorized by the governing body. [Added
7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(5) One builder's, architect's or engineer's sign not exceeding 50
square feet in area on the site of construction during the course of
any building operation to be removed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. [Added 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(6) One home improvement contractor's sign not exceeding two feet by
three feet painted in a professional manner on the site of the
contract work to be removed upon completion of the contract work.
[Added 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(7) One grand-opening sign is permitted in the form of a banner not to
exceed 36 inches by 75% of the building width on the site of a new
business for a thirty-day period. [Added 7-12-1994 by Ord. No.
4340; amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355319]
O. No advertising sign shall be erected or located on, within or over any
public right-of-way.
P. No sign as permitted shall extend or project above the highest elevation
of the wall to which it is attached, nor shall any sign be erected on or
attached to the roof of a building.
Q. Wall or ground traffic directional and traffic safety signs containing
such wording as "one-way," "do not enter" and "stop" may be located on
a property in any zone, provided that the locations and sizes of such
signs are approved by the Planning Board.
R. Signs deemed necessary to the public welfare by the governing body
are permitted in all zones.
S. The following types of signs are prohibited everywhere if any part of the
sign or its structure is visible from the street:
319. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
§ 170-152 WELLS § 170-152
614:1159
(1) Signs on which the colors red, amber or green are used either in
direct illumination or in high reflection by the use of special
preparation such as fluorescent paint or glass, if located within 150
feet of a traffic light.
(2) Any sign visible from the public right-of-way using the word "stop"
that may affect the flow of traffic.
(3) No signs or illustrations or symbols shall be placed so as to
interfere with the opening of an exit door of any building or so as to
obstruct any window opening or to interfere with the use of any fire
escape or to create a hazard to pedestrians.
(4) Advertising signs and political signs posted, tacked, painted or
otherwise attached on utility poles, posts, trees, fences, sidewalks,
curbs or traffic signs, except those necessary for safety.
(5) Caricature signs of a bizarre nature.
(6) No advertising sign may be placed, painted or erected on any
railroad bridge, highway bridge, tunnel entrance or overpass
except of an official directional nature.
(7) Sandwich signs or curb signs.
(8) Interior or exterior signs placed directly upon store windows, show
windows or display windows shall at no time cover more than 25%
of the window area. Only one such sign shall be allowed in each
window upon a white background with black lettering,
professionally painted.
(9) Interior paper signs placed directly upon store windows, show
windows or display windows shall at no time cover more than 35%
of the total window area. Only one such sign shall be allowed in
each window, which sign shall be professionally prepared and
contain no more than four colors, including black and white. No
sign shall be allowed for more than 30 days. [Amended
11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4220; 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355320]
(10) Canopy signs. [Added 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 4666]
(11) Awning signs. [Added 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 4666]
(12) Garage and house sale signs. [Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
T. All signs in BA, BB and USBD Districts must be of colonial design.
Letters on said signs shall be raised from background, a minimum of 3/4
inch solid. Illuminated letters and subcopy do not need to meet this
requirement. Grooved or carved signs, with letters of a minimum depth
320. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
§ 170-152 UNION CODE § 170-152
614:1160
§ 170-153. Signs in residential districts.
In the residence districts, only the following signs are permitted:
of 3/4 inch, may be substituted for signs with raised lettering. Signs
in the BC District shall not be required to conform to colonial design
but shall meet all other requirements of business districts. That portion
of a sign that contains a registered trademark, service mark or logo is
exempt from conformance to the colonial design standard. Applicants
for a sign permit must present a valid registration number from the
Library of Congress in the case of national registration or a valid
registration number from the New Jersey Department of State,
Commercial Recording Division, in the case of state registration, or
both, to be eligible for exemption. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 4181; 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355321; 1-28-2003 by Ord. No.
4760]
U. No permits shall be granted by the Construction Code Official for signs
in the BA and BB Districts if, in his opinion, the proposed sign is not one
of colonial design and lacks the necessary aesthetic values required in
order to conform to the Colonial Sign Program of the Township of
Union. An appeal from any such denial shall be made to the Township
Committee. All permits for signs in the Special Improvement District
will require approval of the Special Improvement District's Building
Codes Screening Committee as stipulated in § 170-74B. [Amended
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181; 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355322]
V. The maximum permitted area of any sign located anywhere in the
Township shall be 50 square feet, unless otherwise provided. This
provision shall not apply to signs in the Special Improvement District.
[Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181; amended 9-13-1994 by Ord.
No. 4355]
W. It shall be unlawful to use a vehicle or a trailer as a sign in
circumvention of the requirements set forth in this chapter. Thus, any
sign painted, attached or displayed on any vehicle or trailer whose
primary purpose is advertisement of products or activity and directing
people to a business or activity located on the same or other property
shall be prohibited in all zones. Signs advertising to the public that the
vehicle in question is "for sale" are not intended to be included in this
regulation. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 5044]
A. A nameplate sign, situated within the property lines and bearing only
the name and address of the principal occupant, provided that the sign
does not exceed two square feet in total area.
321. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
322. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
§ 170-152 WELLS § 170-153
614:1161
B. Either one wall sign or one ground sign, not exceeding four square feet
in area, advertising or indicating the home or office of a member of a
recognized professional or home occupation as permitted in the
district. Any such ground sign shall be set back at least 15 feet from the
street right-of-way.
C. Either one wall or ground sign, not exceeding four square feet in area,
expressing an opinion on political issues, which includes any matter of
public interest, or candidates for public office. Any such ground sign
shall be set back at least 15 feet from the street right-of-way. [Added
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 4971323; amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
4998]
D. One "for sale" or "for rent" sign erected only on the property to be sold
or rented, but not to be placed on any tree and not to exceed six square
feet in area. Said sign shall be removed within 10 days of the
consummation of sale or lease.
E. An approved multifamily housing development may display one
freestanding identification sign at each street entrance to the
development, designating only the name of the development, the
address and name of the owner and the names of any buildings located
therein, provided that the area of said sign shall not exceed 35 square
feet and shall be set back 15 feet from a street or property line.
F. There shall be permitted one wall or ground sign not exceeding 20
square feet located on the premises of places of worship; Sunday school
buildings; buildings used for public purposes; public, private and
parochial schools; and public recreational and community center
buildings and grounds. No such sign shall be located closer than 15 feet
to a property line or street right-of-way line.
G. Open house directional signs.
(1) Signs are not to be displayed before 11:30 a.m. and no later than
5:30 p.m.
(2) No more than one sign on a right-of-way or at any intersection or
street corner.
(3) All open house directional signs will be uniform, without broker's
name, colonial in design and of sandwich A-frame construction. The
sign shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall be neutral
black and white in background, with block lettering and directional
arrow. Only one sign shall be permitted at each location no matter
how many realtors have open houses for that day. Generic signs
shall contain the name of the company on the inside of each sign.
323. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C through G as
Subsections D through H, respectively.
§ 170-153 UNION CODE § 170-153
614:1162
§ 170-154. Signs in business districts.
In the business districts, only the following signs are permitted:
(4) No directional sign of any kind shall be tacked or stapled to a utility
pole or tree.
(5) No directional signs shall be allowed on Chestnut Street, Morris
Avenue or Stuyvesant Avenue.
H. Except for signs as permitted in Subsection G(4) above, the above-listed
signs shall be exempt from fees and shall not require a permit.
A. Signs as permitted and regulated in § 170-153 above are permitted in
connection with such uses when located in a business district.
B. No signs in the BA, BB and UCBD Districts shall be permitted which are
not accessory to a business or use conducted on the property, and/or for
uses permitted in residential zones as provided for in § 170-153, subject
to the provisions of said section. [Amended 1-28-2003 by Ord. No.
4760; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 4971]
C. Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted on each commercial building wall
that faces on a street or parking areas, subject to the following
limitations and requirements:
(1) Not more than one wall sign on each such wall shall be permitted
for each business establishment or use located in the building.
(2) No such sign shall extend farther than eight inches from the face of
the building wall to which it is attached. [Amended 9-13-1994 by
Ord. No. 4355324]
(3) The bottom of said sign shall be at least eight feet above the ground
level or sidewalk below the sign if it extends more than three
inches from the face of the building wall.
(4) The height of any such sign shall not exceed four feet. The total of
the widths of any such signs shall not exceed 75% of the width of
the building wall to which attached. [Amended 9-13-1994 by
Ord. No. 4355325]
(5) 326The total area of any such sign shall not exceed 10% of the area
of the building wall, including window areas to which they are
attached. The maximum size of a wall sign in multi-tenant office
324. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
325. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
326. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(5), which provided that the total width of certain signs
shall not exceed 50% of the width of the building wall to which they are attached, was
deleted 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355. Said ordinance also renumbered former Subsection
C(6) as Subsection C(5).
§ 170-153 WELLS § 170-154
614:1163
buildings shall not exceed 10 square feet per tenant and shall not
be located above the first story. These signs may be in addition to
the sign announcing the name of the building, which shall conform
to all provisions listed above. The maximum size of a wall sign in
multitenant buildings occupied by retail stores shall not exceed 25
square feet per tenant and shall not be located above the first story.
[Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 4355327]
D. Ground signs. One ground sign shall be permitted for each commercial
building, subject to the following limitations and requirements:
[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(1) No such sign shall extend more than four feet above the ground
level below the sign, and such sign shall be elevated no more than
one foot above grade.
(2) No such sign shall exceed a width of four feet.
(3) Said sign shall be at least 15 feet from a street right-of-way or
property line.
(4) When used as a directory sign of the tenants occupying a building
or site, the allowed display area of said sign shall be uniformly
divided and equally shared by all tenants. No add-on signs or
additional square footage for sublet use shall be allowed.
E. Freestanding signs. Provided that there is no ground sign, a
commercial property having a street frontage of at least 300 feet shall
be permitted one freestanding sign, subject to the following limitations
and requirements: [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(1) Said sign shall contain only the name of the commercial property or
facility or the brand or the manufacturer's name of the principal
product sold or the service rendered.
(2) The top of the sign shall not extend more than 20 feet above the
ground surface below the sign. The ground may not be artificially
raised in order to increase the height of the sign.
(3) The total area of said sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(4) The bottom of said sign shall be at least 15 feet above the ground
level below the sign.
(5) Subject to the requirement in Subsection E(4) above, one sign for
each business establishment located on the premises may be
suspended below the principal sign surface. Each such sign shall
contain only the name of the business establishment, and each such
sign shall not exceed one foot in height and five feet in width. Such
signs shall be uniform in size so as to be shared equally by all
327. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 4359, adopted 10-11-1994, provided that these provisions of
Ord. No. 4355 shall apply to all BA, BB and BC Districts.
§ 170-154 UNION CODE § 170-154
614:1164
tenants. No add-on signs or additional square footage for sublet use
shall be allowed.
F. Covered walk signs. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a
commercial building containing an overhang along the building wall
and over a sidewalk shall be permitted signs as follows: [Amended
7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340; 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 4666]
(1) One sign suspended from or attached to the ceiling of the overhang
for each business establishment, subject to the following
limitations and requirements:
(a) Said sign shall be located in front of the commercial
establishment.
(b) Said sign shall be erected perpendicular to the face of the
building wall.
(c) The bottom of said sign shall be at least eight feet above the
sidewalk below the sign.
(d) Said sign shall not extend beyond the overhang.
(e) Said sign shall not exceed 10 inches in height or four feet in
width.
(f) Said sign shall contain only the name of the commercial
establishment or the name of the principal product sold or
service rendered.
G. Signs for motor vehicle service stations. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions, motor vehicle service stations may display only the
following signs:
(1) One freestanding or pylon sign advertising the name of the station
and for the principal products sold on the premises, including any
special company or brand name, insignia or emblem, provided that
each such sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area on a side and
shall be erected not less than five feet from the property line and
not less than 10 feet or more than 15 feet above the ground.
(2) Directional signs or lettering displayed on the building wall over
individual entrance doors or bays consisting only of the words
"washing," "lubrication," "repair," "mechanic on duty" or other
words closely similar in import, provided that there shall be not
more than one such sign over each entrance or bay, that the letters
thereof shall not exceed 12 inches in height and that such letters
shall be limited to a single line.
(3) Customary lettering on or other insignia which are a structural part
of a gasoline pump, consisting only of the brand name of gasoline
sold, lead warning sign, a price indicator and any other sign
§ 170-154 WELLS § 170-154
614:1165
required by law and not exceeding a total of three square feet on
each pump.
H. Uniformity of signs. If a building contains more than one establishment,
the signs permitted in §§ 170-152 and 170-153 above shall be uniform in
terms of design, colors, height or background, style and height of
lettering and position on the building wall. In the case of a new sign for
an individual establishment in a preexisting multi-use building, the new
sign shall be consistent with the design of existing signs; where a
uniform pattern has been established, the new sign shall, to the
greatest extent possible, follow the pattern of the existing sign or signs
which most closely fulfill the objectives of these regulations. The owner
as well as individual tenants of multi-use buildings shall be responsible
for compliance with these regulations. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No.
4181]
I. Billboards are not permitted and shall not be erected in any zoning
district within the Township of Union, and any attempt to convert
existing static billboards to digital LED communication systems, or to
employ heightened or changing graphics with more modern technology
for such existing billboards, is also prohibited. [Added 1-28-2003 by
Ord. No. 4760; amended 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 4971;
11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 5281]
J. A business within Union Center may use, without a permit, pedestrian
signs, provided the pedestrian sign meets the following criteria:
[Added 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 5205]
(1) Pedestrian signage consisting of sandwich board (also known as
sidewalk sign or A-frame sign), poster stand or easel sign frame
types may be erected by the business as determined appropriate
for the needs of the business, placed directly in front of the
business, adjacent to the entrance.
(2) No more than one pedestrian sign may be erected per business.
(3) Pedestrian signage may be displayed in front of a business only
during open hours and shall be removed when the business is
closed.
(4) Sign frames, posts and bases shall be made of wood or metal.
(5) Sign types shall consist of sandwich board, poster stand or easels
as defined herein:
EASEL — A freestanding one-sided sign on a three- or four-legged
upright supporting structure. Frame size: 24 inches by 36 inches
and no taller than 48 inches.
POSTER STAND — A freestanding one-sided sign display. Frame
sizes: 24 inches by 36 inches and no taller than 48 inches.
§ 170-154 UNION CODE § 170-154
614:1166
SANDWICH BOARD — A freestanding "A" frame type sign with
one- or two-sided message area. With a maximum frame size of 24
inches by 36 inches and no taller than 48 inches.
(6) Message area of the sign face shall be enclosed by a clearly
discernable border at least one inch in width.
(7) Message area may be composed of a chalkboard or erasable ink for
a changeable copy. Electronic signs and backlite signs are
prohibited. Message cannot automatically change.
(8) The background colors of the sign shall be black, white or natural.
(9) Signs shall not be located in a way that obstructs passing
pedestrians.
(10) No signs may be displayed when ground is covered with snow.
(11) Any signage not displayed in compliance with the above criteria
shall be deemed a violation and subject to code enforcement action
and/or removal.
K. Projecting signs are permitted in the Union Center Business District
(UCBD), provided they meet the following criteria: [Added 2-13-2018
by Ord. No. 5552]
(1) No more than one projecting sign may be erected per business per
street frontage.
(2) Projecting signs shall be erected perpendicular to the face of the
building wall.
(3) Projecting signs shall have two faces, only one of which shall be
measured in computing sign area.
(4) Projecting signs shall not exceed four feet in width and 12 square
feet in area.
(5) Projecting signs shall read only the name of the commercial
establishment or the name of the principal product sold or service
rendered; business symbols or logos are permitted.
(6) The bottom of the projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above
the sidewalk.
(7) Projecting signs shall not be mounted or projected above the first
floor level.
(8) Projecting signs must conform to special standards developed by
the Special Improvement District, including shapes, sizes, and
materials.
(9) Projecting signs shall be permitted in addition to any other sign
types also permitted by the Code with the business district.
§ 170-154 WELLS § 170-154
614:1167
§ 170-155. Signs in the I and OB Districts.
In the I and OB Districts, only the following signs are permitted:
(10) Projecting signs shall be externally illuminated by means of a
directed light.
(11) Projecting signs shall not be less than two feet from the side lot line
of any parcel, and no two projecting signs shall be closer than 10
feet from one another.
A. Signs as permitted and regulated in § 170-153 above are permitted in
connection with such uses when located in an I or OB District.
B. No sign shall be permitted which is not accessory to a use conducted on
the property.
C. Wall signs. Each industrial or office research building may contain one
wall sign, subject to the following limitations and requirements:
(1) The sign is permanently attached or constructed with the building
and does not extend more than one foot from the facade of the
building.
(2) The total advertising space of a sign attached to a building shall not
exceed 50 square feet or 10% of the gross area facade to which it is
attached, whichever is greater, provided that the limits of the sign
do not extend beyond the face of the building.
(3) The bottom of said sign shall be at least 10 feet above the ground
level below the sign.
(4) The height of any such sign shall not exceed five feet or 20% of the
height of the building wall to which it is attached, whichever is the
lesser.
(5) The total of the widths of any such signs shall not exceed 50% of
the width of the building wall to which they are attached.
D. Ground signs. Each industrial or office research property may display
one ground sign, subject to the following limitations and requirements:
(1) Said sign shall be located at least 15 feet from a street right-of-way
or property line.
(2) Said sign shall be located at least 50 feet from the point of
intersection of any two street lines.
(3) The top of the sign shall not extend more than 10 feet above the
ground surface below the sign.
(4) Said sign shall not exceed an area of 60 square feet.
§ 170-154 UNION CODE § 170-156
614:1168
§ 170-156. Signs in the H District.
Signs as permitted and regulated in the I District are permitted in the H
District.
§ 170-157. Signs in the C District.
One ground sign is permitted at each entrance to a cemetery. Such sign
shall meet the requirements for ground signs in the I District.
§ 170-158. Sign permit application.
Application for sign permits shall be made by the owner of the premises
and the person responsible for the erection of the sign, and both shall be
responsible for compliance with the terms as herein set forth. Application
shall be made on forms available from the Construction Code Official and
shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Township.
§ 170-159. Issuance of permit.
It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official to examine the
application and other data regarding the premises upon which it is
proposed to erect the sign, and if it shall appear that the proposed structure
is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other laws
and ordinances of the Township, he shall then issue the sign permit along
with a permit tag to be attached to the sign. The sign permit shall be issued
or denied within 45 days of the date of application.
§ 170-160. Duration of permit.
If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within
four months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
§ 170-161. Unsafe signs.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Construction Code Official, any sign
becomes unsafe or endangers the safety of a building or premises or
endangers the public safety, the Construction Code Official shall send a
registered letter to the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on
which the sign is located, ordering that the sign be made safe or removed
within five days of receipt of the letter. If the permittee fails to remove, alter
or repair it within 30 days after the notice, the sign may be removed, altered
or repaired in order to comply by the Construction Code Official at the
expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located.
The Construction Code Official shall cause any sign or sign structure to be
removed summarily and without written notice if it is an immediate peril to
persons or property by virtue of its construction or moorings.
§ 170-156 WELLS § 170-162
614:1169
§ 170-162. Obsolete signs.
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide
business conducted or a product sold or is not used for a permitted use
hereunder shall be taken down and removed by the permittee, owner, agent
or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure or land upon
which such sign may be found within 10 days after written notification from
the Construction Code Official, and, upon failure to comply with such notice
within the time specified in such order, the Construction Code Official is
hereby authorized to cause removal of the sign, and any expense incidental
thereto shall be paid by the permittee or owner of the building or structure
to which the sign is attached.
§ 170-163. Abandoned signs.
The failure to keep a nonconforming sign painted or in good repair for a
period of six months shall constitute abandonment, and such sign may not
be reused and must be removed.
§ 170-162 UNION CODE § 170-163
614:1170
ARTICLE XVIII
Swimming Pools
§ 170-164. Construction permit application. [Amended 4-25-2000
by Ord. No. 4630]
Before application is made for a construction permit for an in-ground pool,
the plans and specifications therefor, bearing the seal of an architect or
professional engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey, accompanied by
a completed and filed electrical inspection form, together with pertinent
explanatory data, shall be submitted to the Board of Health and Township
Engineer for approval, insofar as the same pertains to the protections of the
public health, safety and drainage, which said approval shall be endorsed
upon said plans and specifications. Upon such approval, the application
shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications and the plot
plan of the property, which said plot plan shall show the accurate location of
the proposed swimming pool and the location, height and type of all fencing
or wails and a topography of the premises showing existing and proposed
grades and elevations and showing that all surface water runoff and pool
overflow will be directed away from adjoining properties. Construction
permit fees for in-ground pools shall be in accordance with the fee schedule
of the Township of Union for construction permits.
§ 170-165. (Reserved)328
§ 170-166. Location. [Amended 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630;
8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 5346]
No private swimming pool shall be constructed or installed on any lot unless
the lot contains a residential building. All pools shall be located in rear and
side yards only, shall occupy no more than 25% of the yard area in which it
is located and shall meet the setback distances for accessory buildings for
each particular zoning district, except that in no case may a swimming pool
be located closer than six feet to any lot line.
§ 170-167. Construction standards. [Amended 4-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 4630]
A. Overflow gutters shall be provided extending completely around an inground
pool, having adequate drainage of overflow water away from
the pool.
B. All materials used in the construction or installation of private
swimming pools as herein defined shall be waterproof and easily
cleaned. Construction, installation and design of said pools shall be
such that the same shall be watertight and be maintained and operated
in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. Sand or dirt
bottoms are prohibited. The owner of every private swimming pool shall
328. Editor's Note: Former § 170-165, Exception, was repealed 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630.
§ 170-164 WELLS § 170-167
614:1171
§ 170-168. Filling and draining.
§ 170-169. (Reserved)329
be responsible to maintain said pool in such condition as to prevent
breaks in the pool chassis or water from the pool overflowing into
adjacent public or private property.
A. All private swimming pools shall be filled by a method of a gooseneck
which will fill the pool from above the rim thereof, maintaining a
sufficient air gap. Upon completion of the filling of the pool, any hose or
pipe used in connection therewith must be removed and stored away
from the enclosed pool area.
B. All private swimming pools, other than those draining into the sanitary
sewer system, shall be provided with not more than one two-inch
galvanized iron pipe with gravity drain; the drainpipe on those draining
into the sanitary sewer system shall comply with the Plumbing Code of
the Township of Union.
C. In the instance of private swimming pools not draining into the sanitary
sewer system, the drainpipe may enter into an open watercourse or, if
no open watercourse is available, into a storm sewer. [Amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4940]
D. In the instance of private swimming pools draining into an open
watercourse or into a storm sewer, it shall be unlawful to drain the
private swimming pool during periods of precipitation and for a period
of 24 hours after the cessation of precipitation. [Amended 3-28-2006
by Ord. No. 4940]
E. If the drain is connected into the sanitary sewer system, it shall be
unlawful to drain any such pool between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m.
F. If it is impossible to drain a pool through any of the foregoing methods,
then and in that event no pool can be drained without the method
thereof having been approved, in writing, by the Township Engineer.
G. No private swimming pool, if the same contains over 300 square feet of
surface area, may be filled more than twice yearly, and every such pool
of over 300 square feet in surface area must have a separate water
meter through which the same is filled, attached to or forming part of
said pool.
H. In the event, by proclamation of the governing body of the Township of
Union in the County of Union, the use of water is curtailed by reason of
a water shortage, no such swimming pool may be filled during the
existence of such proclamation.
329. Editor's Note: Former § 170-169, Water levels; walks, was repealed 4-25-2000 by Ord. No.
4630.
§ 170-167 UNION CODE § 170-170
614:1172
§ 170-170. (Reserved)330
§ 170-171. Nuisances; hours; noise; lights.
§ 170-172. Apparel.
Every person using a private swimming pool must wear a bathing suit or
other suitable garment to protect his or her person from indecent exposure.
§ 170-173. Abandonment.
Should the owner abandon the pool, he shall arrange to remove the
depression and return the surface of the ground to its original grade and
approximately the same condition as before the pool was constructed, and
he shall further notify the Township Clerk of the abandonment of said pool,
so that the inspection of the site may be made and the records of the license
marked accordingly.
§ 170-174. Certificate of registration.
Every person, firm or corporation now or hereafter maintaining a swimming
pool as herein defined shall file a certificate of registration with the
Township Clerk upon such form as may be provided by the Township Clerk,
which said certificate of registration shall certify the existence of a
swimming pool as herein defined. There shall be no fee for the filing of said
A. No private swimming pool shall be so located, designed, operated or
maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyments of their property
rights by the owners of property adjoining the swimming pool or
located in the neighborhood.
B. No such swimming pool may be used between the hours 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. on each day of the week except on Sunday, and on Sunday no
such pool may be used before 8:00 a.m.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
made or continued at any private swimming pool any loud, unnecessary
or unusual noise which would exceed the limitations of Chapter 378,
Noise,331 and all applicable provisions of that chapter shall control.
[Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
D. Lights used to illuminate any private swimming pool shall be so
arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
No conductors carrying electrical current shall cross the pool either
overhead or underground. In the use of any electrical appliance in or
about the pool area, compliance shall be had with all accepted safety
standards.
330. Editor's Note: Former § 170-170, Fencing; safety requirements, as amended 3-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 4181, was repealed 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. 4630.
331. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 378, Noise, was superseded by an ordinance adopted by the
Board of Health 5-11-2005. See now Ch. 585, Noise.
§ 170-170 WELLS § 170-174
614:1173
certificate of registration. In the instance of existing swimming pools, said
certificate of registration shall be filed within 30 days after the adoption of
this chapter. In the instance of a swimming pool hereafter constructed or
installed, said certificate of registration shall be filed not later than 10 days
after the completion of the installation of said private swimming pool.
§ 170-175. Compliance with other laws required.332
In the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of any
swimming pool, state laws and the rules, regulations and requirements of
the State Department of Health shall be observed. In the event of any
conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any provision of state
law or requirement, rule or regulation of the State Department of Health,
the provision imposing the higher standard or the more stringent
requirement shall be controlling.
332. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-174 UNION CODE § 170-175
614:1174
ARTICLE XIX
Performance Standards
§ 170-176. Applicability; construction permit issuance.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to zones and all uses. An
application for a construction permit for a nonresidential use shall provide
documentation that the intended use will comply with the performance
standards enumerated below. In the case of a structure being built where
the future use is not known, a construction permit may be issued until
such time as this documentation is submitted with respect to the particular
occupant. A new application and a new certificate of occupancy shall be
required in the event of a change of any user of any structure.
§ 170-177. Electrical and electronic devices.
All electrical or electronic devices shall be subject to the provisions of
Public Law 90-602, 90th Congress, H.R. 10790, dated October 18, 1968,
entitled, "An Act for the Protection of Public Health and Safety from the
Dangers of Electronic Product Radiation." Radiation products, as defined in
DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003 adequately demonstrates compliance
with the minimum standards established by the Act. All other forms of
electromagnetic radiation lying between 100 gigahertz (GHz) shall be
restricted to the technical limits established in the Federal Communication
Commission's Rules and Regulations. Additionally, electric or electronic
equipment shall be shielded so there is no interference with any radio or
television reception at the lot line (or beyond the operator's dwelling unit,
in the case of multifamily dwellings) as the result of the operation of such
equipment.
§ 170-178. Glare.
No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a strong,
dazzling light or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be
shielded, buffered and directed so that glare, direct light or reflection will
not become a nuisance to adjoining properties, adjoining dwelling units,
adjoining districts or streets.
§ 170-179. Heat.
No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines. Further, no use
shall be permitted which would cause the temperature to rise or fall in any
body of water.
§ 170-180. Noise.333
Noise levels shall be designed and operated in accordance with local
regulations and those rules established by the New Jersey State Department
of Environmental Protection as they are adopted and amended.
333. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 378, Noise.
§ 170-176 WELLS § 170-181
614:1175
§ 170-181. Odor.
Odors due to nonagricultural operations shall not be discernible at the lot
line or beyond.
§ 170-182. Storage and waste disposal.
No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner
that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall
any substance be deposited which can contaminate an underground aquifer
or otherwise render such underground aquifer undesirable as a source of
water supply or recreation or which will destroy aquatic life. All materials
or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire
hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects
shall be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to
eliminate such hazards. Containers shall not be stored or placed in the front
yard area.
§ 170-183. Ventilation.
No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent uses or
contaminate the air with excessive heat or odor. Further, no air conditioners
or exhaust fans shall be permitted to discharge exhausted air unless set
back from all property lines 10 feet or equipped with baffles to deflect the
discharged air away from the adjacent use.
§ 170-184. Vibration.
There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human sense of
feeling beyond the immediate lot.
§ 170-181 UNION CODE § 170-184
614:1176
ARTICLE XX
Underground Storage Tanks
§ 170-185. Applicability.
The provisions in this article apply to all underground facilities used for the
storage of flammable or hazardous materials and wastes in all zones.
§ 170-186. Permit required.
Any applicant, before installing or obtaining any tank for the storage of
flammable or hazardous materials, shall first obtain a permit from the
Building Department. The permit shall be issued upon Department approval
only after review of all required plans and specifications to assure
compliance with the Department's requirements.
§ 170-187. Permit application.
An application shall be submitted to the Building Department, containing
the following information:
§ 170-188. Secondary containment and monitoring equipment
required.
No permits shall be issued to install a tank or tank piping that does not
provide secondary containment and a monitoring system designed to detect
product leakage in advance of entry to soil and groundwater.
A. Specifications for tank and piping, including material, size and quantity.
B. Tank and piping installation details and layout design.
C. Tank and piping detection and monitoring system.
§ 170-185 WELLS § 170-188
614:1177

ARTICLE XXI
Historic Overlay District
§ 170-189. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this article is to establish an Historic Overlay District (HOD)
in order to preserve historic buildings, sites, areas, structures and objects
in the Township. The objectives of the HOD are to:
§ 170-190. Where permitted; requirements.
The HOD shall be permitted in all zoning districts in the Township in
accordance with the following requirements:
A. Promote the use and preservation of historic sites for the education,
welfare and pleasure of the residents of New Jersey and visitors to the
state.
B. Assure financial support to implement the program.
C. Integrate historic buildings and sites with the modern environment,
realizing that a dynamic community is the result of a variety of visual
effects, each complementing and reinforcing the other.
A. General eligibility criteria. Those districts, sites, buildings, structures
and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling and association and that:
(1) Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
(2) Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
(3) Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction or that represent the work of a master builder or
that possess high artistic values or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual
distinction; or
(4) Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
B. Specific eligibility. Only those districts, sites, buildings, structures, and
objects that are listed in or eligible for listing in the State Register of
Historic Places shall be permitted to be established as an HOD.
C. Permitted uses in an HOD. The following uses, and their customary
ancillary uses, shall be permitted in an HOD:
(1) Museums and visitors' centers.
(2) Restaurants.
(3) Inns and conference facilities.
§ 170-189 WELLS § 170-190
614:1179
(4) Ancillary retail facilities.
(5) Office and administrative space for historical and museum-related
activities.
(6) Residential development.
(7) Parks.
D. Development standards.
(1) Minimum area: 20 acres.
(2) Maximum density of residential development: eight dwelling units
per acre, not to exceed 100 units per HOD.
(3) Setbacks: 50 feet minimum setback from all property lines and
right-of-way lines.
(4) Maximum height: 45 feet.
(5) Maximum impervious surface: 50%.
E. Submission requirements. An applicant applying for establishment of
an HOD (Historic Overlay District) shall submit to the Planning Board
the following data and information:
(1) Compliance with eligibility requirements of the district, site,
buildings, structure or objects in the New Jersey Register of
Historic Buildings, or actual listing in the Register.
(2) A comprehensive master site plan to assure the preservation of the
specific district's sites, buildings, structures or objects that form
the basis for eligibility in the HOD. The comprehensive master site
plan shall include the following:
(a) Land use plan.
(b) Circulation and off-street parking plan.
(c) Stormwater management plan.
(d) Sanitary sewage collection plan.
(e) Potable water plan.
(f) Solid waste management.
(g) Landscaping and preservation of existing natural features.
(h) Building locations, with floor area, heights and other
dimensions and specific uses of each building.
(i) Recreational facilities.
(j) General lighting and graphics plan.
§ 170-190 UNION CODE § 170-190
614:1180
§ 170-191. Planning Board hearings.
The Planning Board shall conduct public hearings in accordance with this
chapter for major site plans on the comprehensive master site plan
submitted as part of the Historic Overlay District. The plan shall be referred
to those agencies which normally review major site plans for their review
and recommendations. The Planning Board shall act on the plan within 95
days of submission of a complete plan.
§ 170-192. Planning Board approval.
The Planning Board, after public hearings, may grant preliminary approval
on the comprehensive master site plan, and all conditions of approval shall
be binding on the applicant and all future owners, tenants, occupants,
(k) Open space plan.
(l) Off-site and off-tract improvement plan.
(3) The master site development plan should also include, where
appropriate:
(a) Development characteristics of adjoining lands.
(b) Traffic survey, including studies of capacity and demand of
surrounding roadways and plans to assure adequate access to
and from the district.
(c) Energy conservation program and fire-protection and other
security systems.
(d) Tentative phasing plan indicating when buildings, structures
and facilities are proposed to be constructed, including off-site
and off-tract improvements.
(4) Legal documentation.
(a) The applicant shall also submit, as part of the review process,
existing and proposed covenants, deed restrictions, easements
or exceptions applying to the land or buildings; the form and
bylaws of any organization proposed to own or maintain any
facilities, open space or other uses or facilities; and a master
deed for all land, buildings and facilities proposed to be owned
or operated by any organization, if appropriate.
(b) The applicant shall also submit to the Township Attorney legal
documentation assuring appropriate control in perpetuity of
the use, management and maintenance of the various
amenities and uses which qualified the district as an Historic
Overlay District. The Township Attorney shall review the
proposed legal documentation to ensure that adequate
safeguards are included, guaranteeing the continuance of the
agreement and protecting the Township from harm.
§ 170-190 WELLS § 170-192
614:1181
lessors, lessees, heirs, assignees, developers, contractors or
subcontractors. Where appropriate, the conditions of approval shall be set
forth in a developer's agreement in recordable form and approved by the
Township Committee.
§ 170-193. Final comprehensive master site plan approval.
Final comprehensive master site plan approval shall be granted upon the
installation of all necessary public improvements or the posting of bonds
to insure the installation of such improvements and the submission of an
as-built construction plan to the Township upon installation of all public
improvements.
§ 170-194. Subdivision of parcels or lots.
§ 170-195. Fees and escrow requirements.
The Township's fee schedule with respect to major site plans shall be
required with respect to development applications in the HOD.
A. Residential development proposed as part of an HOD and proposed to
be sold in fee simple or as part of a homeowners' or condominium
agreement shall follow the normal procedures established in the
Township ordinances for major subdivisions.
B. Subdivisions for nonresidential uses, for purposes of maintenance or
financing, shall be permitted without regard to any other requirements
of this chapter, provided that all conditions of approval, including but
not limited to provisions for maintenance, management and control of
the various amenities and uses, shall remain in force.
§ 170-192 UNION CODE § 170-195
614:1182
ARTICLE XXIA
Mixed-Use Overlay District334
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 5143]
§ 170-195.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the development of multifamily
residential and professional office uses in close proximity to Union Station
and Kean University in order to encourage land use compatibility and to
provide the opportunity for the development of supportive land uses around
Union Station.
§ 170-195.1.1. Location; requirements.
A. Location. The Mixed-Use Overlay District consists of the following tax
parcels: Block 405, Lot 72; Block 504, Lots 1, 2.01, and 4.01; Block 605,
Lots 1 through 7, 9.01, 10, 12, and 15; Block 606, Lots 3, 4, 5, and 8;
and Block 708, Lots 2.01, 3 through 7, 8.01, 10, 11.01, 13, 14, and
16.01.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Mixed-Use
Overlay District:
(1) All uses permitted in the underlying zone;
(2) Professional offices;
(3) Multifamily residential developments.
C. Development standards. Development occurring in the mixed-use
overlay district shall comply with the bulk and yard standards of the
underlying zone district.
334. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIA, Lodging Overlay District, added 7-9-1991 by Ord. No.
4155, was repealed 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842.
§ 170-195.1 WELLS § 170-195.1.1
614:1183

ARTICLE XXIB
Planned Development Option in I Industrial District
[Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380]
§ 170-195.2. Purpose.
The purpose of the planned development option is to provide for the reuse
of underutilized industrially zoned lands while protecting adjacent areas.
The provisions and regulations set forth herein provide for commercial
development, in accordance with an alternative zone plan to be approved
by the Planning Board.
§ 170-195.3. Standards for type, density or intensity of use.
Overall standards for a planned development shall be as follows:
§ 170-195.4. Deviations within planned developments.
Within a planned development, areas may be delineated and classified
for development on the land use map in accordance with the following
standards:
A. The option may be exercised for any properties in the areas designated
I Industrial.
B. Principal, accessory and conditional land uses shall be limited to the
enumerated optional zones.
C. The plan shall provide for a tract area of not less than five acres of land,
wholly or partially within the I Industrial District, to be developed as a
single entity. [Amended 11-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4419]
D. Gross density/intensity shall be limited to the maximums stated below,
provided that the entire area of the tract is improvable and shall be
reduced where said area is found to be less.
E. The plan shall provide that the floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.75:1
for all buildings and structures as determined by the sum of all building
floors, including garages, divided by the gross tract area.
F. The plan shall provide that the aggregate floor area of all buildings,
excluding garages, within the planned development shall not exceed
0.5 square foot of floor area per square foot of gross tract area.
A. Any combination of the optional zones enumerated, provided that:
(1) Commercial traffic can be reasonably linked to the regional
roadway system without traffic hazards or congestion.
(2) Commercial traffic can be reasonably linked to the regional
roadway system without exposure to industrial fire or explosion
risks.
§ 170-195.2 WELLS § 170-195.4
614:1185
§ 170-195.5. Approval process.
The Planning Board is authorized to approve planned developments in order
to promote flexibility in the arrangement of land uses in accordance with
this article and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and to grant
approvals to general development plans consistent with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
(3) Commercial land uses can be reasonably buffered from exposure to
industrial fire or explosion risks.
B. The optional districts for which I Industrial District lands may be
mapped shall be as follows: BA, BB or BC Business or I Industrial.
[Amended 11-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4419]
C. Bulk standards. The standards for the design, bulk and location of
buildings shall be in accordance with the bulk standards for the
optional zones delineated and classified for development on the land
use map for the planned development. Additional requirements shall be
as follows:
(1) Buffers not less than 25 feet in width shall separate residential
development from nonresidential development.
A. Prior to granting approval to any planned development, the Planning
Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
B. Site plans for planned developments shall conform to the requirements
for conventional site plans as well as to the requirements for planned
developments. In the event of a conflict, the planned development
§ 170-195.4 UNION CODE § 170-195.5
614:1186
requirements shall supersede site plan requirements. The following
additional requirements shall be satisfied prior to final approval:
(1) The staging proposals for any planned development shall ensure
that each stage shall encompass a balanced mix of land uses in
proportion to the mix for the entire development and that each
stage shall provide for completion of all streets, utilities and
services necessary for the section whether located within or
outside the section.
(2) The Planning Board may authorize a greater concentration of
density or intensity within a stage but only where offset by a lesser
concentration in any completed prior stages or offset by an
appropriate reservation of open space on the remaining land by
grant of easement or covenant in favor of the municipality.
(3) The legal documents proposed to provide for deed restrictions,
cross access agreements and cross maintenance agreements have
been submitted and found to satisfactorily provide for the public's
interests.
(4) All open space created shall be set aside as a separate parcel and
maintained for the benefit of the owners and/or residents of the
development in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(5) Subdivision plats for planned developments shall conform to the
requirements for conventional subdivision plats as well as to the
requirements for planned developments. In the event of a conflict,
the planned development requirements shall supersede subdivision
plat requirements. The following additional requirements shall be
satisfied prior to preliminary approval:
(a) The staging proposals for any planned development shall
ensure that each stage shall encompass a balanced mix of land
uses in proportion to the mix for the entire development and
that each stage shall provide for completion of all streets,
utilities and services necessary for the section whether located
within or outside the section.
(b) The Planning Board may authorize a greater concentration of
density or intensity within a stage but only where offset by a
lesser concentration in any completed prior stages or offset by
an appropriate reservation of open space on the remaining
land by grant of easement or covenant in favor of the
municipality.
(c) The legal documents proposed to provide for deed restrictions,
cross access agreements and cross maintenance agreements
have been submitted and found to satisfactorily provide for the
public's interests.
§ 170-195.5 WELLS § 170-195.5
614:1187
§ 170-195.6. Alternatives to conventional development.
As an alternative to conventional development, the Planning Board may
authorize planned developments for areas designated PD in accordance
with plans and proposals which conform to the requirements of this section.
The standards herein establish the limits of discretionary action which
may be taken by the approving authority administering these provisions.
(d) All open space created shall be set aside as a separate parcel
and maintained for the benefit of the owners and/or occupants
of the development in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(e) The Planning Board shall determine the appropriateness of
proposed dedications of open space prior to granting
subdivision approval. Unless dedicated for public use,
organizations shall be established for the ownership and
maintenance of all open space parcels.
[1] The developer shall provide for an organization pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 for the ownership and maintenance
of open space created under a planned development.
[2] Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not
dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to
an organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the open space for the benefit of such
development, and thereafter such organization shall not
be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space without
first offering to dedicate the same to the municipality.
[3] All owners of property within a planned development shall
be required to become members of the owners association
charged with ownership and maintenance of open space
and other common facilities. All properties shall include a
provision in their deeds requiring membership in the
homeowners' association. This requirement shall pass
from owner to owner as a deed restriction.
[4] The legal documents proposed in the establishment of the
required owners association shall have been submitted
and found to conform with the objectives of the plans and
proposals for the planned development and the intent of
this article.
[5] The plat shall contain specifics of the enabling declaration
dealing with the title to the common property, the granting
of easements of enjoyment, an indication as to whether the
designated areas are dedicated for use by the general
public or they are, or are intended to be, conveyed to an
association.
§ 170-195.5 UNION CODE § 170-195.6
614:1188
No deviation from these standards may be granted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.
A. Standards for type, density or intensity of use. Planned developments
may be approved by the Planning Board in conformity with the
standards governing the type and density or intensity of use set forth by
this subsection and those set forth for each PD designated area.
(1) The minimum tract size shall be five acres.
(2) All lands remaining outside of public streets, building lots and any
other parcels approved for special purposes shall be set aside as
open space. The boundaries of any open space parcels shall be
designed to coincide with adjoining open space parcels, whether
existing or proposed, so as to extend and expand upon an overall
open space network.
(3) Variations of standards. The type and density or intensity shall be
varied from that otherwise permitted within a planned
development in consideration of the amount, location and proposed
use of common open space; the location and physical
characteristics of the site; and the location, design and type of
dwelling units and other uses as set forth by this subsection.
(a) Gross density/intensity shall be reduced in direct proportion to
the extent that the improvable area of the tract is less than the
minimum established for the PD designated area.
(b) Gross density shall be reduced in direct proportion to the
extent that the site is to be developed for nonresidential uses,
other than open space, for each PD designated area.
B. Deviations within planned developments. Within planned
developments, deviations in the standards for type, density or intensity
of use may be authorized by the Planning Board by designating areas to
be developed under different standards in accordance with the
limitations set forth by this subsection and those set forth for each PD
designated area.
(1) A land use map delineating and classifying areas for each variation
shall be established for all planned developments. Land use maps
shall be approved where the Planning Board finds the following
requirements to be satisfied:
(a) The land use proposals are consistent with the policies
articulated in the adopted Master Plan as relates to land use,
community facilities and housing.
(b) The open space proposals protect any special environmental
features by preserving land in an open undeveloped state and
create suitable areas for organized outdoor recreation and are
§ 170-195.6 WELLS § 170-195.6
614:1189
consistent with the policies articulated in the adopted Master
Plan as relates to open space and environmental features.
(c) The circulation proposals provide for a closed traffic
circulation system, provide a pedestrian path network linking
all parts of the development and are consistent with the
policies articulated in the circulation element of the adopted
Master Plan.
(d) The utilities proposals are consistent with the policies
articulated in the adopted Master Plan as relates to
stormwater management, utilities, local services and fiscal
impact on the county, municipality and special districts,
including the local school district.
(e) The overall proposals are consistent, inasmuch as is
reasonably practicable, with other existing, planned or
potential developments.
(2) Classifications for land use areas shall correspond with the optional
zone classifications enumerated for each PD designated area.
Substitute classifications may be approved by the Planning Board
to accommodate substitute bulk standards and shall be consistent
with this section as follows:
(a) Substitute classifications shall provide for the type, density or
intensity of use.
(b) Substitute classifications shall provide uniform standards
which are of equal stringency for the type, density or intensity
of use.
(c) Substitute classifications shall provide standards which are
consistent with the limitations established for the PD
designated area.
(3) Bulk standards.
(a) The standards for the design, bulk and location of buildings for
planned developments shall be evaluated by the Planning
Board and approved where they are found to be in conformity
with the regulations set forth by this subsection and those set
forth for each PD designated area.
(b) The standards employed shall be those standards for the zones
which correspond to the land use classifications established for
each delineated land use area. The Planning Board may
approve substitute bulk standards as follows:
[1] Substitute bulk standards shall provide for minimum lot
area, width and depth; minimum setbacks along streets
and other lot lines; maximum lot coverage; maximum floor
area ratio; minimum improvable tract area and general
§ 170-195.6 UNION CODE § 170-195.6
614:1190
design standards for multifamily residential development;
exceptions for accessory buildings; requirements for
parking, landscaping, lighting and other improvements.
[2] Substitute bulk standards shall provide standards which
are of equal or greater stringency to the corresponding
zones with respect to minimum lot area; maximum
building height measured in feet and stories; maximum
floor area ratio; and minimum improvable tract area for
multifamily residential development.
[3] The Planning Board notify the governing body and Tax
Assessor, by adopted resolution, within five days of
approval, of the approval of substitute bulk standards for
any planned development.
(4) Zoning. Changes in zoning effectuated through the planned
development approval shall be recorded on the Zoning Map.
(a) Upon approval, the area comprising an approved planned
development shall be delineated along with the name and date
of approval of the proposed planned development on the
Zoning Map.
(b) The zoning standards shall be recorded through deed
restrictions upon final approval, and the Zoning Map shall be
periodically amended to reflect the completion of sections of a
planned development.
(5) Plans. Development shall be in conformity with site plans,
subdivisions and any general development plan as approved by the
Planning Board.
§ 170-195.6 WELLS § 170-195.6
614:1191

ARTICLE XXIC
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 4532]
§ 170-195.7. Purpose; applicability; standards.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of these regulations for the siting of wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas is to:
(a) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas.
(b) Encourage the location of towers in appropriate locations.
(c) Minimize the total number of towers throughout Union
Township.
(d) Strongly encourage the joint use of approved tower facilities as
a primary option rather than construction of new or additional
single-use towers.
(e) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal.
(f) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening
and innovative camouflaging techniques.
(g) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently.
(h) Consider the public health and safety of communication
towers.
(i) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower
structures.
(2) In furtherance of these goals, Union Township shall give due
consideration to the Township Master Plan, Zoning Map, existing
land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for
the location of towers and antennas.
B. Nonapplicability to amateur radio stations and to receive-only
antennas. The provisions of this section shall not govern any antenna
that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio
station operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna in
accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
§ 170-195.7 WELLS § 170-195.7
614:1193
C. Antennas and towers permitted on Township property. Wireless
communications towers and antennas which are located on property
owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Township of Union and
which are approved by the Township Committee shall be deemed to be
permitted as a municipal facility in any zone district.
D. Antennas and towers which are not municipal facilities. Wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas are permitted in the I
Industrial Zone on nonmunicipal property upon submission and
approval of a minor site plan by the Planning Board in accordance with
the regulations set forth below:
(1) General requirements.
(a) Principal or accessory use. Wireless telecommunications
towers and antennas may be considered either principal or
accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure
on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot.
(b) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation
of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements,
lot coverage requirements and other such requirements, the
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within
such lot.
(c) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/
or tower shall provide to the Township as part of the
application an inventory of its existing towers and antennas, or
sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within
the jurisdiction of Union Township or within one mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height and design of each tower. The Township may
share such information with other applicants applying for
approvals under this section or other organizations seeking to
locate antennas within the jurisdiction of Union Township;
provided, however, that the Township is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such
sites are available or suitable.
(d) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
[1] Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted
a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
[2] At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials,
§ 170-195.7 UNION CODE § 170-195.7
614:1194
colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend
them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
[3] If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower,
the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(e) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must
cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
(f) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and
any other agency of the state or federal government with the
authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards
and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers
and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers
and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense.
(g) Uniform Construction Code; safety standards. To ensure the
structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall
ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards
contained in applicable state and local codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to
time. If, upon inspection, the Township concludes that a tower
fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30
days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(h) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks
and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to
facilities located in Union Township irrespective of municipal
and county jurisdictional boundaries.
§ 170-195.7 WELLS § 170-195.7
614:1195
(i) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas
shall certify that all franchises required by law for the
construction and/or operation of a wireless communication
system in Union Township have been obtained and shall file a
copy of all required franchises with the Township.
(j) Public notice. For purposes of this section, any variance
request shall require public notice in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(k) Signs. No advertising signs shall be allowed on an antenna or
tower.
(l) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply
with the requirements of § 170-195.7D(2).
(m) Multiple antenna/tower plan. Union Township encourages the
users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for
approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications
for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the
review process.
(n) Maximum height.
[1] The tower shall meet the following maximum height and
usage criteria:
[a] For a single user: up to 90 feet in height.
[b] For two users: up to 120 feet in height.
[c] For three or more users: up to 150 feet in height.
[2] A licensed New Jersey professional engineer must certify
that the tower can structurally accommodate the number
of shared users proposed by the applicant.
(o) Information required. In addition to any information required
for applications for site plan review pursuant to this chapter,
applicants for approval for a tower shall submit the following
information:
[1] A location plan drawn to scale and clearly indicating the
location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site
land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning
(including when adjacent to other municipalities), Master
Plan classification of the site and all properties within the
applicable separation distances set forth in
§ 170-195.7D(1)(s), adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed tower and any other structures, topography
and parking.
§ 170-195.7 UNION CODE § 170-195.7
614:1196
[2] Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
[3] The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
[4] The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to
§ 170-195.7D(1)(c) shall be shown on an updated site plan
or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
[5] A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
[6] Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
[7] A description of compliance with Subsection D(1)(c), (d),
(e), (f), (g), (j), (l), (m), (r), (s) and all applicable federal,
state or local laws.
[8] A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
[9] Identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the municipality.
[10] A description of the unsuitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
tower.
[11] A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Township based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event that the proposed tower is erected.
(p) Factors considered in granting approval for towers. In addition
to any standards for consideration of site plans pursuant to this
chapter, the municipal agency shall consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue an approval:
[1] Height of the proposed tower.
[2] Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential district boundaries.
§ 170-195.7 WELLS § 170-195.7
614:1197
[3] Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
[4] Surrounding topography.
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
[6] Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
[7] Proposed ingress and egress.
[8] Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in § 170-195.7D(1)(q) of this
chapter.
(q) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of
the municipal agency that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers
or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by
the municipal agency related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the
following:
[1] No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
[2] Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
[3] Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support the applicant's proposed
antenna and related equipment.
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing towers or structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
[5] The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
§ 170-195.7 UNION CODE § 170-195.7
614:1198
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
[7] The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures, such
as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
(r) Minimum required setback. The following minimum setback
requirements shall apply to all towers for which site plan
approval is required:
[1] Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100%
of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line, but in
no event shall the tower be located in the minimum
required yard area or buffer area of the zone district.
[2] Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback and buffer requirements.
(s) Minimum separation requirement between uses. The following
separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas
for which site plan approval is required:
[1] Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[a] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or
designated areas as specified in Subsection
D(1)(s)[1][b], below, except as otherwise provided.
[b] Towers shall maintain a separation distance of 750
feet from residential dwelling units or from lands
zoned for residential use. [Amended 2-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 4536]
[2] Separation distances between towers. Separation
distances between towers shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed tower and preexisting
towers or other proposed towers. The separation distances
shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line
between the base of the existing tower and the proposed
base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as
shown below in the table of required separation distances
between towers.
§ 170-195.7 WELLS § 170-195.7
614:1199
SCHEDULE 2
REQUIRED SEPARATION DISTANCES BETWEEN
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
Tower
Type
Lattice
(linear
feet)
Guyed
(linear
feet)
Monopole
75 Feet
in Height
or
Greater
(linear
feet)
Monopole
Less
Than 75
Feet in
Height
(linear
feet)
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole
75 feet in
height or
greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole
less than
75 feet in
height
750 750 750 750
(t) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with
an appropriate anticlimbing device; provided, however, that
the municipal agency may waive such requirements, as it
deems appropriate.
(u) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which site plan approval is
required; provided, however, that the municipal agency may
waive such requirements if the goals of this section would be
better served thereby:
[1] Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences.
[2] In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
[3] Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
(v) In approving the tower the municipal agency may impose
conditions, including the use of an alternative tower structure,
§ 170-195.7 UNION CODE § 170-195.7
614:1200
to the extent the municipal agency concludes such conditions
are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties.
(2) Buildings or other equipment storage.
(a) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall
comply with the following:
[1] The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are
less than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned
equipment structure, if over 200 square feet of gross floor
area or 10 feet in height, shall be located on the ground
and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
[2] If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a
building, the area of the equipment structure and other
equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 10%
of the roof area.
[3] Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with
all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas located on towers, utility poles or light poles. The
related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more
than 200 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet
in height and shall be located in accordance with the minimum
yard and buffer requirements of the zoning district in which
located and shall be screened from view of all residential
properties.
(3) Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower
that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower
shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Township of Union notifying the owner of such abandonment.
Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90
days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower,
then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
using the tower.
(4) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance is
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
§ 170-195.7 WELLS § 170-195.7
614:1201

ARTICLE XXID
Affordable Housing
[Added 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 5163]
§ 170-195.8. Affordable housing obligation.
§ 170-195.9. Inclusionary zoning.
A. The Union Township Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. The Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by the
Township governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes the ways the
Township of Union shall address its fair share for low- and moderateincome
housing as determined by the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) and as documented in the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan. COAH has granted substantive certification to the Township
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan addressing the Township prior
round and the Township third round fair share housing obligation.
B. This article implements the terms of the COAH substantive certification
and the Township Fair Share Plan for addressing the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:97 by incorporating the inclusionary zoning requirements
and the accessory apartment program of Chapter 150, the Township
Affordable Housing Ordinance, into the Township Land Development
Regulations.
A. Presumptive densities and set-asides. In any zone within the Township
that permits the minimum presumptive density pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:97-6.4, all residential development of four or more for-sale units or
five or more rental units shall be constructed as an inclusionary
development. To ensure the efficient use of land through compact forms
of development and to create realistic opportunities for the
construction of affordable housing, inclusionary zoning permits
minimum presumptive densities and presumptive maximum affordable
housing set-asides as follows:
(1) For-sale developments.
(a) Under COAH regulations, inclusionary zoning in State
Planning Area 1 permits residential development at a
presumptive minimum gross density of eight units per acre and
a presumptive maximum affordable housing set-aside of 25% of
the total number of units in the development.
(b) In the case of any development of for-sale units that includes
variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, Subdivision d,
at the minimum presumptive density, the required affordable
housing set-aside shall be 25% of the total number of units in
the development when four or more units are to be
constructed.
§ 170-195.8 WELLS § 170-195.9
614:1203
§ 170-195.10. Accessory apartment program.
(2) Rental developments.
(a) Under COAH regulations, inclusionary zoning permits a
presumptive minimum density of 12 units per acre and a
presumptive maximum affordable housing set-aside of 20% of
the total number of units in the development and the zoning
provides for at least 10% of the affordable units to be
affordable to households earning 30% or less of the area
median income for the COAH region.
(b) In the case of any development of rental units that includes
variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, Subdivision d,
at the minimum presumptive density, the required affordable
housing set-aside shall be 20% of the total number of units in
the development when five or more units are to be constructed.
B. Affordable housing regulations. All inclusionary development and
affordable housing units shall be subject to the applicable requirements
as set forth in the regulations and provisions of Chapter 150, Affordable
Housing.
A. Requirements. Accessory apartments are permitted as part of the
Township accessory apartment program in the areas specified.
Accessory apartment units shall be affordable to low- and moderateincome
households.
B. Permitted areas. Accessory apartments will be permitted within the
following areas: Block 4001, lots 3 through 6; Block 5806, lots 31.01
through 39; Block 5807, lots 43.01 though 56; Block 5807, lots 89
through 98; and Block 5823, lots 1 through 13.
C. Number of accessory apartments permitted. In no event shall the
Township permit a number of creditable accessory apartments that
exceeds the number of creditable accessory apartments in the
Township Master Plan Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
D. Affordable housing regulations. All accessory apartment units shall be
subject to the applicable requirements and conditions as set forth in the
regulations and provisions of Chapter 150, Affordable Housing.
Property owners wishing to apply to create an accessory apartment
shall submit an application to participate in the accessory apartment
program in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 150.
§ 170-195.9 UNION CODE § 170-195.10
614:1204
ARTICLE XXIE
Inclusionary Overlay Residential District
[Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5568]
§ 170-195.11. Purpose.
To address its affordable housing unmet need obligation, the Township
shall implement an Inclusionary Overlay Zone Ordinance that creates a
realistic opportunity for housing in the Township that is affordable to lowand
moderate-income households. This article establishes the Inclusionary
Overlay Residential Zone and permits the creation of multifamily housing
within certain areas, provided that such housing complies with a required
inclusionary set-aside requirement and with the requirements of this article.
§ 170-195.11.1. Location; requirements.
A. Location. The Inclusionary Overlay Residential District consists of the
following tax parcels: Block 5711, Lot 1, and Block 3303, Lot 8.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the
Inclusionary Overlay Residential District:
(1) Inclusionary multifamily development provided:
(a) The minimum percentage of very-low, low- and moderateincome
housing shall be 15% of the total number of dwelling
units for rental affordable units and 20% of the total number of
dwelling units for for-sale affordable units.
(b) In any multi-family development having five or more
residential units, at least one unit must be established as
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
(c) All affordable units produced in the Inclusionary Overlay
Residential District must comply with the Township's
Affordable Housing Ordinance.335
C. Accessory uses permitted. The following accessory uses and structures
shall be permitted in the IOR District, provided they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to,
any of the above permitted uses.
(2) Surface parking area, garages and parking structures.
(3) Swimming pools.
(4) Temporary construction trailers, leasing and/or sales offices.
335. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Affordable Housing.
§ 170-195.11 WELLS § 170-195.11.1
614:1205
(5) Utilities and related facilities.
(6) Flag poles, clock towers and statuary.
(7) Freestanding signs in conformance with Article XVII.
D. Design standards.
(1) Architectural design.
(a) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture of other multifamily
dwelling units in the Business Retail or Union Center
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing examples of and
comparisons with existing high-quality buildings within the
Business Retail or Union Center Business District.
(b) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square
feet shall be required to use architectural features that provide
variety and reduce the visual impact of the building mass,
through the use of varied facade materials, facade projections
and recesses, judicious use of windows, other openings in the
facade, and other similar features.
(c) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately
screened from view.
(2) Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to
include both interior and exterior common areas devoted to
recreational, social and similar functions for residents and their
guests, as set forth below:
(a) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
interior common areas, such as but not limited to meeting
rooms, community centers, fitness centers, indoor recreational
areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs,
elevators, entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical
space or office space and similar areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement.
(b) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such
areas may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on
the roof of the building. Lawn and landscaped areas shall not
count towards meeting this requirement unless such areas are
specifically designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
(3) Parking.
(a) Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only.
§ 170-195.11.1 UNION CODE § 170-195.11.1
614:1206
§ 170-195.11.2. Area bulk and dimensional regulations.
The bulk standards of the underlying zones shall be superseded by the
following standards for any new multifamily development, provided that it
conforms to the inclusionary set-aside standards of this article, as follows:
(b) Parking setbacks shall conform to the underlying district.
E. Performance standards.
(1) There must exist approved public water and public sewer systems
which shall be available to each unit prior to the issuance of the
building permit for that unit.
(2) All other applicable regulations of this Chapter 170 shall be
followed as required.
(3) For developments to be constructed over a period of years, a
phasing plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan for
the entire concept.
F. Affordable housing. All residential development shall be required to
include affordable housing as a component. The following requirements
shall apply:
(1) The minimum percentage of very-low, low- and moderate-income
housing shall be 15% of the total number of dwelling units for
rental affordable units and 20% of the total number of dwelling
units for for-sale affordable units.
(2) Very-low, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed
and rented in accordance with the Council on Affordable Housing
rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
including standards for the split between very-low, low- and
moderate-income housing, provided a minimum of 13% of the
affordable units are very-low-income units at 30% of the median
income and 37% of the affordable units are low-income units with
the fifty-percent balance of units allowed at moderate income;
bedroom distribution; range of affordability; pricing and rent of
units; affirmative marketing; thirty-year minimum affordability
controls and construction phasing with the market-rate units
developed on the tract.
(3) Affordable housing units shall not be age-restricted.
(4) The Township-designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall
be responsible to affirmatively market, administer and certify the
occupant of each affordable unit, with all administrative costs to be
paid by the developer.
A. Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet.
§ 170-195.11.1 WELLS § 170-195.11.2
614:1207
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Principal building setbacks:
(1) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(2) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
E. Accessory building setbacks:
(1) Side yard: 10 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 10 feet.
F. Maximum principal building height: three stories/35 feet.
G. Maximum accessory building height: 20 feet.
H. Maximum residential density:
(1) Block 5711, Lot 1: 20 units per acre.
(2) Block 3303, Lot 8: 35 units per acre.
I. Maximum building coverage: 35%.
J. Maximum impervious surfaces: 65%.
K. Transition buffer: 25 feet.
§ 170-195.11.2 UNION CODE § 170-195.11.2
614:1208
ARTICLE XXIF
Mixed-use Overlay District 2
[Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5567]
§ 170-195.12. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to permit the development of multifamily
residential and professional office uses in close proximity to Union Station
and Kean University to encourage land use compatibility, provide the
opportunity for the development of supportive land uses around Union
Station and to address the Township's affordable housing unmet need
obligation. The MUOD-2 District promotes affordable residential
development opportunities in close proximity to the train station or other
mixed-use areas along Morris Avenue.
§ 170-195.12.1. Location; requirements.
A. Location. The Mixed-Use Overlay 2 District consists of the following tax
parcels: Block 512, Lot 2.01, Block 606, Lots 4, 5, and 8, and Block
4401, Lot 1.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Mixed-Use
Overlay District 2:
(1) All uses permitted in the underlying zone;
(2) Professional offices;
(3) Inclusionary multifamily development, provided:
(a) The minimum percentage of very-low, low- and moderateincome
housing shall be 15% of the total number of dwelling
units for rental affordable units and 20% of the total number of
dwelling units for for-sale affordable units.
(b) In any multifamily development having five or more residential
units, at least one unit must be established as affordable to
low- and moderate-income households.
(c) All affordable units produced in the Inclusionary Overlay
Residential District must comply with the Township's
Affordable Housing Ordinance.336
C. Development standards.
D. Design standards.
(1) Architectural design.
(a) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
336. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Affordable Housing.
§ 170-195.12 WELLS § 170-195.12.1
614:1209
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture of other multifamily
dwelling units in the Business Retail or Union Center
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing examples of and
comparisons with existing high-quality buildings within the
Business Retail or Union Center Business District.
(b) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to
use architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied
rooflines, decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet
heights and similar features designed to provide variety and
reduce the visual impact of the building height. In order to
accommodate such features, the height of such features shall
not exceed the maximum permitted building height by more
than eight feet.
(c) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square
feet shall be required to use architectural features that provide
variety and reduce the visual impact of the building mass,
through the use of varied façade materials, façade projections
and recesses, judicious use of windows, other openings in the
façade, and other similar features.
(d) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately
screened from view.
(2) Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to
include both interior and exterior common areas devoted to
recreational, social and similar functions for residents and their
guests, as set forth below:
(a) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
interior common areas, such as but not limited to meeting
rooms, community centers, fitness centers, indoor recreational
areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs,
elevators, entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical
space or office space and similar areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement.
(b) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such
areas may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on
the roof of the building. Lawn and landscaped areas shall not
count towards meeting this requirement unless such areas are
specifically designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
(3) Parking.
(a) Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only.
§ 170-195.12.1 UNION CODE § 170-195.12.1
614:1210
§ 170-195.12.2. Area bulk and dimensional regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
(b) Parking setbacks shall conform to § 170-239E(1) for the BB
District.
E. Performance standards.
(1) There must exist approved public water and public sewer systems
which shall be available to each unit prior to the issuance of the
building permit for that unit.
(2) All other applicable regulations of this Chapter 170 shall be
followed as required.
(3) For developments to be constructed over a period of years, a
phasing plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan for
the entire concept.
F. Affordable housing. All residential development shall be required to
include affordable housing as a component. The following requirements
shall apply:
(1) The minimum percentage of very-low, low- and moderate-income
housing shall be 15% of the total number of dwelling units for
rental affordable units and 20% of the total number of dwelling
units for for-sale affordable units.
(2) Very-low, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed
and rented in accordance with the Council on Affordable Housing
rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UI-IAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
including standards for the split between very-low, low and
moderate-income housing, provided a minimum of 13% of the
affordable units are very-low-income units at 30% of the median
income and 37% of the affordable units are low-income units with
the fifty-percent balance of units allowed at moderate income;
bedroom distribution; range of affordability; pricing and rent of
units; affirmative marketing; 30-year minimum affordability
controls and construction phasing with the market rate units
developed on the tract.
(3) Affordable housing units shall not be age-restricted.
(4) The Township-designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall
be responsible to affirmatively market, administer and certify the
occupant of each affordable unit, with all administrative costs to be
paid by the developer.
A. Minimum lot size: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: --.
§ 170-195.12.1 WELLS § 170-195.12.2
614:1211
C. Minimum lot depth: --.
D. Principal building setbacks:
(1) Front yard: zero feet minimum; 15 feet maximum from front lot
line.
(2) Side yard: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: zero feet.
E. Accessory building setbacks:
(1) Side yard: 10 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 10 feet.
F. Maximum principal building height: four stories/45 feet.
G. Maximum accessory building height: 20 feet.
H. Maximum residential density: 35 units per acre.
I. Maximum building coverage: 50%.
J. Maximum impervious surfaces: 80%.
K. Maximum floor area ratio: 150%.
§ 170-195.12.2 UNION CODE § 170-195.12.2
614:1212
ARTICLE XXIG
Affordable Housing-2 (AH-2) District
[Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 5565]
§ 170-195.13. Purpose.
The AH-2 District is intended to promote the development that supports
and is consistent with the commercial development pattern surrounding the
train station and to accommodate multifamily housing with a portion of such
housing restricted to households of very-low, low- and moderate-income.
§ 170-195.13.1. Design standards.
A. Architectural design.
(1) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture of other
multifamily dwelling units in the Business Retail, Union Center
Business or the Union Station District. The applicant for any
development shall demonstrate such design by providing examples
of and comparisons with existing high-quality buildings within the
Business Retail, Union Center Business or the Union Station
District.
(2) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to use
architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied rooflines,
decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet heights and similar
features designed to provide variety and reduce the visual impact
of the building height. In order to accommodate such features, the
height of such features shall not exceed the maximum permitted
building height by more than eight feet.
(3) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square feet
shall be required to use architectural features that provide variety
and reduce the visual impact of the building mass, through the use
of varied façade materials, façade projections and recesses,
judicious use of windows, other openings in the façade, and other
similar features.
(4) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened
from view.
B. Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to
include both interior and exterior common areas devoted to
recreational, social and similar functions for residents and their guests,
as set forth below:
(1) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to interior
common areas, such as but not limited to meeting rooms,
community centers, fitness centers, indoor recreational areas,
§ 170-195.13 WELLS § 170-195.13.1
614:1213
§ 170-195.13.2. Performance standards.
§ 170-195.13.3. Affordable housing.
All residential development shall be required to include affordable housing
as a component. The following requirements shall apply:
lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs, elevators,
entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical space or office
space and similar areas shall not count towards meeting this
requirement.
(2) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such areas
may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on the roof of
the building. Lawn and landscaped areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement unless such areas are specifically
designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
C. Parking.
(1) Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only, and/or
beneath the principal building or buildings.
(2) Parking setbacks shall conform to § 170-239E(1) for the BB
District.
A. There must exist approved public water and public sewer systems
which shall be available to each unit prior to the issuance of the
building permit for that unit.
B. All other applicable regulations of this Chapter 170 shall be followed as
required.
C. For developments to be constructed over a period of years, a phasing
plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan for the entire
concept.
A. The minimum percentage of very-low, low- and moderate-income
housing shall be 15% of the total number of dwelling units for rental
affordable units and 20% of the total number of dwelling units for forsale
affordable units.
B. Very-low, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed and
rented in accordance with the Council on Affordable Housing rules at
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. including standards for the split
between very-low, low- and moderate-income housing, provided a
minimum of 13% of the affordable units are very-low-income units at
30% of the median income and 37% of the affordable units are lowincome
units with the fifty-percent balance of units allowed at moderate
§ 170-195.13.1 UNION CODE § 170-195.13.3
614:1214
§ 170-195.13.4. Area bulk and dimensional regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
income; bedroom distribution; range of affordability; pricing and rent of
units; affirmative marketing; thirty-year minimum affordability controls
and construction phasing with the market-rate units developed on the
tract.
C. Affordable housing units shall be affordable family rentals and shall not
be age-restricted.
D. The Township-designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall be
responsible to affirmatively market, administer and certify the occupant
of each affordable unit, with all administrative costs to be paid by the
developer.
A. Minimum lot size: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: --.
C. Minimum lot depth: --.
D. Principal building setbacks:
(1) Front yard:
(a) From Lehigh Avenue: 12 feet minimum from curb; 15 feet
maximum from front lot line.
(b) From Morris Avenue: zero feet minimum; 15 feet maximum
from front lot line.
(2) Side yard: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: zero feet.
E. Accessory building setbacks:
(1) Side yard: 10 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 10 feet.
F. Maximum principal building height: 6 stories/75 feet.
G. Maximum accessory building height: 20 feet.
H. Maximum residential density: 35 units per acre.
I. Maximum building coverage: 90%.
J. Maximum impervious surfaces: 95%
K. Maximum floor area ratio: 400%.
§ 170-195.13.3 WELLS § 170-195.13.4
614:1215

ARTICLE XXIH
Affordable Housing-3 (AH-3) District.
§ 170-195.14. Purpose.
The AH-3 District is intended to promote the development of multifamily
housing with a portion of such housing restricted to households of verylow,
low- and moderate-income including the option of having a commercial
component along Morris Avenue.
§ 170-195.14.1. Design standards.
A. Architectural design.
(1) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture of other multifamily
dwelling units in the Business Retail or Union Center
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing examples of and
comparisons with existing high-quality buildings within the
Business Retail or Union Center Business District.
(2) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to use
architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied rooflines,
decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet heights and similar
features designed to provide variety and reduce the visual impact
of the building height. In order to accommodate such features, the
height of such features shall not exceed the maximum permitted
building height by more than eight feet.
(3) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square feet
shall be required to use architectural features that provide variety
and reduce the visual impact of the building mass, through the use
of varied façade materials, façade projections and recesses,
judicious use of windows, other openings in the façade, and other
similar features.
(4) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened
from view.
B. Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to
include both interior and exterior common areas devoted to
recreational, social and similar functions for residents and their guests,
as set forth below:
(1) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to interior
common areas, such as but not limited to meeting rooms,
community centers, fitness centers, indoor recreational areas,
lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs, elevators,
entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical space or office
§ 170-195.14 WELLS § 170-195.14.1
614:1217
§ 170-195.14.2. Performance standards.
§ 170-195.14.3. Affordable housing.
All residential development shall be required to include affordable housing
as a component. The following requirements shall apply:
space and similar areas shall not count towards meeting this
requirement.
(2) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such areas
may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on the roof of
the building. Lawn and landscaped areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement unless such areas are specifically
designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
C. Parking.
(1) Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only.
(2) Parking setbacks shall conform to § 170-239E(1) for the BB
District, except for when a greater transition buffer is required
pursuant to § 170-239O(1).
A. There must exist approved public water and public sewer systems
which shall be available to each unit prior to the issuance of the
building permit for that unit.
B. All other applicable regulations of this Chapter 170 shall be followed as
required.
C. For developments to be constructed over a period of years, a phasing
plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan for the entire
concept.
A. The minimum percentage of very-low, low- and moderate-income
housing shall be 15% of the total number of dwelling units for rental
affordable units and 20% of the total number of dwelling units for forsale
affordable units.
B. Very-low, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed and
rented in accordance with the Council on Affordable Housing rules at
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including standards for the split
between very-low, low- and moderate-income housing, provided a
minimum of 13% of the affordable units are very-low-income units at
30% of the median income and 37% of the affordable units are lowincome
units with the fifty-percent balance of units allowed at moderate
income; bedroom distribution; range of affordability; pricing and rent of
units; affirmative marketing; thirty-year minimum affordability controls
§ 170-195.14.1 UNION CODE § 170-195.14.3
614:1218
§ 170-195.14.4. Area bulk and dimensional regulations
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
and construction phasing with the market-rate units developed on the
tract.
C. Affordable housing units shall be affordable family rentals and shall not
be age-restricted.
D. The Township-designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall be
responsible to affirmatively market, administer and certify the occupant
of each affordable unit, with all administrative costs to be paid by the
developer.
A. Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Principal building setbacks:
(1) Front yard:
(a) From Liberty/Grandview Avenue: 20 feet minimum.
(b) From Morris Avenue/Stowe Street: 10 feet minimum; 25 feet
maximum.
(2) Side yard: 20 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 20 feet.
E. Accessory building setbacks:
(1) Side yard: 10 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 10 feet.
F. Maximum principal building height: four stories/45 feet
G. Maximum accessory building height: 20 feet.
H. Maximum residential density:
(1) 1900 Morris Avenue parcel (Block 2906, Lot 17): 28 units per acre.
(2) Grandview/Miele Avenue parcel: 28 units per acre.
I. Maximum building coverage: 35%.
J. Maximum impervious surfaces: 65%.
K. Transition buffer: 25 feet.
§ 170-195.14.3 WELLS § 170-195.14.4
614:1219

ARTICLE XXI-I
Affordable Housing-1 (AH-1) District
§ 170-195.15. Applicability.
The use, bulk, design and performance standards shall supersede and
replace the zoning provisions of the Union Township Land Development
Ordinance for Block 4303, Lot 17. In any instance in which these
regulations and standards do not address a particular land development
control, or when specific reference to the LDO is made, the standards of the
Land Development Ordinance shall apply.
§ 170-195.15.1. Purpose.
The AH-1 District is intended to promote the development of multifamily
housing, with a portion of such housing restricted to households of verylow,
low- and moderate-income. The standards for the zone are intended
to accommodate a specific type and density of housing consistent with the
concept site plans and architectural elevations (Exhibit A, Reuse Scheme
and Exhibit B, Tear Down Scheme337) and to provide a compensatory benefit
to the developer of affordable housing.
§ 170-195.15.2. Design standards.
A. Architectural design. The design of the apartment building shall be
substantially consistent with the Exhibit A,338 contained herein, entitled
"Reuse Scheme," architectural elevation and floor plans, including the
proposed architectural treatment to adequately screen the HVAC and
mechanical equipment from all ground view sight lines if the existing
building will be retained and renovated to accommodate the residential
use. If the existing building will not be retained and a new building
constructed in accordance with Exhibit B (Tear Down Scheme),339 the
following architectural design standards shall apply:
(1) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture of other multifamily
dwelling units in the Business Retail or Union Center
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing examples of and
comparisons with existing high-quality buildings within the
Business Retail or Union Center Business District.
(2) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to use
architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied rooflines,
decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet heights and similar
features designed to provide variety and reduce the visual impact
337. Editor's Note: Exhibit A and Exhibit B are on file in the Township offices.
338. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
339. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 170-195.15 WELLS § 170-195.15.2
614:1221
of the building height. In order to accommodate such features, the
height of such features shall not exceed the maximum permitted
building height by more than eight feet.
(3) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square feet
shall be required to use architectural features that provide variety
and reduce the visual impact of the building mass, through the use
of varied façade materials, façade projections and recesses,
judicious use of windows, other openings in the façade, and other
similar features.
(4) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened
from view.
B. Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to
include both interior and exterior common areas devoted to
recreational, social and similar functions for residents and their guests,
as follows:
(1) New building construction. At least 40 square feet per dwelling
unit shall be devoted to interior common areas, such as but not
limited to meeting rooms, community centers, fitness centers,
indoor recreational areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as
hallways, stairs, elevators, entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas,
mechanical space or office space and similar areas shall not count
towards meeting this requirement.
(2) Existing building repurpose. At least 20 square feet per dwelling
unit shall be devoted to interior common areas, such as but not
limited to meeting rooms, community centers, fitness centers,
indoor recreational areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as
hallways, stairs, elevators, entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas,
mechanical space or office space and similar areas shall not count
towards meeting this requirement.
(3) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such areas
may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on the roof of
the building. Lawn and landscaped areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement unless such areas are specifically
designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
C. Parking.
(1) Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only, and/or
beneath the principal building or buildings.
(2) Parking setbacks shall conform to the following:
(a) Minimum setback from building: five feet.
(b) Minimum setback from streets: 10 feet.
§ 170-195.15.2 UNION CODE § 170-195.15.2
614:1222
§ 170-195.15.3. Performance standards.
§ 170-195.15.4. Affordable housing.
All residential development shall be required to include affordable housing
as a component. The following requirements shall apply:
§ 170-195.15.5. Area bulk and dimensional regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
(c) Minimum setback from property line shall be five feet.
However, a setback of zero feet is permitted if an adequate
screening device, as determined by the approving authority,
such as a fence or wall is provided between the property line
and the parking area.
(d) Minimum setback from residential zones: 10 feet.
A. There shall exist approved public water and public sewer systems
which shall be available to each unit prior to the issuance of the
building permit for that unit.
B. For developments to be constructed over a period of years, a phasing
plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan for the entire
concept.
A. The minimum percentage of very-low, low- and moderate-income
housing shall be 20% of the total number of dwelling units.
B. Very-low, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed and
rented in accordance with the Council on Affordable Housing rules at
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including standards for the split
between very-low, low- and moderate-income housing, provided a
minimum of 13% of the affordable units are very-low-income units at
30% of the median income and 37% of the affordable units are lowincome
units with the (up to) fifty-percent balance of units allowed at
moderate income; bedroom distribution; range of affordability; pricing
and rent of units; affirmative marketing; thirty-year minimum
affordability controls and construction phasing with the market-rate
units developed on the tract.
C. Affordable housing units shall be affordable family rentals and shall not
be age-restricted.
D. The Township-designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall be
responsible to affirmatively market, administer and certify the occupant
of each affordable unit, with all administrative costs to be paid by the
developer.
A. Minimum lot size shall be the tract area for Block 4303, Lot 17.
§ 170-195.15.2 WELLS § 170-195.15.5
614:1223
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Principal building setbacks:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet.
(2) Side yard: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 10 feet.
E. Accessory building setbacks:
(1) Side yard: 10 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 5 feet.
F. Maximum principal building height: four stories and 55 feet.
G. Maximum accessory building height shall not exceed 15 feet, except for
clubhouses which shall not exceed 27 feet.
H. Maximum residential density shall not exceed 34.6 units per acre or 64
units whichever is less.
I. Maximum building coverage: 50%.
J. Maximum impervious surfaces: 85%.
§ 170-195.15.5 UNION CODE § 170-195.15.5
614:1224
Part 4
Development Application Review
ARTICLE XXII
Required Approvals; Filing Procedures
§ 170-196. Subdivisions. [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575]
Prior to the subdivision or resubdivision of land, application for subdivision
approval shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the requirements of this
Part 4. When reviewing an application for residential development, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall comply with the
procedures and standards contained in the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards prepared in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55-40.4
and contained in the New Jersey Administrative Code under N.J.A.C. 5:21,
effective June 3, 1997, which are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 170-197. Site plans. [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4575;
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 4846]
Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, certificate of occupancy,
conditional use or other permit as may be required, application for site
plan approval shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board
in accordance with the requirements of this Part 4, except that subdivision
or individual lot applications for detached one- or two-family dwelling unit
buildings shall be exempt from site plan review and approval. Specifically,
site plan approval shall be required for any new building or conditional
use, any addition to an existing building, any change in use and any offstreet
parking area or alteration of or addition to any existing parking
lot. Site plan approval shall not be required for any change in use within
the UCBD Zone, provided the proposed use is a permitted use within the
zone. Site plan approval shall not be required for the installation and/or
replacement of underground fuel and oil tanks when no additional site
construction is proposed. The installation and/or replacement of said tanks
shall require a construction permit and shall be constructed in accordance
with all applicable regulations and codes.
§ 170-198. Board of Adjustment review.
In the event that the subdivision or site plan application requires action by
the Board of Adjustment as provided in this chapter, said application shall
be submitted to and processed by said Board, which shall act in the same
manner as the Planning Board as provided in this Part 4.
§ 170-199. Submission of conceptual plan.
At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The developer shall
§ 170-196 WELLS § 170-199
614:1225
not be required to submit any fees for such an informal review. The
developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review is
requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by any such review.
§ 170-200. Filing requirements; contents of application.
A. The applicant shall submit one copy of the development application
forms signed by the Zoning Officer and one set of plans, together with
stormwater calculations and sanitary sewer developmental impact
assessment form and a detailed narrative of proposed use, for
completeness review. When advised, in writing, by the Planning Board
Clerk that the application is complete, the following items must be
submitted, at which time an application number and hearing date will
be set.
B. An application for development shall include the following:
(1) Development application master form (all submissions).
(2) Development application: major and minor subdivisions.
(3) Development application: site plan approval.
(4) Development application: variance relief. All variances must be
listed by section number.
(5) Development application: conditional use approval.
(6) Stormwater detention calculation form.
(7) Sanitary sewer developmental impact assessment form.
(8) Twenty copies of plans: folded eight-and-one-half-by-eleven-inch
packets with title block exposed and a copy of applications
attached.
(9) Detailed narrative of proposed use (principal points).
(10) Documentation of compliance with the performance standards of
Articles XIX and XXIX. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4940]
(11) Fees pursuant to Part 5.
(12) Statement of ownership.
(13) Proof of payment of taxes.
(14) Proof of public notice publication two days prior to hearing.
(15) Proof of public notice to property owners within two hundred 200
feet two days prior to hearing.
(16) Approval of the Union County Planning Board: all site plans for
projects location on county roads and all subdivisions.
§ 170-199 UNION CODE § 170-200
614:1226
(17) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land to be subdivided or developed and certification that the
applicant is the owner of the land or his properly authorized agent
or that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(18) An application for final approval shall also be accompanied by the
following:
(a) Letters directed to the Chairman of the Board and signed by a
responsible official of the lighting agency and water company
and of any other utility company or governmental authority or
district which provides accessory utility service and has
jurisdiction in the area, approving each proposed utility
installation design and stating who will construct the facility so
that service will be available prior to occupancy.
(b) A statement from the Township Engineer that he is in receipt of
a map showing all utilities in exact location and elevation, that
he has examined the drainage plan and found that the interests
of the Township and of neighboring properties are protected
and that he has identified those portions of any utilities already
installed and those to be installed. The applicant shall certify in
writing to the Board that he has:
[1] Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; and/or
[2] Posted a performance guaranty in accordance with
§ 170-243 of this chapter.
(c) A statement from the Township Engineer that all
improvements installed prior to application have been
inspected as provided in § 170-245 of this chapter and that
such improvements meet the requirements of the Township.
Any improvements installed prior to application for final
approval that do not meet or exceed Township standards shall
be factored into the required performance guaranty. If
applicable, an as-built map showing the exact location of all
improvements, including utilities and their elevation, may be
required.
(d) A deed conveying to the Township any drainage easement,
sanitary sewer easement or utility easement which is required
to be provided under the terms and conditions of preliminary
approval.
(19) Except as otherwise required, all information required above and
such additional information studies and reports as may have been
required by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, including
but not limited to traffic studies, economic studies, environmental
impact studies and wetland surveys, shall be filed with the Board by
the time notice of hearing is given, but in no event later than two
§ 170-200 WELLS § 170-200
614:1227
§ 170-201. Incomplete applications.
If the application for development is found to be incomplete, the developer
shall be notified in writing by the administrative officer within 45 days
of submission of such application, or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents as
may be required by the Planning Board. An application shall be certified as
completed immediately upon the meeting of all requirements specified in
this chapter and in the rules and regulations of the Planning Board and shall
be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative
officer for purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by
the Planning Board.
§ 170-201.1. Conformity with state provisions regarding highway
access. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
Subdivision and site plan approvals are required to be in conformity with
any state highway access management code adopted by the State
Commissioner of Transportation under Section 3 of the State Highway
Access Management Act, P.L. 1989, c. 32 (N.J.S.A. 27:7-91).
weeks prior to the date of hearing. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 4181]
§ 170-200 UNION CODE § 170-201.1
614:1228
ARTICLE XXIII
Review Procedures
§ 170-202. Distribution of submission materials.
At least 10 days prior to the first regularly scheduled monthly meeting
of the Planning Board, the administrative officer shall retain one copy of
all required submissions and shall then immediately distribute remaining
materials in the following manner:
§ 170-203. Hearing.
Upon determination that an application is complete, the Planning Board
shall schedule a hearing on the application in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 170-39.
§ 170-204. Action by Planning Board.
A. Chairman of the Board: one copy of the preliminary plat or plan and one
copy each of the application and any applicable protective covenants or
deed restrictions.
B. County Planning Board: one copy of the preliminary plat or plan and
one copy each of the application and any applicable protective
covenants or deed restrictions.
C. Construction Code Official/Secretary of the Board of Adjustment: one
copy of the preliminary plat or plan and one copy each of the
application and any applicable protective covenants or deed
restrictions.
D. Township Engineer: one copy of preliminary plat or plan and one copy
each of the application and any applicable protective covenants or deed
restrictions.
E. At the direction of the Board, additional copies shall be sent to other
municipal, county and state agencies and officials.
A. An application shall be granted or denied within the times of
submission of a complete application prescribed below, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant:
Type of Application
Period of Time For Action By
Planning Board
(days)
Minor subdivision 45
Minor site plan 45
Preliminary subdivision
10 lots or fewer 45
§ 170-202 WELLS § 170-204
614:1229
§ 170-205. Review by County Planning Board.
Whenever review or approval of an application by the County Planning
Board is required, the Planning Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon the timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
§ 170-206. Notification of applicant.
The applicant shall be notified of the action of the Planning Board within
one week of its action and shall be furnished with a signed copy of any plat
or plan granted approval.
§ 170-207. Distribution of approved plan.
Upon approval of an application, copies of the plat or site plan be filed by
the Planning Board with the following:
Type of Application
Period of Time For Action By
Planning Board
(days)
More than 10 lots 95
Preliminary site plan
10 acres of land or less 45
10 dwelling units or fewer 45
Preliminary site plan
More than 10 acres of land 95
Greater than 10 dwelling units 95
Final subdivision 45
Final site plan 45
Applications as provided in § 170-15 95
B. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed for
acting upon applications for final site plan or final major subdivision
approval shall constitute final approval, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of
the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required
and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes
of filing subdivision plats.
A. Township Clerk.
B. Township Engineer.
C. Township Construction Code Official and Zoning Officer.
§ 170-204 UNION CODE § 170-207
614:1230
D. Township Tax Assessor.
§ 170-207 WELLS § 170-207
614:1231

ARTICLE XXIV
Minor Subdivisions and Minor Site Plans
§ 170-208. Filing of applications; contents.
Application for minor subdivision or minor site plan approval shall be filed in
accordance with Article XXII and shall contain all the data and information
prescribed in § 170-231 or 170-234, as the case may be, and shall be
designed in accordance with Article XXVIII.
§ 170-209. Approval or denial by Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall approve or deny the application within the time
limit prescribed in § 170-204. An approved plat shall be signed by the
Chairman and the Secretary of the Planning Board. No further Planning
Board approval shall be necessary.
§ 170-210. Final approval.
Minor subdivision or minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final
approval by the Board, provided that the Board may condition such approval
on terms ensuring the completion of improvements pursuant to Article
XXVIII.
§ 170-211. Expiration of approval. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 4842]
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
municipal approval unless, within such period, a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. Any
such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the application
for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the Planning Board may
accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided that, if the developer chooses to file
the minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than deed, such plat
shall conform to the provisions of said Act.
§ 170-212. Zoning requirements and general terms.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision or minor site plan
approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after
the date of approval, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall
have been duly recorded as provided in this Part 4.
§ 170-208 WELLS § 170-213
614:1233
§ 170-213. Major subdivisions.
In the event it is determined that the application is a major subdivision, the
plat shall be returned to the applicant for compliance with Articles XXV and
XXVI.
§ 170-213 UNION CODE § 170-213
614:1234
ARTICLE XXV
Preliminary Subdivision Plats and Preliminary Site Plans
§ 170-214. Filing of applications; contents. [Amended 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 4940]
Application for approval of a preliminary subdivision plat or a preliminary
site plan shall be filed in accordance with Article XXII, shall contain all
information prescribed in § 170-232 or 170-235, as the case may be, and
shall be in accordance with the design standards prescribed in Article
XXVIII and, if applicable, Article XXIX.
§ 170-215. Amended applications.
If the Planning Board required any substantial amendment in the layout of
improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject of a
hearing, an amended application for development shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for development.
§ 170-216. Recommendations of other agencies.
The recommendations of the County Planning Board and those of all other
agencies and officials to whom the preliminary plat or plan was submitted
for review shall be given careful consideration in the final decision on the
development application. If the County Planning Board or the Municipal
Professional Engineer approves the preliminary submission, such approval
shall be noted on the plat.
§ 170-217. Approval of plat or plan.
If the Board acts favorably on the preliminary plat or plan, the Chairman of
the Board (or the Acting Chairman, in his absence) and the Secretary of the
Board shall affix their signatures to at least 10 copies of the plat or plan,
with a notation that it has been approved.
§ 170-218. Rejection of plat or plan.
If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the preliminary plat or
plan, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be made by the
Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plat or plan, and a resolution
adopted setting forth the reasons for such rejections. One copy of the plat
or plan and said resolution shall be returned to the applicant within 10 days
of such determination.
§ 170-219. Rights conferred by preliminary approval.
A. Preliminary approval shall, except as provided in Subsection B below,
confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period of
time from the date of the preliminary approval:
§ 170-214 WELLS § 170-219
614:1235
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements
peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to § 170-239, except that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Township from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case
may be.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that, if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time, longer than
three years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
the nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may thereafter apply for and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension of preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and the nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval and the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided
that, if the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
§ 170-219 UNION CODE § 170-219
614:1236
ARTICLE XXVI
Final Subdivision Plats and Final Site Plans
§ 170-220. Filing of applications; contents.
Application for approval of a final plat or a final site plan shall be filed
in accordance with Article XXII and shall contain all the information
prescribed in § 170-233 or 170-236, as the case may be. Said application
shall be filed within the period prescribed in § 170-219 and may be for the
whole or a section or sections of the preliminary plat or site plan, as the
case may be.
§ 170-221. Other conditions to be met.
Prior to the grant of final approval, all provisions of Part 5 relating to
installation of improvements, performance and maintenance guaranties,
developer's agreement and other related conditions shall be met.
§ 170-222. Amended applications.
If the applicant proposes any substantial amendment in the layout of
improvements as shown on the preliminary plat or plan previously granted
preliminary approval, an amended application shall be submitted and
proceeded upon as in the case of the original application for preliminary
approval.
§ 170-223. Final approval.
In the event the Planning Board determines that the final plat or site plan
complies with all the provisions of this chapter, the conditions of preliminary
approval and all other applicable governmental requirements, it shall grant
final approval, and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board (or the Acting
Chairman and Secretary, where either or both may be absent) shall affix
their signatures to at least 10 copies of the plat, with a notation that it
has been approved. The applicant shall furnish such copies to the Board for
signing.
§ 170-224. Rights conferred by final approval.340
Final approval of a subdivision or site plan shall confer upon the applicant
the following rights:
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
Article XXV, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed
for a period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final
approval is adopted; provided that, in the case of a major subdivision,
the rights conferred by this Part 4 shall expire if the plat has not been
duly recorded within the time period provided in § 170-225. If the
340. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-220 WELLS § 170-224
614:1237
§ 170-225. Expiration of final approval; recording.
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and,
in the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required in
§ 170-225, the Planning Board may extend such period of protection
for extensions of one year, but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the granting
of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval
pursuant to § 170-219 for the section granted final approval.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or
more, or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor area of
200,000 square feet or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights
referred to in Subsection A of this section for such period of time,
longer than two years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to
be reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
C. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to Subsection A or B of this section and final approval has
expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the
extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date.
The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what
would otherwise be the expiration date.
D. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for the
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of final
approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection A or B of this section.
§ 170-224 UNION CODE § 170-225
614:1238
§ 170-226. Materials filed with Township Clerk.
After final approval, one translucent tracing and one cloth print shall be
filed with the Township Clerk. The original tracing and one cloth print shall
be returned to the developer.
§ 170-227. Final subdivision approval required prior to construction
permit issuance.
No construction permit shall be issued until final subdivision approval by
the Planning Board of the final plat and until said plat has been properly
filed with the County Clerk within the time or extended time required
by § 170-225A. Proof of filing shall be submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Board. The Construction Code Official shall not issue a
construction permit until he has been notified by the Secretary of the
Planning Board that proof of filing has been received.
§ 170-228. Final site plan approval required prior to construction
permit issuance.
A construction permit for any building or structure which is the subject of
site plan review shall not be issued until final site plan approval is granted
and all improvements completed or guaranties to insure completion have
been posted in accordance with § 170-243 of this chapter.
§ 170-229. Certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy in connection with a site plan shall be issued
until all improvements required as a part of final site plan approval by the
Planning Board have been satisfactorily completed. The Township Engineer
shall submit to the Planning Board and to the Construction Code Official
or appropriate subcode official(s) a written report with respect to the
installation of improvements relating to off-street parking, landscaping,
storm waste disposal, sanitary sewage disposal and outdoor lighting, when
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless, within such period, the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. The
Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
B. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board, as indicated
on the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of
the Planning Board, or a certificate has been issued by the
administrative officer pursuant to § 170-230 of this chapter. The
signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board shall
not be affixed until the developer has posted the guaranties required
pursuant to § 170-230. If the County Recording Officer records any plat
without such approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void.
§ 170-225 WELLS § 170-229
614:1239
such improvements have been installed in accordance with the plans
therefor. The Construction Code Official or appropriate subcode official(s)
shall submit a written report to the Planning Board when all other
improvements have been installed in accordance with the plans therefor.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a period of 10 days after the
Planning Board has received the foregoing reports. In the event that the
Chairman or Secretary of the Planning Board shall, within such period of 10
days, notify the Construction Code Official that any improvement has, in the
opinion of the Board, not be installed in accordance with the development
plan, the Construction Code Official shall not issue a certificate of
occupancy until the Planning Board authorizes its issuance.
§ 170-230. Certification of certain subdivisions.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision or which
formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding the effective
date of the Municipal Land Use Law341 may apply, in writing, to the
Subdivision Certifying Officer for the issuance of a certificate certifying
whether or not such subdivision has been approved by the Planning
Board. Such application shall contain a diagram showing the location
and dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name
of the owner thereof.
B. The Subdivision Certifying Officer shall make and issue such certificate
within 15 days after the receipt of such written application and the fees
therefor. Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record of his office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land" and shall certify:
(1) Whether there exists in the Township a duly established Planning
Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling the
subdivision of land adopted under the authority of this act.
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that the subdivision of which the lands are a part is a
validly existing subdivision.
(3) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in
Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975.342
341. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
342. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 170-229 UNION CODE § 170-230
614:1240
ARTICLE XXVII
Application Details
§ 170-231. Minor subdivision plats.
A minor subdivision plat shall be drawn by a professional engineer and/or
land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey and shall bear
the signature, seal and license number and address of said professional
engineer and/or land surveyor. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of not
more than 50 feet to the inch on one of two standard size sheets, namely 18
inches by 24 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches, to enable the entire tract to
be shown on one sheet and shall show or include the following information:
§ 170-232. Preliminary subdivision plat.
A. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to surrounding
areas.
B. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
C. All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and
within 200 feet thereof.
D. The name of the owner of record of the tract to be subdivided and the
name of the subdivider, if other than the owner.
E. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number of the tract to be subdivided.
F. All properties within 200 feet of any part of the tract to be subdivided
and the Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers and owners thereof as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
G. All streets and roads and streams within 200 feet of the subdivision.
H. The existing right-of-way and pavement width of any street abutting the
property. Dedication of additional right-of-way, if specified in the Master
Plan or Official Map, shall also be shown.
I. Marshes, ponds and land subject to flooding within the subdivision and
within 200 feet thereof.
J. Such additional information as the Planning Board may reasonably
require in order to make an informed decision on the application.
A. A preliminary subdivision plat shall be drawn by such New Jersey
licensed professional person or persons, depending upon the nature of
the information to be provided, in accordance with the latest-adopted
rules and regulations of the State Professional Boards and shall bear
the signature, seal and license number and address of said professional
person. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to
the inch on one of two standard size sheets, namely 18 inches by 24
inches or 24 inches by 36 inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain
§ 170-231 WELLS § 170-232
614:1241
the entire property, the plat may be divided into sections to be shown
on separate sheets of equal sizes, with reference on each sheet to the
adjoining sheets.
B. The preliminary plat shall show or include the following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding areas, at a scale of one inch equals not less than 1,000
feet.
(2) Title block:
(a) Name of the subdivision, municipality and county.
(b) Name and address of subdivider on the application form
provided by Planning Board.
(c) Name and address of the owner or owners of record and the
names and addresses of all property owners (on the application
form provided by Planning Board) within 200 feet of the
extreme limits of the tract, as shown on the most recent tax list
prepared by the Township Tax Assessor.
(d) Name, address, signature and license number of the
professional person who prepared the drawing.
(e) Acreage of tract to the nearest 1/10 acre.
(3) Scale and North arrow.
(4) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision
thereof.
(5) Existing block and lot number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided, as
they appear on the Municipal Tax Map, and the proposed block and
lot numbers, as provided by the Township Tax Assessor, upon
written request.
(6) Subdivision boundary line (heavy solid line).
(7) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(8) The location, size and nature of the entire lot or lots in question and
any contiguous to lots owned by the applicant or in which the
applicant has a direct or indirect interest.
(9) Dimensions of all existing and proposed property lines and the
minimum front, rear and side yard setback line for each proposed
lot.
(10) Existing contours, with intervals of one foot where slopes are 3% or
less, and two feet where slopes are more than 3%, referred to a
known datum and to be indicated by a dashed line. Where any
§ 170-232 UNION CODE § 170-232
614:1242
change in contours are proposed, finished grades should be shown
as a solid line.
(11) Locations of all existing and proposed structures, showing front,
rear and side yard setback distances, and an indication of whether
the existing structures and uses will be retained or removed.
(12) The proposed finished grade elevations at the corners of any
structure or structures; and the lowest elevation within any
proposed structure after its completion.
(13) The location, size and nature of all existing and proposed drainage
rights-of-way or easements and the location, size and description of
any lands to be dedicated to the municipality or county.
(14) The layout and size of existing and proposed public streets.
(15) The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed easements,
railroad rights-of-way, bridges and natural features, such as
wooded areas and any extensive rock formations, both within the
tract and within 200 feet of its boundaries.
(16) The elevation of any existing or proposed pumping facilities.
(17) The nature and extent of any construction alterations or repairs.
(18) The locations and species of all existing trees or groups of trees
having a caliper of eight inches or more, measured three feet above
ground level, shall be shown. The proposed location of shade trees
to be provided shall also be indicated.
(19) All existing and proposed watercourses, including lakes and ponds,
shall be shown and accompanied by the following information:
(a) When a stream is proposed for alteration, improvement or
relocation or when a drainage structure or fill is proposed over,
under, in or along a running stream, evidence of approval of
required alterations, lack of jurisdiction or denial of the
improvement by the New Jersey Division of Water Policy and
Supply shall accompany the subdivision.
(b) Cross-sections of watercourse and/or drainage swales at any
approximate scale showing the extent of floodplain, top of
bank, normal water levels and bottom elevations at the
following locations:
[1] At any point where a watercourse crosses a boundary of
the tract.
[2] At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 300 feet upstream
and downstream of any proposed and/or existing culvert or
bridge within the tract and within 1,000 feet downstream
of the tract.
§ 170-232 WELLS § 170-232
614:1243
[3] At fifty-foot intervals up to 300 feet upstream and
downstream of any point of the juncture of two or more
watercourses within 1,000 feet of the tract.
[4] At a maximum of five-hundred-foot intervals at not less
than two locations along each watercourse which runs
through or within 500 feet of the tract.
[5] When ditches, streams or watercourses are to be altered,
improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing slopes
and measures to control erosion and siltation, as well as
typical ditch sections and profiles, shall be shown or
accompany it.
[6] The boundaries of the floodplains of all watercourses
within or adjacent to the tract.
(c) The total acreage in the drainage basin of any watercourse
running through or adjacent to a tract in the area upstream of
the tract.
(d) The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage in the tract
which drains to the structure.
(e) The location and extent of drainage and conservation
easements and stream encroachment lines.
(f) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within and adjacent to the tract.
(20) The application shall include plans and computations for any storm
drainage systems, including the following:
(a) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to
the tract, showing size and profile of the lines, direction of the
flow and the location of each catch basin, inlet, manhole,
culvert and headwall.
(b) The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, retention basins or other water
or soil conservation devices.
(21) Proof of stream encroachment lines obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection.
(22) The extent of filling of the land, if any.
(23) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed erosion and
siltation control measures, such as slope protection, soil
stabilization, sedimentation basins, sediment traps, headwalls and
water retention facilities.
§ 170-232 UNION CODE § 170-232
614:1244
§ 170-233. Final subdivision plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in accordance with the requirements of the
Map Filing Law, Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960.343 The final plat shall
show the following:
(24) All the pertinent rainfall data, stream flow data, gaugings, etc., on
which calculations were based.
(25) Complete calculations, hydraulic profiles for normal, average and
storm of record shall be submitted with the application.
(26) Where required by the Planning Board, the developer shall furnish
information in relation to subsurface conditions, based on
percolation tests and soil borings or probes.
(27) The location of existing utility structures such as water and sewer
mains, gas transmission lines and high tension power lines on the
tract and within 200 feet of its boundaries.
(28) Plans of proposed improvements and utility layouts, including
sewers, storm drains, water, gas, telephone and electricity, showing
feasible connections to any proposed utility systems. If private
utilities are proposed, they shall comply fully with all Township,
county and state regulations. If service will be provided by an
existing utility company, a letter from that company stating that
service will be available before occupancy will be sufficient. When
individual on-lot water or sewage disposal is proposed, the plan for
such system shall be approved by the appropriate Township and
state agencies, and the results of percolation tests shall be
submitted under conditions designated by the Township Board of
Health.
(29) Plans, typical cross-sections, center-line profiles, tentative grades
and details of all proposed streets and of the existing streets
abutting the tract, based on the vertical datum specified by the
Township Engineer, including curbing, sidewalks, storm drains and
drainage structures. Sight triangles, the radius of curblines and
street sign locations shall be so clearly indicated at intersections.
(30) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
(31) Proposed permanent monuments shall be shown.
(32) The Board reserves the right to require additional information
before granting preliminary approval when unique circumstances
affect the tract and/or when the application for development poses
special problems for the tract and surrounding area.
343. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 170-232 WELLS § 170-233
614:1245
A. Name and location of the subdivision, name and address of the owner of
record, name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines with accurate dimensions, lot
areas, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles
of all curves.
C. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered in accordance with the chronological scheme employed by
the Township Tax Map. This information shall be obtained from the
Township Tax Assessor.
D. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to the
public use and the proposed use of any sites for other than residential
purposes.
E. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
F. Location and description of all monuments.
G. Names of owners of adjoining lands.
H. Certification by a licensed surveyor as to the accuracy of details of plat.
All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision shall be
balanced and closed to a precision of 1:10,000 and the dimensions of all
lot lines to within 1:20,000. All dimensions, angles and bearings must
be tied to at least two permanent monuments not less than 300 feet
apart, and all information shall be indicated on the plat. At least one
corner of the subdivision shall be tied to United States Geological
Survey (USGS) benchmarks with data on the plat as to how the
bearings were determined.
I. The final submission shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent or that the owner has given consent
under an option agreement.
(2) Cross-sections, profiles and established grades of all streets, as
approved by the Township Engineer.
(3) Plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewer and water mains,
as approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) Letters directed to the Chairman of the Board and signed by a
responsible official of the lighting agency and water company and
of any other utility company or governmental authority or district
which provides accessory utility service and has jurisdiction in the
area, approving each proposed utility installation design and
§ 170-233 UNION CODE § 170-233
614:1246
§ 170-234. Minor site plan.
Where applicable to the proposed use, a minor site plan application shall be
accompanied by such information as required in § 170-235 for a preliminary
site plan in order to allow the Planning Board to make an informed decision
of the application.
§ 170-235. Preliminary site plan.
stating who will construct the facility so that service will be
available prior to occupancy.
(5) A statement from the Township Engineer that he is in receipt of a
map showing all utilities in exact location and elevation, that he has
examined the drainage plan and found that the interests of the
Township and of neighboring properties are protected and that he
has identified those portions of any utilities already installed and
those to be installed. The applicant shall certify, in writing, to the
Board that he has:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; and/or
(b) Posted a performance guaranty in accordance with § 170-243
of this chapter.
(6) A statement from the Township Engineer that all improvements
installed prior to application have been inspected as provided in
§ 170-245 of this chapter and that such improvements meet the
requirements of the Township. Any improvements installed prior to
application for final approval that do not meet or exceed Township
standards shall be factored into the required performance
guaranty. If applicable, an as-built map, showing the exact location
of all improvements, including utilities and their elevations, may be
required.
A. A preliminary site plan shall be drawn by such New Jersey licensed
professional person or persons, depending upon the nature of the
information to be provided, in accordance with the latest adopted rules
and regulations of the state professional boards and shall bear the
signature, seal and license number and address of said professional
person. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to
the inch on one of two standard size sheets, namely 18 inches by 24
inches or 24 inches by 36 inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain
the entire property, the plan may be divided into sections to be shown
on separate sheets of equal sizes, with reference on each sheet to the
adjoining sheets.
B. Contents of preliminary site plan.
(1) The preliminary site plan shall include such details as may be
necessary to properly evaluate the application and determine
§ 170-233 WELLS § 170-235
614:1247
compliance with this chapter, and, where applicable to the
proposed use or construction, the following information shall be
clearly shown:
(a) A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding areas, at a scale of one inch equals not less than
1,000 feet.
(b) Title block:
[1] Name of the development, municipality and county.
[2] Name and address of the developer on the application
form provided by the Planning Board.
[3] Name and address of the owner or owners of record and
the names and addresses of all property owners (on the
application form provided by the Planning Board) within
200 feet of the extreme limits of the tract as shown on the
most recent tax list prepared by the Township Tax
Assessor.
[4] Name, address, signature and license number of the
professional person who prepared the drawing.
[5] Acreage of tract to the nearest 1/10 acre.
(c) Scale and North arrow.
(d) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision
thereof.
(e) Existing block and lot number(s), as they appear on the
Municipal Tax Map, and proposed block and lot numbers, as
provided by the Township Tax Assessor, upon written request.
(f) Development boundary line (heavy solid line).
(g) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(h) Existing contours, with intervals of one foot where slopes are
3% or less, and two feet where slopes are more than 3%,
referred to a known datum and to be indicated by a dashed
line. Where any changes in contours are proposed, finished
grades should be shown as a solid line. The plan shall also
show the highest and lowest elevation of the finished grade at
the foundation and at a distance of 15 feet from the foundation.
[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(i) Locations of all existing and proposed structures, showing
existing and proposed front, rear and side yard setback
distances and an indication of whether the existing structures
and uses will be retained or removed.
§ 170-235 UNION CODE § 170-235
614:1248
(j) The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed railroad
rights-of-way, bridges and natural features, such as wooded
areas and any extensive rock formations, both within the tract
and within 200 feet of its boundaries.
(k) The locations and species of all existing trees or groups of
trees having a caliper of eight inches or more measured three
feet above ground level shall be shown. The proposed location
of shade trees to be provided shall also be indicated.
(l) All pertinent watercourse, storm drainage facilities and
calculations, grading and other related information applicable
to the site plan as described in § 170-232B(11) through (30).
(m) All dimensions necessary to confirm conformity to this chapter,
such as structure, setbacks, structure heights and yard areas.
(n) The proposed location and direction of illumination, power and
type of proposed outdoor lighting, including size and height of
fixtures.
(o) A preliminary screening, buffering the landscaping, including a
landscaping plan.
(p) The location, size and description of all proposed signs.
(q) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or
loading areas, showing size and location of bays, aisles and
barriers.
(r) All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site
on the public streets, showing the site and location of
driveways and curb cuts, including the possible utilization of
traffic signals, channelization, acceleration and deceleration
lanes, additional width and any other device necessary to
prevent a difficult traffic situation. The right-of-way lines of all
public streets abutting the property shall be shown. Right-ofway
lines of state highways shall be as provided by NJDOT.
Sight triangle design criteria shall be incorporated for all
ingress and egress driveways and driving aisles where said
driveway and driving aisles intersect with pedestrian sidewalks
or walkways. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(s) Elevations at the corners of all proposed buildings and paved
areas and at property corners if new buildings or paved areas
are proposed.
(t) Tentative building floor plans and front, rear and side building
elevations showing building heights and building materials,
drawn by an architect or professional engineer licensed by the
State of New Jersey. The plans shall be at a scale of not less
than 1/8 inch equals one foot. Building height shall be
§ 170-235 WELLS § 170-235
614:1249
§ 170-236. Final site plan.
Except as provided below, the site plan and related drawings, including
front, rear and side building elevations, which were granted preliminary
approval by the Planning Board shall satisfy the application requirements
for final approval of a conventional site plan unless modifications, approved
by the Township Engineer were made subsequent to preliminary approval.
In such instances, revised drawings shall be submitted with the final site
plan application. When final approval of only a section of a site plan is
being sought, a final site plan of the section, showing all applicable details
prescribed in § 170-235, shall be submitted. These provisions shall not be
construed as exempting the applicant from filing the required application
forms and fees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an application for final site
plan shall include the following:
expressed in terms of elevation in relation to ground elevations
as shown on the site plan. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No.
4181]
(u) Specification for and location of proposed surface paving and
curbing.
(2) The Board reserves the right to require additional information
before granting preliminary approval when unique circumstances
affect the tract and/or when the application for development poses
special problems for the tract and surrounding area. Such
information may include but not be limited to drainage calculations
and traffic analyses.
A. Final architectural drawings, showing floor plans and front, rear and
side building elevations.
B. A detailed landscaping plan, showing the location, size and species of
all plantings.
C. Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his properly
authorized agent or that the owner has given consent under an option
agreement.
D. Letters directed to the Chairman of the Board and signed by a
responsible official of the lighting agency and water company and of
any other utility company or governmental authority or district which
provides accessory utility service and has jurisdiction in the area,
approving each proposed utility installation design and stating who will
construct the facility so that service will be available prior to occupancy.
E. A statement from the Township Engineer that he is in receipt of a map
showing all utilities in exact location and elevation, that he has
examined the drainage plan and found that the interests of the
Township and of neighboring properties are protected and that he has
identified those portions of any utilities already installed and those to
§ 170-235 UNION CODE § 170-236
614:1250
be installed. The applicant shall certify, in writing, to the Board that he
has:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter; and/or
(2) Posted a performance guaranty in accordance with § 170-243 of
this chapter.
F. A statement from the Township Engineer that all improvements
installed prior to application have been inspected as provided in
§ 170-245 of this chapter and that such improvements meet the
requirements of the Township. Any improvements installed prior to
application for final approval that do not meet or exceed Township
standards shall be factored into the required performance guaranty. If
applicable, an as-built map, showing the exact location of all
improvements, including utilities and their elevation, may be required.
§ 170-236 WELLS § 170-236
614:1251

ARTICLE XXVIII
Improvements and Design Standards
§ 170-237. General standards.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the applicant shall have installed or
furnished performance guaranties as set forth in § 170-243 for the ultimate
installation of the improvements described below. All improvements shall
be subject to approval and inspection by the Township Engineer, who shall
be notified by the developer at least two weeks prior to the start of
construction of any improvement. No underground installation shall be
covered until inspected and approved. The applicant shall observe the
following requirements and principles for a subdivision or portion thereof:
§ 170-238. Subdivisions. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
Required improvements and design standards shall be applicable to new
subdivisions and all existing uses in all zones and shall be as follows:
A. Development pattern. The development plat shall conform to design
standards that will encourage orderly and harmonious development
patterns within the Township.
B. Conformance to Master Plan and Official Map. Where either or both an
Official Map or Master Plan has been adopted, the development shall
conform to the proposals and conditions shown therein. The streets,
drainage, rights-of-way, bikeways, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an official adopted Master Plan or Official Map
shall be considered in the approval of subdivision plats.
C. Further conformance. Where not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat
or plan in accordance with the applicable statutes of New Jersey and
shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of
the Township.
A. Streets. The subdivider shall install streets in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) All developments shall be served by paved public streets with
adequate crowns. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to
provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets and should
conform with the topography as far as practicable.
(2) When a new development adjoins land susceptible to being
subdivided, suitable provisions shall be made for optimum access
of the remaining and/or adjoining tract to existing or proposed
streets.
(3) Local streets shall be so planned and identified with appropriate
signs so as to discourage through traffic. Street signs shall be
metal-on-metal posts of the type, design and standard previously
§ 170-237 WELLS § 170-238
614:1253
installed elsewhere in the Township. The location of the street signs
shall be determined by the Board and Township Engineer, but there
shall be at least two street signs furnished at each intersection. All
signs will be installed free of visual obstruction.
(4) In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing streets
that do not conform to the street width requirements of this
chapter, additional land along either or both sides of said street,
sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements, shall be
dedicated for the location, installation, repair and maintenance of
streets, customarily located on street rights-of-way. The necessary
deeds of ownership shall be furnished, and the dedication shall be
expressed as follows: "Street's right-of-way granted permitted the
entrance upon these lands for the purpose provided for and
expressed in the Land Development Ordinance of the Township."
This statement shall in no way reduce the developer's responsibility
to provide, install, repair or maintain the facilities in the area
dedicated by ordinance and/or as shown on the plan and/or as
provided for by any maintenance or performance guaranties. If the
development is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be dedicated. Additionally, that portion of the existing street
or road adjoining or included within a subdivision shall be
improved, including excavation, grading, curbing, sidewalk, base
courses and surfacing in accordance with the road improvement
standards of this chapter.
(5) In all developments, the minimum public street right-of-way shall
be measured from lot line to lot line and shall be in accordance with
the following schedule, but in no case shall a new street that is a
continuation of an existing street be continued at a width less than
the existing street, although a greater width may be required in
accordance with the following schedule:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Pavement Width
(feet)
Arterial 80 Determined individually
Collector 60 40
Local 50 36
(6) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60°, and approaches to all
intersections shall follow a straight line for at least 100 feet. No
more than two streets shall meet or intersect at any one point, and
the center lines of both intersecting streets shall pass through a
common point. Measuring from this common point, two
intersections shall be spaced at least 125 feet apart. The block
corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline, with the
§ 170-238 UNION CODE § 170-238
614:1254
street having the highest radius requirement, as outlined below,
determining the minimum standard for all curblines:
(a) Arterials: 30 feet.
(b) Collectors: 25 feet.
(c) Local streets: 20 feet.
(7) A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets. When connecting street
lines deflect from each other at any one point, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius conforming to standard
engineering practice so that the minimum sight distance within the
right-of-way shall be 350 feet for a local street, 500 feet for a
collector street and 800 feet for an arterial street.
(8) Culs-de-sac shall be no more than 600 feet in length and shall
provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of 50 feet on the
curbline, plus a utility and planting strip width of 10 feet around
the entire cul-de-sac. The center point for the radius shall be on the
center line of the associated street or, if offset, to a point where the
radius becomes tangent to the right curbline of the associated
street.
(9) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate the name of an existing street that confusion results. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
Curvilinear streets shall change their names only at street
intersections. The Board shall reserve the right to recommend the
naming of streets to the governing body.
(10) The quality of surfacing and base materials shall adhere to the
minimum standards set forth by the Township, County or State
Engineer when said paving concerns roads under the jurisdiction
and where such standards exist. Streets under the jurisdiction of
the Township shall be constructed in accordance with Township
standard specifications except as otherwise specified by the
Township Engineer.
(11) The approval of any map of land delineating streets by the
governing body of the Township shall in no way be construed as an
acceptance of any street indicated thereon.
(12) Sight triangle easements shall be required and shall include the
area on each street corner that is bounded by the line which
connects the sight or connecting points located on each of the
right-of-way lines of the intersecting street. The planting of trees or
other plantings or the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in
height that would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the
easements shall be prohibited, and a public right of entry shall be
reserved for the purpose of removing any object, material or
§ 170-238 WELLS § 170-238
614:1255
otherwise, that obstructs the clear sight. The distances shown on
the sketches344 between the connecting points and the intersection
of the right-of-way lines shall be required.
B. Curbs. Belgian block or concrete curbing shall be installed along every
street within a subdivision and at intersections with existing Township,
county or state roads and shall be laid in a manner approved by the
appropriate governmental authority. All curbing shall be constructed in
accordance with standard Township specifications. Openings for
driveway access shall be in such widths as shall be determined by the
Township Engineer. Driveway openings shall not be located closer than
10 feet from the end of radius of an intersecting street. Curb cuts or
flush curbs with curb stops shall be utilized wherever possible or where
directed by the Township Engineer to meet the requirements of
nonstructural stormwater management strategies as outlined in Article
XXIX for applicable applications. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No.
4940]
C. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks may be provided on both sides of all streets as required
by the Board. Sidewalks within developments may be required, at
the Board's discretion, depending upon the probable volume of
pedestrian traffic, the development's location in relation to other
populated areas and the general type of improvement intended.
(2) Where required, sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with
standard Township specifications.
D. Lots.
(1) Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
Part 3, Zoning, of this chapter.
(2) Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to served streets.
(3) Each lot must front upon a street having a right-of-way at least 50
feet in width.
(4) Where extra width has been dedicated for the widening of existing
streets, lot areas shall be computed from such extra width line, and
all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
(5) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots. The
Planning Board may also require that provision be made for
conservation easements in environmentally sensitive areas.
344. Editor's Note: The sketches are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-238 UNION CODE § 170-238
614:1256
(6) Monuments shall be installed for all newly created lots in
compliance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11q(8). All lot
corners shall be marked with a metal alloy pin of permanent
character.
E. Easements and natural features.
(1) Easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility
installation may be required. Such easements shall be at least 15
feet wide and located in consultation with the companies or
Township departments concerned.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both,
as will be adequate for the purpose.
(3) Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision
containing such features.
F. Drainage. All streets shall be provided with catch basins and pipes
where the same may be necessary for proper surface discharge and
where the use of natural vegetated swales is not practical or approved
by the Township Engineer. The requirements of this section shall not be
satisfied by the construction of dry wells. [Amended 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 4940]
(1) The system shall be adequate to carry off or store the stormwater
and natural drainage water which originates not only within the lot
or tract boundaries, but also that which originates beyond the lot or
tract boundaries. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water
shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems or
create flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on
other private properties of public lands without proper and
approved provisions being made for taking care of these
conditions.
(2) Techniques for computing stormwater runoff shall be as approved
by the Township Engineer. The Rational Method of surface water
runoff computation may be used for storm sewers and open
channels with drainage basins up to 25 acres in area. The Soil
Conservation Method, or other methods approved by the Township
Engineer, shall be used for drainage basins larger than 25 acres in
area.
(3) Storm sewers, open channels, bridges and culverts, unless
otherwise directed by the Township Engineer, shall be designed for
minimum flow capacities as follows:
§ 170-238 WELLS § 170-238
614:1257
Drainage Basin Size
(acres)
Storm Frequency Design
Capacity
0 to 25 15-year
26 to 100 25-year
Over 100 50-year
NOTE: Establishment of surcharge and freeboard deviations shall
be based upon the flood of record as specified in Article XIII. Minor
street and yard flooding is permitted. The ground level on the first
floor of all dwellings shall be one and two feet, respectively, above
the surcharge and freeboard elevations.
(4) The materials used in the construction of storm sewers, bridges
and other drainage structures shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction of the New Jersey State Highway Department,
current edition, and any supplements, addenda and modifications
thereof. Modification or change of these specifications may be
effected only with the knowledge and written consent of the
Township Engineer and governing body.
(5) Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from buildings
and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools.
(6) Land subject to periodic or occasional flooding (floodplain areas)
shall not be plotted for residential occupancy or for any other
purpose which may endanger life or property or aggravate the
flood hazard. Such land shall be considered for open spaces or
other similar uses. All provisions of Article XIII relating to flood
hazard areas shall be met.
(7) Drainage structures which are located on state or county rights-ofway
shall be approved by the State or County Engineer's office, and
a letter from that office indicating such approval shall be directed
to the Township Engineer and shall be received prior to the
granting of final approval. Drainage structures proposed on a brook
or stream shall be approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP), Division of Water Resources,
and a letter from that office shall be directed to the Township
Engineer.
(8) Where a lot or tract is traversed by a watercourse, surface or
underground drainageway or drainage system, channel or stream,
there shall be provided and dedicated a drainage right-of-way
easement to the Township conforming substantially with the lines
of such watercourse, and such further width or construction or
both as will be adequate to accommodate expected stormwater
runoff in the future, based upon reasonable growth potential in the
Township, and, in any event, meeting any minimum widths and
§ 170-238 UNION CODE § 170-238
614:1258
locations shown on any adopted Official Map or Master Plan. Such
easement dedication shall be expressed on the plat or plan as
follows: "Drainage right-of-way easement granted for the purpose
provided for and expressed in the Land Development Ordinance."
(9) An existing lot or tract shall not alter property grades so as to
divert surface runoff from its natural or preexisting pattern without
first filing a topographical contour map indicating existing and
proposed property grades with and receiving approval of the
Township Engineer.
(10) The leader pipes and/or roof drains of any preexisting use in any
zone shall be directed towards the street gutter or storm drainage
facility and shall not be directed towards adjacent properties.
(11) The leader pipes and/or roof drains of any new construction in any
zone shall be connected, via underground pipes of a material and
size approved by the Township Engineer, to a storm drainage
facility or in lieu to the street gutter.
G. Stormwater control measures. Applications applicable to § 170-241
shall be designed in accordance with the performance and design
standards outlined in Article XXIX, Stormwater Management and
Control. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4940]
(1) No land area, except for single- or two-family residential
construction not part of a major subdivision, shall be developed by
any person that will result in:
(a) The volume and/or rate of stormwater runoff occurring at the
area being increased over what occurs there under conditions
existing on or before the effective date of this chapter.
(b) The drainage or adjacent areas being adversely affected.
(c) Soil erosion during and after development being increased
over what naturally occurs there.
(d) Soil absorption and groundwater recharge capacity of the area
being decreased below what occurs there under conditions
existing on or before the effective date of this chapter.
(e) The natural drainage pattern of the area being significantly
altered.
(2) In order to duplicate as nearly as possible natural drainage
conditions, regulation and control of storm sewer runoff and
erosion for the construction shall be through on-site stormwater
detention and/or ground absorption systems, which include but are
not limited to the following:
(a) Detention areas which may be depressions in parking areas,
excavated basins, basins created through use of curbs,
§ 170-238 WELLS § 170-238
614:1259
stabilized earth berms or dikes or any other form of grading
which serves to temporarily impound and store water.
(b) Rooftop storage through temporary impoundment and storage
of stormwater on flat or slightly pitched building rooftops by
use of drain outlets which restrict the stormwater runoff from
the roof surface.
(c) Dry wells or leaching basins which control stormwater runoff
through ground absorption and temporary storage.
(d) Porous asphaltic pavement, which preserves the natural
ground absorption capacity of a site and provides a subsurface
reservoir for temporary storage of stormwater.
(e) Any system of porous media, such as gravel trenches drained
by porous wall or perforated pipe, which temporarily store and
dissipate stormwater through ground absorption.
(f) Any combination of the above-mentioned techniques which
serves to limit stormwater runoff from a given site to what
presently occurs there.
(3) Stormwater detention exclusions and waiver.
(a) Exclusions. All development of property consisting of 5,000
square feet or less shall be exempt from the on-site detention
requirements of this chapter, except when, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, such exemption would be detrimental to
the purpose of this chapter.
(b) Waiver. If, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, detention
facilities are impractical or of questionable value, the
requirement for on-site detention can be waived with the
applicant remitting a sum equal to the construction costs,
which shall then be deposited in the Township's Infrastructure
Renewal Trust Account to be used at the Township
Committee's direction for broader-based detention facilities or
infrastructure construction and repair.
(4) Design of stormwater detention facilities.
(a) Stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to contain an
amount equal to the increase in volume of runoff which would
result from the development of any site. The volume of runoff
and intensity shall be computed on the basis of the August 2,
1973, storm and shall be equivalent to the rainfall excess as
previously defined. The total rainfall for the August 2, 1973,
storm was six inches, and the intensity was 3.2 inches per hour.
(b) The rainfall excess shall be computed for each site using
accepted, published runoff coefficients which reflect land use
§ 170-238 UNION CODE § 170-238
614:1260
and topography. Acceptable runoff coefficients currently in
practice include but are not limited to the following:
Land Use Type Runoff Coefficients
Business:
Downtown areas 0.70 to 0.95
Neighborhood areas 0.50 to 0.70
Residential:
Single-family areas 0.30 to 0.50
Multiunits, detached 0.40 to 0.60
Multiunits, attached 0.60 to 0.75
Residential (suburban) 0.25 to 0.40
Apartment dwelling areas 0.50 to 0.70
Industrial:
Light areas 0.50 to 0.80
Heavy areas 0.60 to 0.90
Parks, cemeteries 0.16 to 0.25
Playgrounds 0.20 to 0.35
Railroad yard areas 0.20 to 0.35
Unimproved areas 0.10 to 0.30
Streets:
Surface type:
Asphaltic 0.70 to 0.95
Concrete 0.80 to 0.95
Brick 0.70 to 0.85
Drives and walks 0.75 to 0.85
Roofs: 0.75 to 0.95
Flat: 2% 0.05 to 0.10
Average: 2% to 7% 0.10 to 0.15
Steep: 7% 0.15 to 0.20
Lawns: heavy soil:
Flat: 2% 0.13 to 0.17
Average: 2% to 7% 0.18 to 0.22
Steep: 7% 0.25 to 0.35
NOTE: The range of coefficients for each land use surface type
reflects differences in land slope, intensity of development,
amount of impervious surface and degree of ground
saturation due to antecedent precipitation.
§ 170-238 WELLS § 170-238
614:1261
(c) The runoff coefficients shall be determined for each site for
both existing and proposed conditions, and the difference in
the two shall be used to compute the volume of rainfall excess
for design of stormwater detention facilities. The volume for
design is equal to the depth of the rainfall excess multiplied by
the area of the site.
(d) The outlet(s) for any stormwater detention facility shall be
designed such that the discharge rate never exceeds the peak
runoff rate for conditions existing on or before the effective
date of this chapter and such that there is no adverse effect on
any other property.
(e) More sophisticated methods than the procedure described in
Subsection G(4)(a) and (c) above may be used to design
stormwater detention facilities. However, any method used
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(f) In the case of detention facilities utilizing porous media for
ground absorption, such as dry wells, porous pavement or the
like, the volume of the porous media shall be large enough to
contain the total volume of rainfall excess within the voids.
Ground absorption systems shall be used only where the
infiltration rate of the receiving soil is acceptable, as
determined by percolation tests and soil borings provided by
the developer. Provisions shall be made to contain overflow of
such systems on site or to surface-drain the overflow in such a
way as not to adversely affect any other property.
(g) If detention facilities utilizing surface impoundment, such as
detention basins or rooftop storage, are used, sufficient volume
to contain fully the total volume of rainfall excess shall be
provided. The outlet of such facilities shall discharge in such a
way as not to adversely affect any other property. If rooftop
storage is proposed, the weight of the impounded water on the
roof shall be accounted for in the structural design of the
building, and the roof shall be designed to provide maximum
protection against leakage. If earth berms or dikes are used to
create the impounding area, they shall be adequately stabilized
and the slope protected with vegetative cover, paving or riprap
to protect against failure or breaching.
(h) If a combination of different stormwater detention techniques
is used, the combined volume of the systems shall be large
enough to fully contain the total volume of rainfall excess.
(i) Stormwater detention facilities shall be maintained regularly
by the owner to ensure continual functioning of the systems at
design capacity and to prevent the health hazards associated
with debris buildup and stagnant water. In no case shall water
be allowed to remain in any facility long enough to constitute a
§ 170-238 UNION CODE § 170-238
614:1262
mosquito breeding, disease or any other type of health
problem. If the land containing the stormwater detention
facility or facilities is dedicated to the Township, then the
Township shall be responsible for maintenance.
(j) In accordance with the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act (P.L. 1975, c. 251),345 sediment and erosion control
measures shall be installed prior to any other site
development, shall apply to all aspects of the proposed
development and shall be in operation during all stages of
development. Increased runoff and sediment, resulting from
modified soil and surface conditions caused by the proposed
development, shall be minimized and, where possible, retained
on site. Detention and sediment and erosion control facilities
shall be designed in conformance with the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey of the New Jersey
State Soil Conservation Committee and administered by the
Somerset-Union Soil Conservation District.
H. Water supply. Water mains shall be constructed in such a manner as to
make adequate water service available to each lot or building within the
development. The entire system shall be designed in accordance with
requirements and standards of the local and/or state agency having
approval authority and shall be subject to their approval. The system
shall also be designed with adequate capacity and sustained pressure.
I. Sanitary sewers. Each lot within a subdivision area shall be provided
with sewage disposal facilities by the required extension of sewer mains
and connections thereto, the costs thereof to be borne by the
subdivider. All such installation of sewer mains and connections shall be
constructed in accordance with the specifications and requirements of
the Township and shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
J. Streetlighting of a type supplied by the utility and of a type and number
approved by the Township Engineer shall be provided for all street
intersections and along the arterial, collector and local streets and
anywhere else deemed necessary for safety reasons. Wherever electric
utility installations are required to be underground, the applicant shall
provide for underground service for streetlighting.
K. Public utilities.
(1) All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities
system where one exists. The developer shall arrange with the
servicing utility for the underground installation of the utilities
distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as part of its tariff, as the same are then on file with
the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners, and
345. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 170-238 WELLS § 170-238
614:1263
the developer shall provide the Township with four copies of a final
plan showing the installed location of the utilities. The developer
shall submit to the Board, prior to the granting of final approval, a
written instrument from each serving utility, which shall evidence
full compliance with the provisions of this subsection; provided,
however, that lots which abut existing streets where overhead
electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from these overhead lines, but any
new service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall
be installed underground. In cases where extensions of services
are needed to existing buildings or new buildings in established
subdivisions or industrial shopping centers, the present method of
service may be continued. In the case of existing overhead utilities,
however, should a road widening or an extension of service or other
such condition occur as a result of the development and necessitate
the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or
relocation shall be underground.
(2) In large-scale developments, easements along rear property lines
or elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such
easements shall be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation
with the companies or Township departments concerned and, to
the fullest extent possible, be centered on or adjacent to rear or
side lot lines. Such easement shall be expressed on the plat or plan
as follows: "Utility right-of-way easement granted for the purposes
provided for and expressed in the Land Development Ordinance."
L. Natural features.
(1) Natural features, such as trees, natural terrain, open waters and
natural drainage lines, shall be preserved whenever possible in
designing any development containing such features.
(2) A conscious effort shall be made to preserve all worthwhile trees
and shrubs which exist on the site. Stripping trees from a lot or
filling around trees on a lot shall not be permitted unless it can be
shown that grading or construction requirements necessitate the
removal or trees, in which case those lots shall be replanted with
trees to reestablish the tone of the area in conformance with
adjacent lots. All newly planted shade trees shall be of nursery
stock, shall have a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches and shall be of a
species approved by the Board. In any case, a sufficient number of
shade trees shall be provided and planted to ensure a minimum of
eight trees per acre of lot area. The location of all trees to be
planted shall be approved by the Board.
M. Shade trees. When required by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall
plant shade trees in the front yard of each residential lot in the
subdivision as designated by the Planning Board; the trees shall meet
§ 170-238 UNION CODE § 170-238
614:1264
§ 170-239. Site plans; on-site improvements; parking requirements.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the applicant shall have installed or
furnished performance guaranties, as set forth in § 170-243, for the ultimate
installation of any required improvements, as the same are described in
§ 170-238. In addition, the Planning Board may require the installation of
on-site improvements, as described below, prior to the granting of final
approval and which it finds essential before the issuance of a construction
permit and may require the furnishing of performance guaranties to insure
completion of remaining improvements. All such improvements shall be
subject to the approval and inspection of the Township Engineer. Site plans
shall comply to the requirements and the principles of design specified in
current standard specifications of the Township as to location, size,
species and planting.
N. Topsoil protection. Topsoil shall not be removed from a subdivision. For
purposes of this provision, topsoil shall be the existing top six inches of
arable soil. Topsoil from road surfaces and foundation excavations shall
be scraped and stored during the course of construction and
redistributed upon the completion of construction so as to provide an
even cover to all yard areas opened during the course of development of
any lot. Redistributed topsoil shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
O. Energy conservations.
(1) General. All subdivisions shall, to the greatest degree possible,
follow energy-efficient design principles and maximize the use of
renewable energy sources. Within the limits of practicability and
feasibility, the criteria listed below shall be followed.
(2) Streets. Streets shall be so oriented as to permit the buildings to be
constructed thereon to maximize solar gain. Where possible,
streets shall run in an east-west direction.
(3) Lots. Lots shall also be oriented as to permit buildings to be
constructed thereon to maximize solar gain. Where possible, the
long access of a lot shall run in a north-south direction.
(4) Topography. The development shall take advantage of topographic
features to maximize solar gain and afford protection from winter
winds. Where possible, development shall be oriented to southerly
slopes.
(5) Vegetation. Maximum use shall be made of natural vegetation
which will afford protection from winter winds and provide shading
in summer.
P. Monuments. The subdivider shall install monuments in accordance with
the requirements of the provisions of Section 3 of the Map Filing Law
(1960), Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11.
§ 170-238 WELLS § 170-239
614:1265
§ 170-238, Subdivisions, as determined to be applicable by the Township
Engineer.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for all new buildings or
uses or additions to existing buildings or uses in all zone districts,
except the UCBD Union Center Business District Zone or UCBD-II Zone
as described herein, there shall be provided the number of parking
spaces required by the specific use as prescribed in the following
schedule. Additional parking shall not be required for any change in use
within the UCBD, provided the proposed use is a permitted use within
the zone or is not part of a new mixed-use development. Parking within
the UCBD-II District shall be in accordance with the following schedule,
provided that the use is not part of a new mixed-use development.
Parking for mixed uses within the UCBD and UCBD-II Zones shall be in
accordance with the requirements of Note (1) below and § 170-239.1 as
applicable. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181; 1-26-1999 by
Ord. No. 4575; 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 5120; 5-10-2011 by Ord.
No. 5188]
Type of Use(1) Required Parking Spaces(2)
Assembly halls, community
buildings, private membership
clubs, lodges
1 for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area
Banks 1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Bowling alleys 4 for each lane
Buildings for tennis, squash,
racquetball, etc.
4 for each court
Churches, auditoriums,
theaters, arenas, etc.
1 for each 3 seats(3)
Community residences and
shelters under § 170-142
1 for each 3 residents
Funeral homes 1 for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area
Gymnasiums, health clubs 1 for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area
Home professional offices 3 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area, but not less than 2 spaces
Hospitals 2 for each bed
Hotels, motels 12 for each 10 rooms, plus additional
parking for restaurants, banquet
facilities, etc., as herein required
Manufacturing, assembly,
processing plants, etc.
1 for each 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Medical offices Same as office buildings
§ 170-239 UNION CODE § 170-239
614:1266
Type of Use(1) Required Parking Spaces(2)
Nursing homes 1 for each bed
Office buildings:
Under 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Over 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area
1 for each 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Public limousine service 1 for each motor vehicle, not to
exceed 3
Repair garages, motor vehicle
service stations
4 for each bay or work area
Research laboratories 1 for each 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Residential uses As required by Residential Site
Improvement Standards {R.S.I.S.
[N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14(b)]}
Restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments
1 for each 50 square feet of net floor
area(4)
Retail stores or service
establishments:
Food sales
Under 50,000 square feet
of gross floor area
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Over 50,000 square feet of
gross floor area
1 for each 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Nonfood sales
Under 100,000 square feet
of gross floor area
1 for each 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Over 100,000 square feet
of gross floor area
1 for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Schools:
Elementary 2 for each classroom or teacher
station
Intermediate 2.5 for each classroom or teacher
station
Secondary 3.0 for each classroom or teacher
station
Supermarket Same as retail food sales
Warehouse and storage 1 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 170-239 WELLS § 170-239
614:1267
Type of Use(1) Required Parking Spaces(2)
Wholesale distribution center 1 for each 800 square feet of gross
floor area
NOTES:
(1) In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street
parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements of the
various uses computed separately except where a shared parking
approach is permitted pursuant to the requirements of
§ 170-239.1, and off-street parking facilities for one use shall not
be considered as providing required parking facilities for any
other use except as herein specified and as may be permitted
in a shared parking approach as set forth in § 170-239.1C. For
any building or use not listed above, there shall be provided one
parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Fractional spaces: One-half space or more shall be counted as a
full space. Less than 1/2 space shall not be counted.
(3) One space shall be considered 22 inches when calculating the
capacity of pews and benches.
(4) Net floor area is defined as public area, excluding floor area
dedicated to restrooms.
B. Off-street loading. In all districts, for every building or use requiring the
receipt or distribution in vehicles of materials or merchandise, there
shall be maintained on the same premises with such building at least
one off-street loading space.
(1) Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet in width and 30 feet in
length and have a fourteen-foot clearance above grade; provided,
however, that the Planning Board may require additional length of
up to 55 feet, depending on the length of vehicles using space.
(2) Such space shall be located in the side or rear yard only, but in no
case in a side yard adjoining a street.
(3) Loading areas involving on-site maneuvering of trucks shall have
provision for a minimum turning path for a WB-50 design vehicle in
accordance with standards published by AASHTO and shown in the
diagram appended to this chapter when articulated vehicles are
allowed access to the site. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
C. Parking space size. Each parking space shall have minimum length of
20 feet (18 feet where curb overhand is provided) and a minimum width
of nine feet measured perpendicular to the axis of the length. The
minimum number of off-street parking spaces specified in Subsection A
may be reduced at the discretion of the Board if the applicant can
demonstrate adequate parking for the proposed use. However, the
applicant shall reserve the land required to meet the minimum number
of spaces for future use should the additional parking spaces become
§ 170-239 UNION CODE § 170-239
614:1268
necessary. Such reserved land shall be appropriately landscaped in
the interim. When parking spaces are provided within a garage or
other structure, said structure shall adhere to the proper accessory or
principal building setbacks.
D. Parking aisle widths. The provision of parking spaces shall also include
adequate driveway and necessary turning areas for handling the
vehicles for which provision is made. Parallel parking space shall be a
minimum of 22 feet in length and 10 feet wide. Parking areas shall be
designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the
parking space provided to it without requiring the moving of any other
motor vehicles. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall have the
following minimum dimensions. Where the angle of parking is different
on both sides of the aisle, the larger aisle width shall prevail.
Angle of Parking Space
(degrees)
1-Way Aisle
(feet)
2-Way Aisle
(feet)
90 Prohibited 24
60 18 20
45 15 20
30 12 18
Parallel 12 18
E. Parking setbacks, off-street parking and loading requirements.
[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(1) All off-street parking and loading areas, except for parking which is
accessory to one- or two-family dwellings, shall, unless otherwise
provided by this chapter, meet the location requirements
prescribed in the following schedule:346
SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM DISTANCES
FOR LOCATION OF PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
Zone(1)
From
Buildings
(feet)(2)
From
Streets
(feet)(4)
From
Property
Lines
(feet)
From
Residential
Zones
(feet)(5)
RA 10 10 10 10
RB 10 10 10 10
RC 10 10 10 10
RD 10 10 10 10
RM and
US
10 10 10 10
346. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-239 WELLS § 170-239
614:1269
SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM DISTANCES
FOR LOCATION OF PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
Zone(1)
From
Buildings
(feet)(2)
From
Streets
(feet)(4)
From
Property
Lines
(feet)
From
Residential
Zones
(feet)(5)
BA 5(3) 10 10 10
BB 5(3) 10 10 10
BC 10 10 10 10
I 10 10 10 25
OB and
IO
10 25 10 25
H 10 10 10 10
C 10 25 10 25
NOTES:
(1) All uses except one-family dwellings.
(2) Loading areas and parking spaces adjoining garage doors
excepted.
(3) Ten feet from front of building.
(4) Parking prohibited in front yard except for parking in
residential driveway or in the I Industrial District, provided
that no parking shall be situate within 100 feet of any
residential zone. [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380;
7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 4414]
(5) But not less than 10% of the average lot depth from a rear
property line.
(2) Transitional landscaped buffer areas.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection O(1) of § 170-239,
a transitional landscaped buffer area of 25 feet shall be
required on all lots in all zones, except the residential zones,
along all side and rear property lines when the same abut a
residential zone or residential lot, and including lots that are
split-zoned with a residential zone.
(b) In the case of undersized lots, said requirement may be
reduced as a minimum design standard to 10% of the affected
lot width or lot depth (whichever applied), but in no case less
than the footages set forth as parking/loading setbacks in
Subsection E(1) above, plus five feet.
§ 170-239 UNION CODE § 170-239
614:1270
(c) The parking/loading and transitional buffer requirements shall
not pyramid; however, the minimum footages provided shall
equal the greater requirement. Additionally, parking space
overhangs shall not intrude into the minimum transitional
buffer area.
F. Surfacing. All parking and loading areas and access drives shall be
paved as outlined below or the equivalent as determined by the
Township Engineer and approved as part of the development
application approval. All parking areas, regardless of size and location,
shall be suitably paved, drained and maintained.
(1) Areas of ingress or egress, loading and unloading areas, major
interior driveways or access aisles and other areas likely to
experience similar heavy traffic shall be paved with not less than
four inches of compacted base course of plant-mixed bituminous,
stabilized base course, constructed in layers of not more than two
inches compacted thickness and prepared and constructed in
accordance with Division 3, Section 2A, of the New Jersey State
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridge
Construction (1983) and amendments thereto. A minimum twoinch-
thick compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete
(FABC) shall be constructed thereon in accordance with Division 3,
Section 10, of the aforesaid New Jersey State Highway Department
specifications and amendments thereto.
(2) Parking stall areas and other areas likely to experience similar light
traffic shall be paved with not less than three inches of compacted
base course of plant-mixed bituminous, stabilized base course,
prepared and constructed in accordance with Division 3, Section
10, of the aforesaid New Jersey State Highway Department
Specifications and amendments thereto. A minimum two-inch-thick
compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete (FABC) shall be
constructed thereon in accordance with Division 3, Section 10, of
the aforesaid New Jersey State Highway Department specifications
and amendments thereto.
(3) Where subbase conditions of proposed parking and loading areas
are wet, springy or of such a nature that surfacing would be
inadvisable without first treating the subbase, the treatment of the
subbases shall be made in the following manner: The areas shall be
excavated to a depth of six to 12 inches below the proposed
finished grade and filled with suitable subbase material, as
determined by the Township Engineer. Where required by the
Township Engineer, a system of porous concrete pipe subsurface
drains shall be constructed beneath the surface of the parking area
and connected to a suitable drain. After the subbase material has
been properly placed and compacted, the parking area surfacing
material, as described heretofore, shall be spread thereon.
§ 170-239 WELLS § 170-239
614:1271
G. Curbing. All paved areas shall be bounded by concrete or granite block
curbing six inches above the paved surfaces and meeting specifications
provided by the Township Engineer. Curb cuts or flush curbs with curb
stops shall be utilized wherever possible or where directed by the
Township Engineer to meet the requirements of nonstructural
stormwater management strategies as outlined in Article XXIX for
applicable applications. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4940]
H. Marking. All off-street parking lots shall have adequate designations to
indicate traffic flow and parking spaces.
I. Drainage and stormwater control. Adequate provision shall be made for
storm drainage facilities and control following the provisions of §
170-238F and G and, if applicable, Article XXIX. [Amended 3-28-2006
by Ord. No. 4940]
J. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in appropriate locations
between buildings and parking areas as required by the Planning
Board. When used in pedestrian sidewalks or ornamental walkways as
part of a landscape plan, paver blocks shall be set in a bed of mortar
and grouted with mortar. When used as an ornamental edging, paver
blocks shall be treated as curbing and set in mortar so as to prevent
shifting. Paver blocks shall be considered impervious surface.
[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
K. Driveway aprons. No driveway or apron shall be constructed unless the
same complies with the following requirements:
(1) Business and industrial zones.
(a) All such driveways or aprons shall be constructed of concrete
or bituminous concrete.
(b) Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and a
maximum of 20 feet wide for one-way traffic, and a minimum of
20 feet wide and a maximum of 30 feet wide for two-way
traffic. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(c) No apron may be located within 10 feet of an end-of-radius
curve at an intersecting street.
(2) Residential zones. Residential zones are regulated in § 170-136.1.
[Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(3) In such instances as may require two or more aprons at one
location, there shall be at least 35 feet of curbing of the same
height as contiguous curbs in the area between said driveway
apron.
(4) Curbing shall be depressed at the driveway or the curbing may be
rounded at the corners and the driveway connected with the street
in the same manner as another street.
§ 170-239 UNION CODE § 170-239
614:1272
(5) Driveways for nonresidential uses shall have a minimum width of
10 feet for one-way traffic and 20 feet for two-way traffic and shall
conform to the transition requirements of § 170-51.
L. Location of parking and loading.
(1) No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in fire lanes, landscaped
areas, aisles, buffer areas, sidewalks or turning areas.
(2) The off-street parking facilities required for one-family, two-family
and multifamily dwellings shall be on the same lot or parcel of land
as the buildings they are intended to serve.
(3) The off-street parking facilities required for nonresidential uses, as
permitted by this chapter, shall be provided within 250 feet of the
building they are intended to service, measured to the nearest
point of the building. However, nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as including any municipal parking lot, conducted and
maintained by the Township of Union, as satisfying any off-street
parking requirement.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection L(3) above, the
following provisions shall apply to certain uses: [Added 3-10-1992
by Ord. No. 4181]
(a) Parking for restaurants in the BB and BC Districts shall be
located on site.
(b) Parking for hotels and motels in the BC District shall be met on
site and may be accommodated on grade, subgrade or in a
basement, on parking decks or in parking garages.
(5) Parking shall be accommodated on grade, subgrade or in a
basement, on parking decks or in parking garages. [Added
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(6) Required parking for a gymnasium in the BB District shall be met
on-site unless there exists a municipal parking lot located within
250 feet of the facility. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
M. Lighting. All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant
passageways and driveways serving commercial, public, office,
industrial, apartment or other similar uses having common off-street
parking and/or loading areas and building complexes requiring area
lighting shall be adequately illuminated for security and safety
purposes. The lighting plan in and around the parking areas shall
provide for nonflare color-corrected lights focused downward. The light
intensity provided at ground level shall be a minimum of 0.3 footcandle
anywhere in the area to be illuminated, shall average a minimum of 0.5
footcandle over the entire area and shall be provided by fixtures with a
mounting height of not more than 25 feet or the height of the building,
whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the center line of
§ 170-239 WELLS § 170-239
614:1273
the light source, spaced a distance not to exceed five times the
mounting height. The light intensity shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle
along any property line or 0.3 footcandle at a residential property line.
Any other outdoor lighting, such as building and sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient
detail to allow determination of the effects to adjacent properties,
traffic safety and overhead sky flow. The objective of these
specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light
shall shine into windows or onto streets and driveways in such manner
as to interfere with or distract driver vision. To achieve these
requirements, the intensity of such light sources, the light shielding
and similar characteristics shall be subject to municipal review and
approval. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
N. Natural features. The provisions of § 170-238L, regarding preservation
of natural features, shall be complied with.
O. Landscaping and screening.
(1) Except for one- and two-family detached dwellings, a screen
planting of a dense evergreen material not less than four feet in
height shall be provided between the off-street parking areas and
any lot line or street line, except where a building intervenes or
where the distance between such areas and the lot line or street
line is greater than 150 feet. See § 170-239E(2). [Amended
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4181]
(2) All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened sufficiently to
obscure the view of the parked vehicle and loading platforms from
any public street, adjacent residential districts or uses and the
front yards of adjacent commercial and industrial uses. Such
screening shall be by an extension of the building, a fence, a wall,
planting or a combination thereof and shall not be less than four
feet in height.
(3) Each off-street parking area shall have a minimum area equivalent
to one parking space per every 30 parking spaces landscaped with
half of said spaces having shrubs no higher than three feet and the
other half having trees with branches no lower than seven feet.
Such landscaped spaces shall be distributed throughout the
parking area in order to break the view of long rows of parked cars
in a manner not impairing visibility and shall not be construed as
meeting the requirements for buffers or screening as specified in
this chapter.
P. Barrier-free construction. Barrier-free construction for handicapped
persons shall be included as required by law.
Q. Energy conservation. All site plans shall, to the greatest degree
possible, follow energy-efficient design principles and maximize the use
§ 170-239 UNION CODE § 170-239
614:1274
of renewable energy sources. Within the limits of practicability and
feasibility, the criteria listed below shall be followed.
(1) Buildings shall be oriented to maximize solar gain. Where possible,
building walls with the greatest number of windows or window
area shall face in a southerly direction. The use of active and
passive solar energy gain systems in buildings is encouraged.
(2) Buildings shall be arranged to provide maximum protection for
each other in terms of energy-consuming elements.
(3) The use of energy-efficient building materials and colors is
encouraged.
(4) Site arrangement shall take advantage of topographic features to
maximize solar gain and afford protection from winter winds.
(5) Natural vegetation and landscaping, including fences, walls and
earthworks, shall be utilized to maximize protection from wind,
channel breezes and shade buildings and pavement.
(6) The site shall be designed to minimize pavement and afford
efficient circulation. The use of footpaths and bike paths in
multifamily housing developments, in order to reduce motor
vehicle use, is encouraged.
R. Building design. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to
the terrain and to existing buildings in the vicinity that have a visual
relationship to the proposed buildings. Such relationship shall be
achieved by:
(1) Architectural design which is harmonious with the character of
existing development.
(2) The use of exterior colors, facades or roof materials or the
combination of colors and materials that are harmonious.
(3) The relationship of design features such as height and mass,
building proportions, rooflines, building projections and
ornamental features that will create a coordinated and harmonious
appearance.
(4) It is the intention and purpose of this section to endeavor to have
all exterior designs throughout the area herein set forth to be
representative of the type and nature of business structures in
existence during the Colonial era to the end that, with the passage
of time, a Williamsburg facade will be existent in all BA, BB and BC
Zones of the Township of Union.
S. Trash, garbage and solid waste. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No.
4181]
§ 170-239 WELLS § 170-239
614:1275
(1) For every use, the applicant shall provide an estimate of the
amount of trash, garbage and other solid waste, including
recyclable and nonrecyclable materials. The applicant shall also
submit a description of the proposed means of storage of all waste
material, the nature and frequency of collection or removal from
the site and the number, sizes and locations of containers. The
applicant shall demonstrate that the containers to be provided have
sufficient capacity to accommodate all waste materials based upon
anticipated generation rate, sizes of containers and frequency of
collection.
(2) At least one refuse location shall be provided for each building.
Said area shall be separate from parking spaces by either a location
within the building or in a pickup location outside the building
obscured from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent
residential uses or zoning district by a fence, wall, planting or
combination thereof. If located within the building, the doorway
may serve both the loading and refuse functions and, if located
outside the building, may be located adjacent to or within the
general loading area(s), provided that the container in no way
interferes with or restricts loading and unloading functions.
(3) All refuse containers shall be completely enclosed and constructed
of steel and shall comply with requirements of the Federal
Consumer Product Safety Commission.
(4) In multifamily residential developments containing 25 or more
units and in nonresidential developments utilizing 1,000 square
feet or more of land area, the applicant shall submit the location
and description of provisions for the recycling of recyclable
materials in accordance with Chapter 462, Solid Waste; Recycling.
T. Site maintenance. All buildings, paved areas, landscaping and other site
facilities and improvements shall be adequately maintained at all times.
Dead trees or shrubs shall be replaced by the owner. Failure of the
owner to comply with these provisions within 30 days of notification by
the administrative officer, weather permitting, shall be a violation of
this chapter.
U. Other matters. The Planning Board shall give consideration to such
other elements or aspects of the site plan or proposed use as may relate
to the design of the plan, the general environment of the area or the
health, safety and general welfare of the public, and the Planning Board
may require items of construction, such as retaining walls, guardrails,
safety fencing, traffic barricades or other devices, necessary in the
interest of public safety and convenience.
§ 170-239 UNION CODE § 170-239.1
614:1276
§ 170-239.1. Shared parking. [Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 5188]
A shared parking approach may be permitted for mixed-use developments
to meet off-street parking requirements in the UCBD and UCBD-2 Zones
subject to the review procedures specified herein.
A. An applicant requesting approval of a shared parking approach shall
prepare and submit a shared parking analysis report to the Board and
its professionals for review. In preparing the analysis, the applicant
shall follow the procedures for shared parking specified in the current
edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Parking
Generation. The report shall evaluate and illustrate the temporal
distribution of the parking demand for all of the uses proposed and
confirm that the peak parking demand can be met either fully on site or
through an approved off-site parking arrangement with the Township
for utilization of a municipally-owned parking lot or facility.
B. For the purpose of calculating the peak parking demand for a shared
parking approach, the minimum number of parking spaces for each use
shall be as follows:
(1) Retail (food): one space per 500 gross square feet.
(2) Retail (non-food): one space per 500 gross square feet.
(3) Office: one space per 500 gross square feet.
(4) Bank: one space per 500 gross square feet.
(5) Theater: one space per 200 gross square feet.
(6) Restaurant: one space per 200 gross square feet.
(7) Residential: as required by Residential Site Improvement
Standards (R.S.I.S.) [N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14(b)].
(8) Other uses not specified above: pursuant to Township standards as
specified in § 170-239A or if not specified therein in accordance
with as specified in the current edition of the ITE Parking
Generation Manual.
C. When using an off-site parking arrangement with the Township as part
of a shared parking approach, all or a portion of the parking may be
provided as off-site parking at a municipally owned lot or parking
facility located within the same shared parking zone as the proposed
development site. Shared parking zones include areas within the UCBD
and UCBD-2 Districts plus additional areas as described in the
accompanying Shared Parking Zone Map347 adopted as part of this
section and are generally described as follows:
347. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 170-239.1 WELLS § 170-239.1
614:1277
(1) Zone 1: south of Morris Avenue between Johnson Place and Floyd
Terrace, including Blocks 2902, 2903, and portions of 2904, 2905,
2906, 2917 and 2918.
(2) Zone 2: north of Morris Ave to Vauxhall Road, including Block 4214
and portions of 4211 (municipal parking lot only), 4213, 4215,
2319, and 2320.
(3) Zone 3: north of Vauxhall Road to Lentz and Mountainview
Avenues, including portions of Blocks 5207, 5208, 5212, 2303, and
2302.
D. The net additional parking demand on municipal parking shall be
calculated pursuant to the shared parking analysis as follows:
(1) Calculate the net peak demand on municipal parking for both
nonresidential and residential uses as follows:
A Total number of parking spaces required to satisfy
nonresidential uses at point of peak demand
B Total number of parking spaces required to satisfy
residential uses at point of peak demand
C Total number of parking spaces required to satisfy peak
demand (residential and nonresidential combined) (A+B)
D Less on-site parking supply (existing to remain and
proposed)
E Net peak demand on municipal parking (C-D)
(2) Calculate the net nonresidential parking demand at the point of
total peak parking demand:
A Total number of parking spaces required to satisfy
nonresidential uses at point of peak demand
D Less on-site parking supply (existing to remain and
proposed)
F Net nonresidential demand on municipal parking at peak (A
- D)
(3) Calculate the additional demand on municipal parking associated
with the residential component as follows:
C Total peak demand on municipal parking (A + B)
F Net nonresidential demand on municipal parking at peak (A
- D)
G Net additional demand on municipal parking at peak (C - F)
(4) If the available on-site parking is greater than nonresidential
demand at peak (i.e., the number in Row F above is negative), then
the net additional demand on municipal parking at peak is
§ 170-239.1 UNION CODE § 170-239.1
614:1278
calculated by subtracting the available on-site parking from the
residential parking demand at peak (Row B).
E. The applicant shall pay a fee to the Township of $500 per space for the
net additional parking demand on municipal parking.
F. Annual parking permits for residential uses.
(1) The Township will establish and make available an annual
allocation of municipal parking permits for use by the residential
occupants of the mixed-use development equivalent to the number
of parking spaces required by Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS). Each residential unit will be entitled to a
minimum of one parking permit and a maximum of two parking
permits up to the limit of spaces allocated to the development.
(2) Municipal parking permits will permit residents to park in
municipal parking lots overnight or when no on-site parking is
available. A municipal parking permit shall not guarantee the
availability of a space in a municipal lot, nor shall a specific
municipal parking space be allocated to a residential unit unless
otherwise permitted by the Township.
(3) The annual municipal parking shall be $250 per year or an amount
equivalent to the annual per space maintenance cost as determined
by the Township plus an administrative fee as may be established
by municipal ordinance.
(4) The Township Administrator shall be responsible for administering
the municipal parking permits set forth as part of the shared
parking program.
§ 170-239.1 WELLS § 170-239.1
614:1279

ARTICLE XXIX
Stormwater Management and Control
[Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4940348]
§ 170-240. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Stormwater
Management and Control Ordinance of the Township of Union."
§ 170-241. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management measures and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural measures include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated loading of
potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be
necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water
quality, quantity and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development as defined in § 170-242, Definitions.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Union.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this article are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
development permit, subdivision and site plan review process and do
not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
348. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Arts. XXIX,
XXX and XXXI as Arts. XXX, XXXI and XXXII, respectively.
§ 170-240 WELLS § 170-241
614:1281
§ 170-242. Definitions.
act or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
The definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding
definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 170-241 UNION CODE § 170-242
614:1282
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — See definition in § 170-5.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by
the Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Union.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Union or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
§ 170-242 WELLS § 170-242
614:1283
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural and construction waste or runoff or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or
surface waters of the state or to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant
includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported or has been moved from its site or origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future
redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin) retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin) or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood given priority access to state
resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 170-242 UNION CODE § 170-242
614:1284
§ 170-243. General standards.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 170-244. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
§ 170-242 WELLS § 170-244
614:1285
§ 170-244. General stormwater management requirements for
major development.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 170-250.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13-:1B15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 170-244F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of § 170-244F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing
public roadway or railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a
public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 170-244F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 170-244F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under § 170-244D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
§ 170-244 UNION CODE § 170-244
614:1286
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 170-244F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 170-244F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 170-244E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed.
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 170-244E(3) below;
§ 170-244 WELLS § 170-244
614:1287
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 170-244E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard, see § 170-244E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle sale grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb
opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates and grates
of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, playas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
§ 170-244 UNION CODE § 170-244
614:1288
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 170-244G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 170-244G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 170-244F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices (BMP) Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from
the address identified in § 170-247 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
§ 170-244 WELLS § 170-244
614:1289
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 170-245, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to § 170-244F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas wheLre pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
§ 170-244 UNION CODE § 170-244
614:1290
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 170-245, complete one of
the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two- , ten- , and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two- , ten- , and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area; or
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two- , ten- , and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
§ 170-244 WELLS § 170-244
614:1291
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development in § 170-242 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this article and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section,, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
§ 170-244 UNION CODE § 170-244
614:1292
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 170-247 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 170-247. Total
suspended solids (TSS) reduction shall be calculated based on the
removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the
capability of these alternative rates and methods to the review
agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of
calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at
be following address: Division of Watershed Management, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetand
90
§ 170-244 WELLS § 170-244
614:1293
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Extended detention basin 40 to 60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device § 170-246C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60 to 80
Wet pond 50 to 90
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AxB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 170-244F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 170-247.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
§ 170-244 UNION CODE § 170-244
614:1294
County Soil Surveys within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under § 170-244G(8)(a)[1] above
shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
§ 170-244 WELLS § 170-244
614:1295
§ 170-245. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 170-244G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
§ 170-244G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in § 170-244G(8)(a)[1] above. In no
case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the special water resource protection area to less
than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection,
(e) Section 170-244G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
§ 170-244 UNION CODE § 170-245
614:1296
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 170-245A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 170-245A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient
or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods) or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
§ 170-245 WELLS § 170-245
614:1297
§ 170-246. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 170-248D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4 and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
§ 170-245 UNION CODE § 170-246
614:1298
§ 170-247. Sources for technical guidance.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 170-248.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 170-244 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 170-244 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; Telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bio-retention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
§ 170-246 WELLS § 170-247
614:1299
§ 170-248. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(3) The Somerset-Union Conservation Districts, Somerset County 4-H
Center, 308 Milltown Road, Bridgewater, New Jersey 08807,
(908)526-2701.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
(3) For purposes of this subsection, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
§ 170-247 UNION CODE § 170-248
614:1300
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 170-248C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See § 170-248D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 170-248 WELLS § 170-249
614:1301
§ 170-249. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 170-249C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with § 170-249C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision, site
plan or development application review process by the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment or official from which municipal approval is
sought. The Board and/or Zoning Officer shall consult the Township
Engineer or other such engineer (as appropriate) to determine if all of
the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the
project meets the standards set forth in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of properly lines and significant natural and
manmade features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis.
(a) A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made
features of the site and its environs. This description should
include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands,
waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention
should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
§ 170-249 UNION CODE § 170-249
614:1302
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 170-243
through 170-246 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 170-244 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
§ 170-249 WELLS § 170-249
614:1303
§ 170-250. Maintenance and repair.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 170-750.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The board reviewing an
application under this article may, in consultation with the
Township Engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements in
§ 170-249C(1) through (6) of this section when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 170-244C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of Sections § 170-250B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170-250B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 170-250B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
§ 170-249 UNION CODE § 170-250
614:1304
§ 170-251. Violations and penalties.
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170-250B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170-250B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170-250B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 170-250B(6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 170-250B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have five days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Township
Engineer or his designee. The Township, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the Township may immediately
proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible
person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in Municipal Court, be punishable by imposition of
the penalties set forth in Chapter 170, Article XXXII.
§ 170-250 WELLS § 170-251
614:1305
§ 170-252. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause
of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article.
§ 170-253. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this article are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 170-254. Publication.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed, upon adoption of this article after
public hearing thereon, to publish notice of the passage thereof and to file a
copy of this article as finally adopted with the Union County Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16. The Clerk shall also forthwith transmit
a copy of this article after final passage to the Township Tax Assessor as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:49-2.1.
§ 170-255. Effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency or 60 days from the receipt of the article by the County
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
B. Each instance of engaging in a separate regulated activity in violation
of this article shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. In addition, the Township may institute civil action for injunctive or
other relief to enforce the provision of this article.
§ 170-251 UNION CODE § 170-255
614:1306
ARTICLE XXIXA
Riparian Buffer Conservation Zone349
[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 5098]
§ 170-255.1. Intent; purpose.
The governing body finds that riparian lands adjacent to streams, lakes,
or other surface water bodies that are adequately vegetated provide an
important environmental protection and water resource management
benefit. It is necessary to protect and maintain the beneficial character
of riparian areas by implementing specifications for the establishment,
protection, and maintenance of vegetation along the surface water bodies
within the jurisdiction of the Township, consistent with the interest of
landowners in making reasonable economic use of parcels of land that
include such designated areas. The purpose of this article is to designate
riparian zones, and to provide for land use regulation therein in order to
protect the streams, lakes, and other surface water bodies of the Township;
to protect the water quality of watercourses, reservoirs, lakes, and other
significant water resources within the Township; to protect the riparian
and aquatic ecosystems of the Township; to provide for the environmentally
sound use of the land resources of the Township, and to complement
existing state, regional, county, and municipal stream corridor protection
and management regulations and initiatives. The specific purposes and
intent of this article are to:
A. Restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of
the water resources of the Township;
B. Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment, and organic matter, as well as
biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface waters by
optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition, absorption,
adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, and denitrification, which
occur when stormwater runoff is conveyed through vegetated buffers as
stable, distributed flow prior to reaching receiving waters;
C. Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to moderate
temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and support a healthy
assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna;
D. Provide for the availability of natural organic matter (leaves and twigs)
and large woody debris (trees and limbs) that provide food and habitat
for aquatic organisms (insects, amphibians, crustaceans, and small
fish), which are essential to maintain the food chain;
E. Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream bank
349. The requirements set forth in Article XXIXA are consistent with those found in the State
of New Jersey's Stormwater Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, and the Water Quality Management Planning rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:15.
§ 170-255.1 WELLS § 170-255.1
614:1307
§ 170-255.2. Statutory authority.
The Township of Union is empowered to regulate land uses under the
provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., which authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate land use
in order to protect public health, safety and welfare by protecting and
maintaining native vegetation in riparian areas. The Township is also
empowered to adopt and implement this article under provisions provided
by the following legislative authorities of the State of New Jersey:
§ 170-255.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acidproducing
soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment or Construction Office with all of the powers delegated,
assigned, or assumed by them according to statute or ordinance.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction
Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this article, and that would be located in whole or in part within a
regulated riparian zone.
erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for aquatic
organisms;
F. Maintain base flows in streams and moisture in wetlands;
G. Control downstream flooding; and
H. Conserve the natural features important to land and water resources,
e.g., headwater areas, groundwater recharge zones, floodways,
floodplains, springs, streams, wetlands, woodlands, and prime wildlife
habitats.
A. Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
B. Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
C. Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.
D. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
E. Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
§ 170-255.1 UNION CODE § 170-255.3
614:1308
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — The meaning ascribed to this
term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:9B, for purposes
of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in those standards,
for protection from measurable changes in water quality characteristics
because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other characteristics
of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance, or
exceptional fisheries resources.
CATEGORY TWO WATERS or C2 WATERS — Those waters not designated
as outstanding natural resource waters or Category One waters in the
Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:9B, for purposes of
implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in those standards.
FLOODWAY — The meaning ascribed to this term by the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., and regulations promulgated
thereunder published at N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq., and any supplementary or
successor legislation and regulations from time to time enacted or
promulgated.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special
water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys.
LAKE, POND, or RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water
resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys; that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water resource
protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in
the county soil surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their
point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant
§ 170-255.3 WELLS § 170-255.3
614:1309
to the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
RIPARIAN ZONE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan approved by the Township
Engineer. The plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect, professional
engineer or other qualified professional, and shall evaluate the effects of
any proposed activity/uses on any riparian zone. The plan shall identify
existing conditions, all proposed activities, and all proposed management
techniques, including any measures necessary to offset disturbances to any
affected riparian zone.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and shown
on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream,
lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any regulated water
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-22 or state
open waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued under the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Division of Land Use
Regulation shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 6 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq., or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.IV.
§ 170-255.4. Establishment of riparian zones.
A. Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be protected
from avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed. This includes special
water resource protection areas or SWRPAs as defined herein and
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil, Surveys
§ 170-255.3 UNION CODE § 170-255.4
614:1310
within the associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the surface water body;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the surface
water body for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the
length of the surface water body; and
(d) Any segment of a surface water body flowing through an area
that contains acid-producing soils.
(3) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide
shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
B. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top-of-bank. If a discernible bank
is not present along a surface water body, the portion of the riparian
zone outside the surface water body is measured landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or swale, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line;
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit;
(3) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the mean high waterline; and
(4) Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a definable channel, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
(5) Where slopes (in excess of 15%) are located within the designated
widths, the riparian zone shall be extended to include the entire
distance of this sloped area to a maximum of 300 feet.
(6) For areas adjacent to surface water bodies for which the floodway
has been delineated per the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:13-3 or the state's adopted floodway delineations, the
riparian zone shall cover the entire floodway area, or the area
described in § 170-255.4A(1) or (2) above, whichever area has the
§ 170-255.4 WELLS § 170-255.4
614:1311
greatest extent. Requests for alterations to the adopted
delineations can be provided to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection for consideration if site-specific
information is available.
C. A riparian zone is an overlay to the existing zoning districts. The
provisions of the underlying district shall remain in full force except
where the provisions of the riparian zone differ from the provisions of
the underlying district, in which case the provision that is more
restrictive shall apply. These provisions apply to land disturbances
resulting from or related to any activity or use requiring application for
any of the following permits or approvals:
(1) Building permit.
(2) Zoning variance.
(3) Special exception.
(4) Conditional use.
(5) Subdivision/land development approval.
D. A map of the riparian zones of the entire Township, including all land
and water areas within its boundaries, which designates surface water
bodies, is included as part of this article, and is appended as Figure
1.350 Maps of the municipality on which these designations have been
overlain shall be on file and maintained by the offices of the Township
Clerk. This map conforms to all applicable laws, rules and regulations
applicable to the creation, modification and promulgation of zoning
maps.
E. It shall be the duty of the Township Engineer, every second year after
the adoption of this article, to propose modifications to the map
delineating riparian zones required by any naturally occurring or
permitted change in the location of a defining feature of a surface water
body occurring after the initial adoption of the riparian zone map, to
record all modifications to the riparian zone map required by decisions
or appeals under § 170-255.11, and by changes made by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection in surface water
classifications or floodway delineations.
F. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site, and for
identifying the area on any plan submitted to the Township in
conjunction with an application for a construction permit, subdivision,
land development, or other improvement that requires plan
submissions or permits. This initial determination shall be subject to
review and approval by the Municipal Engineer, governing body, or its
350. Editor's Note: A copy of Figure 1 is available in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 170-255.4 UNION CODE § 170-255.4
614:1312
appointed representative, and, where required, by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
G. The municipal Master Plan provides the legal basis for zoning and land
use regulation at the local level. The technical foundation for local
riparian zones in this municipality should be incorporated into the
Master Plan. A technical report on the need for riparian zones in the
Township may be adopted as part of the Master Plan, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28b(11). The technical report should include the following
information: a statement setting forth the rationale and need to protect
riparian zones; and reference to the methods used to designate and
delineate riparian zones.
H. Exemptions. Instead of the riparian zone protection requirements
above, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with one of the
following:
(1) The proposed project or activity is not in the riparian zone
established at § 170-255.4A above;
(2) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is for a linear
development with no feasible alternative route. If the riparian zone
is associated with Category One waters, the linear development
must also meet the requirements for special water resource
protection areas under the Stormwater Management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h);
(3) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is in accordance with a
stream corridor restoration or stream bank stabilization plan or
project approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection;
(4) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is necessary to provide
for public pedestrian access or water-dependent recreation that
meets the requirements of the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E;
(5) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or federal oversight
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11a et seq. or the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 9601 et seq.;
(6) The proposed disturbance is for redevelopment that does not
exceed the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
(7) The proposed disturbance would prevent extraordinary hardship
on the property owner peculiar to the property; or prevent
extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not created by
§ 170-255.4 WELLS § 170-255.4
614:1313
§ 170-255.5. Uses permitted in riparian zones.
the property owner, that would not permit a minimum economically
viable use of the property based upon reasonable investment; and/
or
(8) Demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed development
and topography that new disturbance is not located in areas with a
twenty-percent-or-greater slope, except as allowed under
Subsection H(6) and (7) above.
A. For riparian zones in Category One waters (C1 waters), permitted uses
are governed by the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13,
unless otherwise exempt.
B. Any other riparian zone area shall remain in a natural condition or, if in
a disturbed condition, including agricultural activities, at the time of
adoption of this article, may be restored to a natural condition. There
shall be no clearing or cutting of trees and brush, except for removal of
dead vegetation and pruning for reasons of public safety or for the
replacement of invasive species with indigenous species. There shall be
no altering of watercourses, dumping of trash, soil, dirt, fill, vegetative
or other debris, regrading or construction. The following uses are
permitted either by right or after review and approval by the
municipality in riparian zones. No new construction, development, use,
activity, encroachment, or structure shall take place in a riparian zone,
except as specifically authorized in this section. The following uses shall
be permitted within a riparian zone:
(1) Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted by right to extend into a riparian zone, provided near
stream vegetation is preserved. These uses do not require approval
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or compliance with an approved
riparian zone management plan. Such uses include wildlife
sanctuaries, mature preserves, forest preserves, fishing areas,
game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing reserves, operated for the
protection and propagation of wildlife, but excluding structures.
Such uses also include passive recreation areas of public and
private parklands, including unpaved hiking, bicycle and bridle
trails, provided that said trail has been stabilized with pervious
materials.
(2) Fences, for which a permit has been issued by the Construction
Code Office, to the extent required by applicable law, rule or
regulation.
(3) Crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, recreational trails, roads,
railroads, storm waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, waterlines and
public utility transmission lines, provided that the land disturbance
is the minimum required to accomplish the permitted use, subject
§ 170-255.4 UNION CODE § 170-255.5
614:1314
§ 170-255.6. Performance standards for riparian zones.
to approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, provided that any
applicable state permits are acquired, and provided that any
disturbance is offset by buffer improvements in compliance with an
approved riparian zone management plan and that the area of the
crossing is stabilized against significant erosion due to its use as a
crossing.
(4) Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which conform
to the guidelines of an approved riparian zone management plan,
or wetlands mitigation projects that have been approved by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, subject to
approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and subject to
compliance with an approved riparian zone management plan.
A. All encroachments proposed into riparian zones in C1 waters shall
comply with the requirements of the Stormwater Management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C.
7:13, and shall be subject to review and approval by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, unless exempt.
B. For all other riparian zones, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) All new major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall be
designed to provide sufficient areas outside of the riparian zone to
accommodate primary structures, any normal accessory uses
appurtenant thereto, as well as all planned lawn areas.
(2) Portions of lots within the riparian zone must be permanently
restricted by deed or conservation easement held by the Township,
its agent, or another public or private land conservation
organization which has the ability to provide adequate protection
to prevent adverse impacts within the riparian zone. A complete
copy of the recorded conservation restriction that clearly identifies
the deed book and pages where it has been recorded in the Union
County Clerk's office or the registrar of deeds and mortgages of
Union County must be submitted to the Township. The applicant
shall not commence with the project or activity prior to making this
submittal and receiving actual approval of the plan modification
and receipt of any applicable permits from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. The recorded
conservation restriction shall be in the form approved by the
municipality and shall run with the land and be binding upon the
property owner and the successors in interest in the property or in
any part thereof. The conservation restriction may include
language reserving the right to make de minimus changes to
accommodate necessary regulatory approvals upon the written
consent of the Township, provided such changes are otherwise
consistent with the purpose and intent of the conservation
§ 170-255.5 WELLS § 170-255.6
614:1315
restriction. The recorded conservation restriction shall, at a
minimum, include:
(a) A written narrative of the authorized regulated activity, date of
issuance, and date of expiration, and the conservation
restriction that, in addition, includes all of the prohibitions set
forth at N.J.S.A.13:8B-2b(1) through (7);
(b) Survey plans for the property as a whole and, where
applicable, for any additional properties subject to the
conservation restrictions. Such survey plans shall be submitted
on the surveyor's letterhead, signed and sealed by the
surveyor, and shall include metes and bounds descriptions of
the property, the site, and the areas subject to the conservation
restriction in New Jersey State Plane Coordinates, North
American Datum 1983, and shall depict the boundaries of the
site and all areas subject to the conservation restriction as
marked with flags or stakes on site. All such survey plans shall
be submitted on paper and in digital CAD or GIS file on a media
and format defined by the municipality. The flags or stakes
shall be numbered and identified on the survey plan; and
(c) A copy or copies of deeds for the property as a whole that
indicate the deed book and pages where it has been recorded
in the office of the Union County Clerk or the registrar of deeds
and mortgages of Union County.
(3) Any lands proposed for development which include all or a portion
of a riparian zone shall, as a condition of any major subdivision or
major site plan approval, provide for the vegetation or revegetation
of any portions of the riparian zone which are not vegetated at the
time of the application or which were disturbed by prior land uses,
including for agricultural use. Said vegetation plan shall utilize
native and noninvasive tree and plant species to the maximum
extent practicable in accordance with an approved riparian zone
management plan, described in § 170-255.10.
(4) For building lots which exist as of the date of adoption of this
article, but for which a building permit or a preliminary site plan
approval has not been obtained or is no longer valid, the required
minimum front, side, and rear setbacks may extend into the
riparian zone, provided that a deed restriction and/or conservation
easement is applied which prohibits clearing or construction in the
riparian zone.
(5) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow through
a riparian zone and shall comply with the standard for off-site
stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. (See N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.)
§ 170-255.6 UNION CODE § 170-255.6
614:1316
§ 170-255.7. Nonconforming structures and uses in riparian zones.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land within the riparian zone are
subject to the following requirements:
§ 170-255.8. Uses prohibited in riparian zones.
(6) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through a riparian
zone cannot comply with the standard for off-site stability cited in
§ 170-255.6B(5), then the proposed stabilization measures must
meet the requirements of the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et seq., and have an approved flood hazard
area permit.
A. Legally existing but nonconforming structures or uses may be
continued.
B. Any proposed enlargement or expansion of the building footprint within
the riparian zone of a C1 water shall comply with the standards in the.
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
C. For all other riparian zones:
(1) Encroachment within the riparian zone shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred and shall be in
conformance with the Stormwater Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8,
and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
(2) Existing impervious cover shall not be increased within the riparian
zone as a result of encroachments where previous development or
disturbances have occurred.
(3) Discontinued nonconforming uses may be resumed any time within
one year from such discontinuance but not thereafter when
showing clear indications of abandonment. No change or
resumption shall be permitted that is more detrimental to the
riparian zone, as measured against the intent and purpose under
§ 170-255.1, than the existing or former nonconforming use. This
one-year time frame shall not apply to agricultural uses that are
following prescribed best management practices for crop rotation.
However, resumption of agricultural uses must be strictly confined
to the extent of disturbance existing at the time of adoption of this
article.
A. Any use within a riparian zone of a C1 water shall comply with the
standards in the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h)
and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
B. For other riparian zones, any use or activity not specifically authorized
in §§ 170-255.5 and 255.7 shall be prohibited within the riparian zone.
By way of example, the following activities and facilities are prohibited:
§ 170-255.6 WELLS § 170-255.8
614:1317
§ 170-255.9. Activities permitted in riparian zones in case of no
reasonable or prudent alternative or extreme hardship.
(1) Removal or clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation or soil
disturbance such as grading, except for selective vegetation
removal for the purpose of stream or riparian area stabilization or
restoration projects that require vegetation removal or grading
prior to implementation.
(2) Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
(3) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards or the recommendations of
the Soil Conservation District.
(4) Roads or driveways, except where permitted in compliance with
§ 170-255.5.
(5) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area, except as permitted by
this article.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Any type of permanent structure, except structures needed for a
use permitted by § 170-255.5.
(8) New subsurface sewage disposal system areas. The expansion and
replacement of existing subsurface sewage disposal system areas
for existing uses is permitted.
(9) Residential grounds or lawns, except as otherwise permitted
pursuant to this article.
A. For riparian zones in C1 waters, requests for exemptions must be
authorized by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
as per the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
B. For other riparian zones, hardship variances may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment in cases of a preexisting lot (existing at the
time of adoption of this article) when there is insufficient room outside
the riparian zone for uses permitted by the underlying zoning and there
is no other reasonable or prudent alternative to placement in the
riparian zone, including obtaining variances from setback or other
requirements that would allow conformance with the riparian zone
requirements, and provided the following demonstrations are made:
(1) An applicant shall be deemed to have established the existence of
an extreme economic hardship if the subject property is not
capable of yielding a reasonable economic return if its present use
is continued or if it is developed in accordance with provisions of
this article and that this inability to yield a reasonable economic
§ 170-255.8 UNION CODE § 170-255.9
614:1318
§ 170-255.10. Riparian zone management plan.
return results from unique circumstances peculiar to the subject
property which:
(a) Do not apply to or affect other property in the immediate
vicinity;
(b) Relate to or arise out of the characteristics of the subject
property because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape or topographical conditions of the property involved,
rather than the personal situations of the applicant, and are
not the result of any action or inaction by the applicant or the
owner or his predecessors in title;
(c) The necessity of acquiring additional land to locate
development outside the riparian zone shall not be considered
an economic hardship unless the applicant can demonstrate
that there is no adjacent land that is reasonably available or
could be obtained, utilized, expanded or managed in order to
fulfill the basic purpose of the proposed activity.
(2) An applicant shall be deemed to have established compelling public
need if the applicant demonstrates, based on specific facts, that
one of the following applies:
(a) The proposed project will serve an essential public health or
safety need
(b) The proposed use is required to serve an existing public health
or safety need; or
(c) There is no alternative available to meet the established public
health or safety need.
(3) A variance can only be granted if it is shown that the activity is in
conformance with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations, including but not limited to the Stormwater
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard Area Control
Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, and that the exception granted is the
minimum relief necessary to relieve the hardship.
C. If such an exception is granted, the applicant shall rehabilitate an
environmentally degraded riparian zone area within or adjacent to the
same site, and at least equivalent in size to the riparian zone reduction
permitted, or, if not possible, rehabilitate or expand a riparian zone
area at least equivalent in size within a nearby site and, if available,
within the same watershed. Rehabilitation shall include reforestation,
stream bank stabilization and removal of debris, in accordance with a
riparian zone management plan, as described in § 170-255.10 below.
§ 170-255.9 WELLS § 170-255.10
614:1319
A. Within any riparian zone, no construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment shall be permitted unless the effects of such
development are accompanied by preparation, approval, and
implementation of a riparian zone management plan.
B. The landowner, applicant, or developer shall submit to the Township
Engineer, or its appointed representative, a riparian zone management
plan prepared by an environmental professional, professional engineer
or other qualified professional which fully evaluates the effects of any
proposed uses on the riparian zone. The riparian zone management
plan shall identify the existing conditions including:
(1) Existing vegetation;
(2) Field-delineated surface water bodies;
(3) Field-delineated wetlands;
(4) The one-hundred-year floodplain;
(5) Flood hazard areas, including floodway and flood fringe areas, as
delineated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection;
(6) Soil classifications as found on soil surveys;
(7) Existing subdrainage areas of the site with HUC (Hydrologic Unit
Code) 14 designations;
(8) Slopes in each subdrainage area segmented into sections of slopes
less than 15%; above 15% but less than 20%; and steep slopes
greater than 20%. The proposed plan shall describe all proposed
uses/activities, and fully evaluate the effects of all proposed uses/
activities in a riparian zone, and all proposed management
techniques, including proposed vegetation and any other measures
necessary to offset disturbances to the riparian zone. A discussion
of activities proposed as well as management techniques proposed
to offset disturbances and/or enhance the site to improve the
riparian zone's ability to function effectively as a riparian zone shall
also be included with the riparian zone management plan submittal
to the Township.
C. The Plan shall be reviewed and must be approved by the Township
Engineer, in consultation with the Environmental Commission, as part
of the subdivision and land development process.
D. The riparian zone management plan must include management
provisions in narrative and/or graphic form specifying:
(1) The manner in which the area within the riparian zone will be
owned and by whom it will be managed and maintained.
§ 170-255.10 UNION CODE § 170-255.10
614:1320
§ 170-255.11. Boundary interpretation; appeals procedures;
inspections; conflicts; severability.
(2) The conservation and/or land management techniques and
practices that will be used to conserve and protect the riparian
zone, as applicable.
(3) The professional and personnel resources that are expected to be
necessary in order to maintain and manage the riparian zone.
(4) A revegetation plan, if applicable, that includes: three layers of
vegetation, including herbaceous plants that serve as ground cover,
understory shrubs, and trees that, when fully mature, will form an
overhead canopy. Vegetation selected must be native, noninvasive
species, and consistent with the soil, slope and moisture conditions
of the site. The revegetation plan shall be prepared by a qualified
environmental professional, landscape architect, or professional
engineer, and shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer, in consultation with the Environmental Commission.
Dominant vegetation in the riparian zone management plan shall
consist of plant species that are suited to the riparian zone
environment. The Township Engineer may require species
suitability to be verified by qualified experts from the Soil
Conservation District, Natural Resources Conservation Service,
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, US Fish and
Wildlife Service and/or state or federal forest agencies.
E. A riparian zone management plan is not required where the riparian
zone is not being disturbed and conservation easements/deed
restrictions are applied to ensure there will be no future clearing or
disturbance of the riparian zone.
F. Performance of the riparian zone management plan shall be guaranteed
for a minimum of two years by a surety, such as a bond, cash or letter of
credit, which shall be provided to the Township prior to the Township
issuing any permits or approving any uses relating to the applicable use
or activity.
A. When a landowner or applicant disputes the boundaries of a riparian
zone, or the defined bank-full flow or level, the landowner or applicant
shall submit evidence to the Township Engineer that describes the
riparian zone, presents the landowner or applicant's proposed riparian
zone delineation, and presents all justification for the proposed
boundary change, including but not limited to a verification issued
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-6, or an
approval from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
to encroach within the special water resource protection area (SWRPA)
of a C1 water pursuant to the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h)1ii.
§ 170-255.10 WELLS § 170-255.11
614:1321
B. Within 45 days of a complete submission of Subsection A above, the
Township Engineer, or appointed representative, shall evaluate all
material submitted and shall make a written determination, a copy of
which shall be submitted to the landowner or applicant. Failure to act
within the forty-five-day period shall not be interpreted to be an
approval of the proposed boundary change.
C. Any party aggrieved by any such determination or other decision or
determination under Subsection B may appeal to the Township
Engineer under the provisions of this article. The party contesting the
location of the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of proof in
case of any such appeal.
D. Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Township
Engineer under this article may appeal to the governing body. The party
contesting the determination or decision shall have the burden of proof
in case of any such appeal.
E. Inspections.
(1) Lands within or adjacent to an identified riparian zone shall be
inspected by the Township Engineer when:
(a) A subdivision or land development plan is submitted;
(b) A building permit is requested;
(c) A change or resumption of a nonconforming use is proposed;
(d) A discontinued nonconforming use is resumed more than a
year later, as described in § 170-255.7.
(2) The riparian zone may also be inspected periodically by
representatives from the Township if excessive or potentially
problematic erosion is present, other problems are discovered, or
at any time when the presence of an unauthorized activity or
structure is brought to the attention of municipal officials or when
the downstream surface waters are indicating reduction in quality.
F. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this article are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this article apply.
G. Severability.
(1) Interpretation. This article shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding that any provision of this article is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of this article shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
§ 170-255.11 UNION CODE § 170-255.11
614:1322
§ 170-255.12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Township of any person or entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon
inspection, a condition which is in violation of this article is discovered, a
civil action in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior
Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed
the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of
appropriate process. Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude
the right of the Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal
proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or
subsection of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
independent of the violation of any other section or subsection, or of any
order issued pursuant to this article. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Any person who violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in Municipal Court, be punishable by
imposition of the penalties set forth in Chapter 170, Article XXXII.
§ 170-255.13. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with the law on April 28, 2009.
(3) The provisions of this article shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 170-255.11 WELLS § 170-255.13
614:1323

ARTICLE XXIXB
Steep Slopes351
[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 5099]
§ 170-255.14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the intensity of use in areas
of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion, excessive
stormwater runoff, the degradation of surface water and to maintain the
natural topography and drainage patterns of land.
§ 170-255.15. Background.
Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion processes from
stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of water bodies with
the associated degradation of water quality and loss of aquatic life support.
Related effects include soil loss, changes in natural topography and
drainage patterns, increased flooding potential, further fragmentation of
forest and habitat areas, and compromised aesthetic values. It has become
widely recognized that disturbance of steep slopes should be restricted or
prevented based on the impact disturbance of steep slopes can have on
water quality and quantity, and the environmental integrity of landscapes.
§ 170-255.16. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to new development or land disturbance on
a steep slope within the Township.
§ 170-255.17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated
structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements on
areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as measured over
any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are determined based on contour
intervals of two feet or less.
351. The requirements set forth in this article are consistent with those found in the State of
New Jersey's Water Quality Management Planning rule (N.J.A.C. 7:15).
§ 170-255.14 WELLS § 170-255.18
614:1325
§ 170-255.18. Designation of areas.
The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal distance) shall be
established by measurement of distance perpendicular to the contour of the
slope. The percent of slope shall be calculated for each two-foot contour
interval. For example, any location on the site where there is a one-foot rise
over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a ten-percent slope; a one-andone-
half-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a fifteen-percent
slope; a two-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a twentypercent
slope.
§ 170-255.19. Steep slope limits.
For steep slopes, any disturbance shall be prohibited except as provided
below:
§ 170-255.20. Conflicts; severability.
A. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces; and
B. New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare,
such as necessary linear development with no feasible alternative; to
provide an environmental benefit, such as remediation of a
contaminated site; to prevent extraordinary hardship on the property
owner peculiar to the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship,
provided the hardship was not created by the property owner, that
would not permit a minimum economically viable use of the property
based upon reasonable investment. For example, redevelopment,
within the footprint of existing impervious cover, should be allowed to
support efforts to revitalize development that has fallen into disrepair.
The applicant shall demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed
development and topography that new disturbance is not located in
areas with a twenty-percent-or-greater slope.
A. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this article are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this article apply.
B. Severability.
(1) Interpretation. This article shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding that any provision of this article is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of this article shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
(3) The provisions of this article shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 170-255.18 UNION CODE § 170-255.21
614:1326
§ 170-255.21. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A prompt investigation shall bemade by the appropriate personnel of the
Township of any person or entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon
inspection, a condition which is in violation of this article is discovered, a
civil action in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior
Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed
the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of
appropriate process. Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude
the right of the Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal
proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or
subsection of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
independent of the violation of any other section or subsection, or of any
order issued pursuant to this article. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Any person who violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in Municipal Court, be punishable by
imposition of the penalties set forth in Chapter 170, Article XXXII.
§ 170-255.22. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with the law on April 28, 2009.
§ 170-255.21 WELLS § 170-255.22
614:1327

ARTICLE XXX
Exceptions; Sales Prior to Final Approval
§ 170-256. Exceptions.
The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval or for preliminary site plan approval, shall have
the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for approval
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions herein, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions herein
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question.
§ 170-257. Sales prior to final approval.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells, except pursuant to an agreement expressly
conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any land
which forms a part of a subdivision, such person shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain a
civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief; and
(2) To set aside and invalidate conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with Section 44 of the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56). In any such action, the transferee, purchaser
or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land
from which the subdivision was made that remains in the
possession of the developer or his assigns or successors to secure
the return of any deposits made or purchase price paid, and also a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if
any. Any such action must be brought within two years after the
date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of said land or within six years, if unrecorded.
§ 170-256 WELLS § 170-257
614:1329

Part 5
Fees; Guaranties; Inspections
ARTICLE XXXI
Fees; Guaranties; Inspections
§ 170-258. Development application fees.
There is hereby established in connection with various applications for
development and other matters which are the subjects of this chapter the
following schedule of fees:
A. Subdivisions and site plans. [Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(1) Each application for subdivision or site plan approval shall be
accompanied by both a filing fee and a technical review fee as
provided below. The filing fee is a nonreturnable flat fee to cover
administrative expenses. The technical review fee is established to
cover the costs of legal, engineering and other professional service
connected with the review of the application. Each deposit for
technical review fees shall be held by the Township in a trust
account separate from the general funds of the Township and
separate from any other such account. Sums not utilized in the
review process shall be returned to the applicant. If additional
sums are deemed necessary, the applicant shall be notified as to the
required additional amount and shall add such sum to the trust
account. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5102]
Type of Application Filing Fee Technical Review Fee
Concept plan $100 $100
Minor subdivision
Simple lot line change $150 $750
Other $250 $1,000
Major subdivision
Preliminary plat $500 $2,500 plus $100 per lot
Final plat $250 $1,000 plus $50 per lot
Site plans
Minor $250 $1,000
Major preliminary
(conventional)
$350 $30 per 1,000 square
feet of lot area or
fraction thereof; $30
per 1,000 square feet of
floor area or fraction
thereof; with a total
minimum fee of $1,000
§ 170-258 WELLS § 170-258
614:1331
Type of Application Filing Fee Technical Review Fee
Final (conventional) $250 $15 per 1,000 square
feet of lot area; $15 per
1,000 square feet of
floor area, with total
minimum fee of $500
Preliminary (multifamily) $350 $100 per dwelling unit,
with a total minimum
fee of $1,000
Final (multifamily) $250 $50 per dwelling unit,
with a total minimum
fee of $500
(2) Site plan waiver fee: $300. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
4842]
(3) Requests for concurrent approvals: combined fees.
B. Conditional uses: $150, plus applicable subdivision or site plan fee.
[Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
C. Variances and appeals. [Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 4340]
(1) Appeals from decisions of a Construction Code Official or Zoning
Official pursuant to § 170-26A: $200.
(2) Interpretation of Zoning Map or zoning regulations or for decisions
on other special questions pursuant to § 170-26B: $300.
(3) Variances pursuant to § 170-26C from lot area, lot dimensional,
setback and yard requirements: $200 per variance. [Amended
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 4842]
(4) Variances from use regulations pursuant to § 170-26D: $400.
(5) Direction pursuant to § 170-26F(1) for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on an
Official Map: $250.
(6) Direction pursuant to § 170-26F(2) for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure not related to a street: $200.
(7) The fees in Subsection C(1) through (6), inclusive, above shall be in
addition to any applicable fee in connection with a subdivision or
site plan as provided in Subsection A.
(8) Appeals to the Township Committee pursuant to § 170-41: $300.
(9) Copy of decision of governing body to an interested party in
connection with an appeal pursuant to § 170-41: $50.
§ 170-258 UNION CODE § 170-258
614:1332
§ 170-259. Performance guaranty. [Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No.
5582]
(10) Publication in newspaper of decision of governing body on an
appeal pursuant to § 170-41: cost of publication.
D. Where one application for development includes more than one
approval request, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid.
E. If an applicant desires a certified court reporter, the cost of taking
testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to
the Township shall be at the expense of the applicant, who shall also
arrange for the reporter's attendance.
F. Applications for zone change or amendment to Land Development
Chapter requests to the Planning Board shall be on an application form
furnished by the Planning Board, which shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $250. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may
direct the furnishing of the technical review fee applicable to the
specific request.352
A. Installation of improvements or guaranty prior to grant of final
subdivision approval. Prior to the filing of an application for final
subdivision approval, the applicant shall have installed the
improvements required under the supervision and inspection of the
Township Engineer unless the applicant has furnished to the Township
a performance guaranty in an amount approved by the Planning Board
to assure the installation, on or before a date approved by the Board, of
all improvements required for the whole or any section of the
subdivision tract which are not already inspected and approved by the
Township Engineer.
B. Installation of improvements or guaranty prior to grant of final site plan
approval. Prior to the filing of an application for final site plan approval,
the applicant shall have installed any on-tract or on-site improvements
required under the supervision and approval of the Township Engineer
unless the applicant has furnished the Township with a performance
guaranty in an amount approved by the Planning Board to assure
installation on or before a date approved by the Planning Board;
provided, however, that the Planning Board may waive this requirement
with respect to any improvements in which the public does not have
sufficient interest to warrant such a guaranty in order to insure
completion as a condition for issuance of a construction permit.
C. Amount of performance guaranty. The performance guaranty shall be in
favor of the Township of Union in an amount equal to 120% of the cost
of such improvements, as estimated by the applicant and approved by
the Township Engineer. Ten percent of the performance guaranty shall
352. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Reviews, added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 4380 and
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 5102.
§ 170-258 WELLS § 170-259
614:1333
be in the form of cash or a certified check made payable to "Township of
Union." The governing body shall pass a resolution either approving or
adjusting this performance guaranty. The performance guaranty shall
be developed as noted below:
(1) Publicly dedicated improvements. Only publicly dedicated streets,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, street trees,
surveyor monuments, water mains, sanitary sewers, community
septic systems (not private septic systems), drainage structures,
public improvements of open space, and any grading necessitated
by any of the foregoing public improvements are to be included
within the amount of the performance guaranty.
(2) Perimeter landscape buffers. The Township requires that perimeter
landscape buffer be bonded. Such landscape buffer area shall be 15
feet wide along the property line consisting of a staggered, double
row of six-foot-high evergreens. Landscaping that is located within
the interior of the site that is privately owned and maintained shall
not be bonded.
(3) Safety and stabilization cost. The cost may be posted as part of the
performance guaranty or as a separate guaranty. The purpose is to
provide the Township with a source of funds to protect the public
from access to an unsafe or unstable condition on site. The amount
of the guaranty is $5,000 when the bonded improvements are
$100,000 or less. If the bonded improvements are over $100,000,
then the amount is $5,000 for the first $100,000 and 2.5% of the
bonded improvement cost in excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000,
plus 1% of the bonded improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
This guaranty, if not included within the overall performance
guaranty, must be released by the Township once the Township
Engineer deems the site safe for public occupancy. Additionally, the
Township can only call the safety/stabilization cost guaranty after
site work has stopped for a period of 60 days or longer and the
Township has sent a default notice via certified mail to the
developer.
(4) Temporary certificate of occupancy (or "TCO") guaranty.
Developers have the option of posting a TCO guaranty allowing
them to a TCO for the project. Upon posting a TCO guaranty, the
Township shall release the existing performance guaranty or
safety/stabilization cost guaranty leaving the TCO guaranty to bond
just the improvements (detailed above) that have not yet been
completed. The bond is held until a permanent certificate of
occupancy is obtained. The Township Engineer will determine if a
TCO can be issued based on the extent of the remaining bonded
work needed to render the public space safe.
D. Ownership of utilities by other agencies. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities will automatically own the
utilities to be installed or that the improvements are covered by a
§ 170-259 UNION CODE § 170-259
614:1334
§ 170-260. Developer's agreement.
Prior to any construction and coincident with the furnishing of the
performance guaranty by the developer, there shall be executed an
agreement between the developer and the Township of Union, incorporating
all of the terms and conditions of approval imposed by the Planning Board.
§ 170-261. Inspections and tests. [Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No.
5582]
performance guaranty to another governmental agency, no
performance guaranty shall be required by the municipality for such
utilities or improvements; provided, however, that the municipality may
require evidence that the developer has paid to any such other
governmental agency or public utility any charges which are required
for installation, including any refundable deposits.
E. Approval by Attorney. The applicant shall present two copies of the
performance guaranty for approval as to form and execution by the
Attorney for the Township of Union. The Township Attorney for the
Board shall notify the Secretary of the Planning Board prior to the
meeting that the performance guaranty is properly executed and can be
added to the agenda.
F. Guaranty completion date. The performance guaranty shall run for a
term not to exceed two years from the date of final approval. With the
consent of the principal and any surety, the time allowed for the
completion of improvements may be extended by the governing body by
resolution. The Planning Board shall have a thirty-day period in which
to comment upon any proposed extension. As a condition or as part of
any such extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be
increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed
120% of the cost of the installation of the remaining improvements, as
determined as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
G. Reduction in performance guaranty. The amount of a performance
guaranty may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during the
time of their installation, under the supervision of the Township
Engineer, to insure satisfactory completion. The cost of said inspection
shall be the responsibility of the owner, and he shall deposit with the
Township Treasurer, for placement in a special trust fund account, a
sum equal to 5% of the costs of the combined publicly dedicated site
improvements that are the subject of the performance guaranty and the
private site improvements that are not subject to the performance
guaranty. If inspection costs exceed such fund, the owner shall deposit
with the Township Treasurer additional sums upon written notice via
certified mail from the Township Engineer explaining the reasons for
additional inspection escrow. Inspections will not be interrupted when
§ 170-259 WELLS § 170-261
614:1335
the escrow account is depleted. However, the developer must post
the additional escrow within 10 days of being provided notice. The
Township Treasurer shall return any balance of the inspection deposit
to the owner upon expiration of the maintenance bond, together with
the paid invoices for all expenses charged, except that the inspection
fee shall in no case be less than $100.
B. In no case shall any paving work (including prime and seal coats) be
done without permission from the Township Engineer's office. At least
two days' notice shall be given to the Township Engineer's office prior
to any such construction so that the person or a qualified representative
may be present at the time the work is to be done.
C. The Township Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the
following phases of the work has been completed so that the person or a
qualified representative may inspect the work.
(1) Road subgrade.
(2) Curbs and gutters.
(3) Road paving.
(4) Sidewalks.
(5) Drainage pipes and other drainage structures before backfilling.
(6) Street name signs.
(7) Sanitary sewers and/or septic tanks.
(8) Handicap accessibility.
(9) Soil erosion and sediment control.
D. A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be started within
10 days' notification by the subdivider to determine whether the work is
satisfactory and in agreement with the approved final drawings and the
Township specifications. The general conditions of the site shall also be
considered. Upon a satisfactory final inspection report, action will be
taken to release or declare in default the performance guaranty
covering such improvements and utilities.
E. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and
utilities shall not operate to subject the Township to liability for claims,
suits or liability of any kind that may at any time arise because of
defects or negligence during the construction or at any time thereafter,
it being recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe conditions at
all times during construction and to provide proper utilities and
improvements is upon the owner and his contractors, if any.
F. After completing the construction of the public improvements covered
by the performance guaranty, the subdivider shall prepare a set of the
approved public improvement and utility plans and the profiles on
§ 170-261 UNION CODE § 170-261
614:1336
§ 170-262. Conditions for acceptance of improvements. [Amended
5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 5582]
The approval of any application for development by the Township shall be
in no way construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system or any
other improvement, nor shall such approval obligate the Township in any
way to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system
or other improvement. No improvement shall be accepted by the governing
body unless and until all of the following conditions have been met:
Mylar or linen amended to read "as-constructed" and apply to the
Township Engineer for final inspection of the work. The Township
Engineer shall report to the governing body on the condition of the
work and recommend that the performance guaranty be released,
extended or declared in default.
G. After completing the construction of the site improvements delineated
on the approved final plan the applicant shall apply to the Township
Engineer for final inspection and approval of the work. The applicant
shall also file a written certification and two copies of an as-constructed
site plan, prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer or
architect, indicating that all site improvements have been constructed
in accordance with the approved plan, as follows:
I HEREBY CERTIFY ALL SITE IMPROVEMENTS DELINEATED
HEREON HAVE BEEN CONSTRUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
APPROVED FINAL SITE PLAN WITH THE FOLLOWING
EXCEPTION(S):
(None or List)
Signature N.J. License No.
EMBOSSED SEAL
Date
A. The Township Engineer shall have certified in writing that the
improvements are complete and that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter;
B. The final application for development shall have been approved by the
Board; and
C. The owner shall have filed with the governing body a maintenance
guaranty in an amount equal to not more than 15% of the original
estimate of the cost of installing the bonded improvements, plus the
cost of maintaining private stormwater management facilities
(including basins, inflow and water quality structures within the basins,
and the outflow pipes and structures). The maintenance guaranty shall
run for a period of two years, at which point it will be automatically
released. The procedures and requirements governing such
§ 170-261 WELLS § 170-262
614:1337
maintenance guaranty shall be identical with the procedures and
requirements for a performance guaranty set forth in this chapter.
The requirements for a maintenance guaranty may be waived by the
governing body only if the Township Engineer has certified that the
improvements have been in continuous use for not less than two years
from the date the Township Engineer certified completion of such
improvements and that, during this period, the owner has maintained
the improvements in a satisfactory manner.
§ 170-262 UNION CODE § 170-262
614:1338
ARTICLE XXXII
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 170-263. Enforcement.
A. Construction Code Official/Secretary of the Board of Adjustment.
Except as otherwise herein provided, the Construction Code Official/
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment of the Township shall administer
and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No structure shall be erected
until a construction permit is obtained from the Construction Code
Official/Secretary of the Board of Adjustment, and no structure or lot
shall be used in violation of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Code Official/Secretary of the Board of Adjustment to
keep a record of all applications and all construction permits which are
either issued or denied, with notations of any condition involved, which
data shall form a part of the Township public records. A duplicate copy
of all construction permits issued shall be filed with the Tax Assessor. It
shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official/Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment to inspect the structures and land in the Township
and order the owner, in writing, to remedy any condition found to exist
in violation of any provision(s) of this chapter. [Amended 10-26-2004
by Ord. No. 4842]
B. Construction permits. Plans which have been submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment must bear
the stamp of approval of the appropriate agency and must be
accompanied by an affidavit of no change when the application for a
building permit is submitted to the Construction Code Official/
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Every application for a
construction permit shall be accompanied by four sets of plans drawn in
ink or a blueprint showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to
be built upon, the exact location, size and height of all existing and
proposed structure(s), the existing or intended use of each structure,
the number of dwelling units the structure is designed to accommodate,
the number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street
loading areas and such other information with regard to the lot and
neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this chapter. A construction permit shall be granted or
denied within 10 days from the date of a complete application unless
additional time is agreed upon, in writing, by the applicant. One copy of
such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall have
been approved or denied by the Construction Code Official/Secretary of
the Board of Adjustment, together with such permits as may be
granted. All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location
and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey of
the lot by a licensed land surveyor in the State of New Jersey. The lot
and the location of the structure(s) thereon shall be staked out on the
grounds before construction is started. No construction permit shall be
issued for any structure until prior site plan, subdivision and variance
approvals as may be necessary have been granted by the appropriate
§ 170-263 WELLS § 170-263
614:1339
§ 170-264. Additional remedies. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
4917]
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, moved or converted or in case any building, structure or land is
municipal agency or municipal agencies in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or
part(s) thereof, either occupied by a new use or occupant or
hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged, wholly or in part,
until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Construction Code Official/Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. It
shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official/Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment to issue a certificate of occupancy only when
he is satisfied that the structure or part(s) thereof and the proposed
use conform to this chapter and all other applicable codes and
ordinances of the Township. This section shall not be applicable to
the resale of or transfer of existing one- or two-family residential
dwellings.
(2) A certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied, in writing,
within 10 days from the date that a written notification is filed with
the Construction Code Official/Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment that the erection of the structure is completed, unless
additional time is agreed upon by the applicant, in writing.
(3) Should the Construction Code Official/Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment decline to issue a certificate of occupancy, his reason
for doing so shall be so stated on two copies of the application, and
one copy shall be returned to the applicant.
(4) Upon notices being served of any condition found to exist in
violation of any provision(s) of this chapter with respect to any land
use, the certificate of occupancy for such use shall thereupon,
without further notice, be null and void, and a new certificate of
occupancy shall be required for any further use of such structure or
land.
(5) A duplicate copy of all certificates of occupancy shall be filed with
the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be
kept in the office of the Construction Code Official/Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment, and copies shall be furnished on request to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the structure
or land affected. The charge for each copy shall be established by
ordinance of the governing body, except that there shall be no
charge to a municipal agency. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 4842]
§ 170-263 UNION CODE § 170-264
614:1340
used, converted or constructed in violation of any resolution adopted by
either the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment or in violation of or
contrary to any provisions of this chapter, the Township may institute an
action to enjoin or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent
such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or use.
However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the right
of any party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law.
§ 170-265. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law to
hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding $1,000
as such court, in its discretion, may impose, or, if the party so convicted
is a natural person, such person may be imprisoned for such term not
exceeding 90 days as such court, in its discretion, may impose or be
fined a sum not exceeding $1,000, as such court, in its discretion, may
impose, or such natural person may be both imprisoned and fined, not
exceeding the maximum limits set forth herein, as such court, in its
discretion, may impose. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. [Amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No.
4340]
B. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, and/
or the tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or land, or
part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed
or shall exist or be suffered, allowed or permitted to exist, and any
architect, builder, developer, contractor, agent, person or corporation
engaged in connection therewith and who assists in the commission of
any such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, specified above.
§ 170-264 WELLS § 170-265
614:1341