Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-21-2013]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Union City of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Commissioners of
the City of Union City, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 425,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the City of Union City," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, including the 1996
Revised General Ordinances, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Union
City by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Union City" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Union City, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the City. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Union City to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 UNION CITY CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in §
1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Except as provided in § 1-13, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of Union City which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Board of Commissioners of the City
of Union City has determined that the following ordinances are no
longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Former Chapter VI, § 6-8, Public Health Nuisance Code, of the 1996
Revised General Ordinances.
(2) Former Chapter VIII, § 8-8, Operation of Self-Service Laundromats,
etc., of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances.
(3) Former Chapter XIII, § 13-7, Home Improvements; Tax Exemption,
of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances.
(4) Former Chapter XIII, § 13-14, Conversion of Fuel Generators and
Furnaces, of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 4-3-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. The following ordinances amending Chapter 16, Vehicles and Traffic:
ordinances of 11-5-2003 (amending ordinance regarding motorized
vehicles); 7-6-2004 (traffic control installation); 9-21-2004 (amendment
to Schedule IV per attachment); 6-8-2005 amendment (no copy);
8-16-2005 (amending right turn on red provisions); 10-2-2007
(amending bus/commuter vehicle stops); 4-19-2011 (amending bus/
commuter vehicle stops).
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Commissioners that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
1. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the City's offices.
§ 1-13 UNION CITY CODE § 1-14
1:6
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes in nomenclature have
been made throughout the Code:
(1) City Attorney to Corporation Counsel.
(2) Court Clerk to Court Administrator.
(3) Department of Environmental Protection and Energy to
Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) State Department of Health to State Department of Health and
Senior Services.
(5) The term "this revision" to this Code or chapter/article.
D. Statutory references. Statutory references throughout the Code have
been standardized to refer to "N.J.S.A." and have been updated to the
current reference, if necessary.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as §§ 1-1 and 1-3 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 1-15. Terms defined. [Amended 5-21-2013]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the
context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or COMMISSIONERS — The Mayor and
Commissioners of the City.
CITY — The City of Union City in the County of Hudson and State of New
Jersey.
CLERK or CITY CLERK — The municipal Clerk duly appointed pursuant to
law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the City government established
or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the City government assigned to the
organizational unit by the Board of Commissioners.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted, and
including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the procedure
required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall remain in
force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity, acting
either for himself/herself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
WRITING and WRITTEN — Printing, typewriting and any other mode of
communication using paper or similar material which is in general use, as
well as legible handwriting.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
§ 1-16. Construction.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. The singular
number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
C. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
D. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Sunday,
a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the City are closed, that
day shall be excluded.
E. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
§ 1-16 UNION CITY CODE § 1-16
1:10
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 1-5 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 1-17. Administrative enforcement proceedings.
In order to establish uniform procedures for those sections requiring
administrative enforcement of abatement notices, the following will prevail
unless specifically designated otherwise.
§ 1-18. Violation notice.
Where a violation of this Code is found to exist, a written notice from the
enforcing official shall be served on the person or persons responsible for
the correction thereof.
§ 1-19. Contents of notice.
The notice shall specify the location of the property by Tax Map reference,
the violation or violations committed, what must be done to correct same,
a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 days to correct or abate the
violation, the right of the person served to request a hearing and that the
notice shall become an order in 10 days after service unless a hearing is
request pursuant to § 1-21. The notice shall also advise the recipient that if
the violation is found to be harmful to the health and safety of the occupants
and the general public and is not corrected or abated, the City may do same,
the cost of which shall become a lien on the subject property.
§ 1-20. Service of notice.
A. Notice may be served personally or by mail, certified return receipt
requested, addressed to the last known address of the person to be
served. Where it is ascertained that the owner does not reside on the
premises, the last known address shall be the address of the owner as
shown in the office of the Tax Collector. Service upon an owner or
operator may also be attained by personal service of any notice upon a
member of the family of the owner or operator over the age of 14 years,
residing with the owner or operator.
B. If the whereabouts of the person to be served is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by reasonable diligence, the serving of such
notice upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once
each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and
published in the county and circulating in the City of Union City. A copy
of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the notice, and a copy of such notice shall be duly recorded
or lodged for record in the office of the City Clerk.
C. Where the manner of service of notice for a particular type of matter is
prescribed by a state statute in a manner different from above, then
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
§ 1-21. Hearing.
Within 10 days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute
a final order, unless any person affected by the notice requests a hearing
thereon and serves a written request within the ten-day period in person or
by mail to the City Clerk. Such request for a hearing shall set forth briefly
the grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and the
factual matters contained in the notice of violation which are to be disputed
at the hearing. The City Clerk, upon receipt of the request, shall, within 45
days therefrom and upon five days' notice to the party aggrieved, set the
matter down for hearing.
§ 1-22. Appointment of hearing officer.
The Board of Commissioners, upon request for a hearing, shall appoint
a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing, evaluate the evidence
presented and render a decision.
§ 1-23. Evidence and counsel.
The rules of evidence shall not be controlling in these hearings. All parties
to the hearing may appear in person or by attorney and give testimony.
§ 1-24. Determination.
At any hearing provided hereunder, the hearing officer shall be vested
with all the powers provided by law to compel the attendance of witnesses
and parties in interest by issuance and service of subpoena, to require by
subpoena the production of books, records or other documents at any such
hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be determined by him/her and
to enforce any such subpoena as provided by law. Determination shall be
made within 10 days from the completion of the hearing. The hearing officer
shall issue an order either incorporating the determinations and directions
contained in the notice, modifying the same or withdrawing of the notice.
§ 1-25. Extension of time.
The hearing officer may extend the time for correction or abatement of the
violations for an additional period of time not to exceed 30 days, except
where major capital improvements or renovations are involved, in which
instance the time for completion may be extended for a period not to exceed
90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice.
§ 1-26. Immediate action in case of emergency. [Amended
5-21-2013]
Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to public health or life and limb
such statutory provision shall be applicable to the service of the notice
in question, notwithstanding the provisions of this section.
§ 1-20 UNION CITY CODE § 1-26
1:12
unless abated without delay, the enforcement official may either abate the
violation or condition immediately or order the owner, operator or occupant
to correct the violation or condition within a period of time not to exceed
three days, and upon failure to do so, the enforcement official may abate the
condition immediately thereafter.
§ 1-27. Lien against property. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Where abatement of any nuisance, as defined herein, correction of a defect
in the premises, or the maintenance of the premises in a proper condition
so as to conform to municipal ordinances or state law applicable thereto
involves a condition harmful to the health and safety of the occupants or
the general public and requires expending City moneys to correct it, the
enforcing officer shall present a report of work proposed to be done to
accomplish the foregoing to the appropriate Commissioner with an estimate
of the cost thereof, along with a summary of the proceedings undertaken by
him/her or under his/her direction to secure compliance, including notices
served upon the owners, operators, lessors or agents, as the case may be,
and summaries of hearings and copies of orders of the City with reference
thereto. The Board of Commissioners may thereupon order the abatement
of the nuisance, correction of the defect or any work necessary to place
the premises in proper condition and in compliance with ordinances of the
City and laws of the state, by resolution adopted after notice and hearing
to the owner in the manner provided above to the extent applicable. The
City may thereafter proceed to have the work performed in accordance
with such resolution at City expense, not to exceed the amount specified
in the resolution. Upon completion thereof, the Board of Commissioners,
by resolution, may approve the expenses and costs, whereupon the same
shall become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law. A
copy of the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall be certified
by the City Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the City, who shall be
responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of the resolution shall be
sent by certified mail to the owner.
§ 1-28. Emergency costs to be a lien. [Amended 5-21-2013]
If the City incurs costs for emergency abatement including legal fees and
costs as provided in § 1-26, the enforcing officer shall present to the Board
of Commissioners a report of the work done and the cost thereof with a
summary of the proceedings undertaken and the reasons for the emergency
abatement. The Board of Commissioners, after notice and hearing to the
owner in the manner provided above to the extent applicable, may by
resolution approve the costs, including legal fees and costs, whereupon the
same shall become a lien against the premises collectible as provided by
law.
§ 1-29. Court proceedings. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, violations of any provision of
this section may be prosecuted without the prior notices and hearings
§ 1-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-29
1:13
required by this section by the filing of a complaint by the City, or a
person designated by it, in the appropriate Court, it being the intention
that the remedies and penalties provided herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
§ 1-29 UNION CITY CODE § 1-29
1:14
ARTICLE IV
General Penalty
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 1-6 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances,
as amended through Ord. No. 2000-01]
§ 1-30. Violations and penalties.
§ 1-31. Penalties for offenses not requiring court appearance.
[Amended 4-1-2008; 6-4-2008; 5-21-2013; 2-16-2016]
The following is hereby designated as the Supplemental Schedule of
Penalties for offenses which do not require court appearances on first
offense:
Violation Penalty
Collection of garbage*
First offense $250
Second offense Fine not to exceed $1,000
Heat requirements complaint, per dwelling
unit**
First offense $250
Second offense $500
Third offense $750
Fourth offense $1,000
A. Maximum penalty for violations of any provision of any chapter of this
Code or other ordinances of the City where no specific penalty is
provided regarding the section or sections violated, the maximum
penalty upon conviction shall be one or more of the following:
[Amended 4-1-2006; 4-1-2008]
(1) A fine not exceeding $2,000. The minimum fine for violation of any
particular ordinance is $100.
(2) Imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days.
(3) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
(4) A fine not to exceed $2,500 per violation for solid waste unlawful
disposal; for a maximum penalty of $10,000. [Added 5-21-2013]
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the City exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser
penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be
appropriate for a particular case or violation.
§ 1-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-31
1:15
Violation Penalty
Hot water requirement, per dwelling unit* $50
Littering* $50
Public display/public urination* $100
Public drinking* $100
Recycling* $100
Removal of grass, weeds, brush and other
debris
$150
Removal of snow and ice $100
Failure to clean up dog excrement No less than $250, no more
than $500
NOTE:
* Court appearance required for subsequent violations.
** Court appearance required, after the first offense, for all subsequent
violations.
§ 1-32. DUI arrestees. [Added 12-16-2003]
§ 1-33. Zoning and Housing Code violations. [Added 4-1-2006]
A. The City of Union City by ordinance provides that a person who is
arrested for a violation of the provision of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 shall be held
in protective custody at an appropriate police or other facility where the
person's condition may be monitored until the person is no longer a
danger to himself or others. The municipal ordinance shall provide for
the release of the person in protective custody when that person is no
longer a danger to himself or others. The municipal ordinance may
provide that a person is no longer a danger to himself or others when
the person's blood alcohol concentration is less than 0.05% and the
person is no longer under the influence of any intoxicated liquor or
narcotic or hallucinogenic or habit-forming drug to the extent that the
person's facilities are impaired. In no event shall a municipality hold a
person in protective custody for a period of longer than eight hours
without providing an appropriate hearing.
B. Notwithstanding the provision of any ordinance enacted pursuant to
Subsection A of this section, provided that it is not a detriment to the
public safety, the arresting law enforcement agency may, because of the
age, health or safety of the arrested person, release the person
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 2001, c. 69 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22 et
seq.) or provide an appropriate alternative to protective custody. The
municipality shall not be subject to liability if a person is released from
custody pursuant to the provisions of this subsection.
A. Minimum penalty shall be $1,250.
§ 1-31 UNION CITY CODE § 1-33
1:16
B. A penalty greater than $1,250 may be imposed if authorized by N.J.S.A.
40:49-5, as amended.
§ 1-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-33
1:17
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-33 UNION CITY CODE § 1-33
1:18
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 4-1. Official title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Administrative Code of
the City of Union City in the County of Hudson, and is sometimes referred
to in this chapter as the "code."
§ 4-2. Administrative organization.
Pursuant to law, the executive, judicial, administrative and legislative
functions, powers and duties of the Board of Commissioners shall be
allocated among the following basic departments:
§ 4-3. Commissioners assigned to departments.
The Board of Commissioners shall designate, by majority vote, one
Commissioner to be Director of each department. The Board of
Commissioners shall also examine the various departments and divisions,
or subdepartments within departments, and, by resolution, make such
reallocation of functions as it deems desirable. When such reallocation has
been duly made by resolution, the function so allocated shall be deemed
to fall within the departments to which they have been allocated,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this code.
§ 4-4. Jurisdiction of Board of Commissioners over departments.
The Board of Commissioners shall determine the powers and duties to
be performed by each department and shall assign each department the
powers and duties which it deems appropriate. The board shall prescribe
the powers and duties of all officers and employees, may assign particular
officers and employees to one or more departments, and may require any
officer or employee to perform duties in two or more departments if the
work required in each department is similar in character. The Board of
Commissioners may make such rules and regulations as are necessary and
proper for the efficient and economical conduct of the business of the City.
A. Department of Parks and Public Property.
B. Department of Public Affairs.
C. Department of Public Safety.
D. Department of Public Works.
E. Department of Revenue and Finance.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:19
§ 4-5. Execution of contracts.
The City may prescribe the form and manner of execution and approval of
all contracts to be executed by the City, and the Board of Commissioners
has authorized the Mayor to execute all contracts on behalf of the City.
§ 4-5 UNION CITY CODE § 4-5
1:20
ARTICLE II
Board of Commissioners
§ 4-6. Organization.
The Board of Commissioners of the City shall consist of five Commissioners,
who shall be elected at large by the voters of the City at a regular municipal
election and who shall serve for terms of four years, beginning on the first
Tuesday following their election.
§ 4-7. Powers.
All the executive, administrative, judicial and legislative powers of the City
shall be vested in the Board of Commissioners, including the powers of a
local Department of Health.
§ 4-8. Meetings and procedures.
§ 4-9. Quorum.
A majority of all members of the Board of Commissioners shall constitute
a quorum at any regular or special meeting, but a lesser number than a
A. Regular meetings. The Board of Commissioners shall organize on the
first Tuesday following the regular quadrennial municipal election. At
the meeting, or as soon thereafter as practical, the Board shall create,
condemn or abolish all subordinate boards and appoint any officers that
it deems necessary for the proper and official conduct of the affairs of
the City. After the organization meeting, the Board shall meet regularly,
at least twice a month, on dates to be determined by resolution. When
the time for any regular meeting of the Board falls on a legal holiday, as
prescribed by law, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the
next succeeding day which is not a legal holiday.
B. Special meetings. Special meetings of the board may be held on call of
the Mayor or any two Commissioners, in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:72-13.
C. Procedure. Except in cases where the Board of Commissioners provides
otherwise by resolution, the proceedings at the meetings of the Board
shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. The
Corporation Counsel shall be ex officio parliamentarian and shall be
prepared, at the request of Commissioner, to give his/her opinion on
any question of procedure.
D. Attendance. All regular and special meetings of the Board of
Commissioners shall be open to the public, and any citizen may have
access to the minutes of any meeting, upon application to the City
Clerk. The Corporation Counsel, the Clerk and any other City officer or
employee whose presence shall be required by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners shall attend such meetings.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:21
quorum may adjourn the meeting. If no member of the Board is present one
hour after the appointed time of any meeting, the Clerk shall adjourn the
meeting.
§ 4-10. Vacancies.
When a vacancy occurs in the office of Commissioner, it shall be filled in
accordance with state law.
§ 4-9 UNION CITY CODE § 4-10
1:22
ARTICLE III
Office of the Mayor
§ 4-11. Selection; duties.
At the first meeting after their election, the Commissioners shall choose
one of their number to preside at all meetings of the Board, who shall
be designated the Mayor. The Mayor shall be President of the Board and
shall preside at its meetings, supervise all departments and report to the
Board for its action all matters requiring the attention of the Board or any
department. The Mayor shall not have the power to veto any measure.
§ 4-12. Secretary to the Mayor.
§ 4-13. Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator.
A. Position established. There is hereby established the position of
secretary to the Mayor.
B. Qualifications.
(1) Such person shall be capable of rendering all pertinent services
required by the Mayor, including but not limited to typing,
stenographic duties, clerical work, some elements of
troubleshooting, working with the public, scheduling
appointments, drafting correspondence, memoranda, statements
and other documents.
(2) Such person preferably shall have five years of responsible
experience in the capacity of a secretary to an executive or
administrative officer in a public or private organization, or other
related experience.
C. Appointment. The secretary shall be appointed by the Mayor at a salary
within the range established by the then current Salary Ordinance.
A. Establishment of position. There shall be the position of Municipal
Emergency Management Coordinator in the City, who shall be under
the direction of the Office of the Mayor and who shall direct the Office
of Emergency Management.
B. Qualifications. The requirements of municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator shall be as follows: ability to read, write and understand
English sufficiently to perform the duties of this position; possession of
a valid New Jersey driver's license; some knowledge of the problems,
methods and procedures involved with disaster control; ability to plan,
develop, organize, install and supervise disaster control and related
functions; to give suitable assignments and instructions; and to direct
the establishment and maintenance of suitable records and files.
C. Duties. It shall be the duty of the municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator to plan, organize and develop disaster control programs
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-13
1:23
§ 4-14. Director of Public Relations.
and procedures for the City; establish and maintain a municipal control
center; integrate municipal civil defense organization with that of the
county and state organizations; confer with county and state
organizations on the development and implementation of mutual aid
programs; plan and develop a comprehensive training program for
municipal staff personnel in accordance with federal and state criteria;
and select voluntary personnel from within the municipality.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established the classified position of
Director of Public Relations under the direction of the Mayor and the
Administrator.
B. Qualifications. The Director shall possess the education, experience,
skills and training necessary to perform the duties of the position.
C. Appointment. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor, pursuant to
the New Jersey Department of Personnel rules and regulations.
D. Salary. The salary for the Director of Public Relations shall be as set
forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.
E. Responsibilities. Under the direction and supervision of the Board of
Commissioners and the Administrator, the Director shall:
(1) Serve as spokesperson for the Board of Commissioners.
(2) Plan public information programs which function to:
(a) Make available to the public or affected groups complete
information about the work of the City.
(b) Disseminate information in an easily understandable manner.
(c) Create and maintain a favorable public image.
(d) Maintain liaison with organizations especially interested in the
work of the City in order to assure public understanding of the
City's programs.
(3) Write and edit copy; review and evaluate for policy, content and
style informational and promotional materials such as press
releases, publications, radio and television programs and
photographs; and assess the value and effectiveness of written
material in achieving the City's information and program
objectives.
(4) Arrange and direct press conferences and radio and television
interviews of the Board of Commissioners.
(5) Select appropriate subject matter; collect data relating to issues
from varied sources, draw reasonable conclusions therefrom; and
§ 4-13 UNION CITY CODE § 4-14
1:24
§ 4-15. Marriage and civil union ceremonies. [Added 3-20-2007]
make use of facts pertinent to specific cases in clear, concise and
informative articles and news releases for publication.
(6) Arrange for and/or conduct meetings and public contract programs
to familiarize residents, community groups, business concerns,
nonprofit organizations and other governmental agencies most
actively interested in the activities of the City; and may select
speakers for public meetings.
(7) Conduct or oversee public surveys and other information-gathering
activities designed to identify public or consumer interests,
attitudes and habits.
(8) Interact with citizens, citizen groups, City departments, boards and
agencies, other municipalities, agencies, commissions, counties
and congressional, United States Senate, State Assembly and State
Senate offices.
(9) Perform any and all tasks assigned by the Board of Commissioners
or the Administrator.
A. The fee for the performance of a marriage or civil union ceremony by
the Mayor shall be paid to the Mayor of Union City. This fee shall be in
addition to any other compensation paid to the Mayor.
B. The Mayor shall be reimbursed for any out of pocket expenses incurred
in connection with the performance of the wedding or civil union
ceremonies.
C. The Salary Ordinance is hereby amended to be consistent with this
section.
§ 4-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-15
1:25

ARTICLE IV
Clerk and Deputy Clerk
§ 4-16. City Clerk.
A. Appointment and qualifications. There shall be a Clerk of the City,
appointed for a term of three years, subject to tenure. The Clerk shall
be qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of his/her
office, as required by law.
B. Powers and duties. The office of the Clerk shall:
(1) Perform all the functions required of municipal clerks by Title 19 of
the New Jersey Revised Statutes and any other state law or City
ordinance, and receive the fees prescribed under such law or
ordinance for the use of the City.
(2) Issue all licenses required by law or ordinance and make all reports
required by law or ordinance to the Commissioners for all fees
received.
(3) Be the custodian of the Official Seal of the City and, when
authorized by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, affix the
Seal to proper documents to which the City is a party and attest to
the execution of such documents, as well as to the signature of the
Mayor and other proper officials on such documents.
(4) Ensure that all ordinances and notices of the City are properly
advertised.
(5) Assume responsibility for the correspondence of the City and of the
Commissioners.
(6) Be the depository and custodian of any official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, except his/
her own bond, which shall be placed in the custody of the Chief
Financial Officer of the City, and of all formal contracts for work,
labor, services, supplies, equipment and materials to which the City
may be a party.
(7) Be the depository for, and have custody of, all performance bonds
running to the City as obligee or any other form of security given by
any contractor, subdivision developer or other person on account of
work to be done in or for the City.
(8) Have custody of all leases of property owned by the City.
(9) Maintain a record of all real property which the City may acquire,
sell, or lease. The records shall be in such form and contain such
information as the Division of Local Finance in the Department of
Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey shall prescribe. It
shall be available for inspection in the office of the Clerk.
§ 4-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16
1:27
§ 4-17. Deputy Clerk.
(10) Have any additional functions, powers and duties as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance or by the direction of the
Commissioners.
A. There shall also be in the office of the City Clerk a Deputy Clerk and
such other personnel as may be required to adequately perform prompt
and efficient services by the office.
B. It shall be the duty of the Deputy Clerk generally to aid and assist the
City Clerk in the performance of the duties of his/her office, in such
manner as the City Clerk shall from time to time direct. It shall be the
duty of the other personnel to perform such duties as are assigned by
the Board of Commissioners and by the Clerk. The salary of the Deputy
Municipal Clerk shall be as set forth by ordinance and amended from
time to time.
§ 4-16 UNION CITY CODE § 4-17
1:28
ARTICLE V
City Administrator
§ 4-18. Position established.
In accordance with the authority set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:63-7, the Board of
Commissioners hereby establishes the position of Administrator for the City
of Union City.
§ 4-19. Appointment; term; vacancies; salary.
The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners
by resolution, with no less than 2/3 of the Board voting in the affirmative.
The term of office of the City Administrator shall be at the pleasure of
the Board of Commissioners. If a vacancy shall occur as a result of the
termination of the City Administrator or for any other reason, such vacancy
shall be filled in accordance with the appointment procedure set forth
herein. The salary of the City Administrator shall be determined and fixed
by the Board of Commissioners and shall be included within the salary
ordinances of the City.
§ 4-20. Removal from office.
The City Administrator may be removed from office by a two-thirds vote
of the Board of Commissioners. The resolution of removal shall become
effective three months after its adoption by the Board. In accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138, the Board of Commissioners may provide that the
resolution of removal shall have immediate effect, provided that the City
shall pay to the City Administrator any unpaid balance of his/her salary and
his/her salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the
resolution.
§ 4-21. Qualifications.
It shall be the obligation of the Board of Commissioners to select a City
Administrator on the basis of his/her executive and administrative abilities,
with special emphasis on the experience, education and training that such
person has in the area of governmental affairs.
§ 4-22. Absence or disability.
During the absence or disability of the City Administrator, the Board of
Commissioners, by resolution, may appoint an officer or regular employee
of the City to perform the duties of the City Administrator. If, after
reasonable accommodation, the City Administrator cannot perform the
essential job functions of the office, then such absence may be deemed a
vacancy. If the reasonable accommodation imposes an undue hardship upon
the City, then such absence may be deemed a vacancy. All absences, other
than for approved sick days, shall be without pay, unless otherwise agreed
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 4-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-23
1:29
§ 4-23. Duties and responsibilities.
The City Administrator shall be under the supervision, control and approval
of each member of the Board of Commissioners as it shall relate to the
departments directly under their control or responsibility. In those
instances where applicable, under the supervision, direction and approval
of the Board, the City Administrator shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
A. To serve as the principal administrative officer representing the Board
of Commissioners. The City Administrator shall be responsible to the
Board as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the
business affairs of the City. The City Administrator's duties and
responsibilities shall relate to the general management of all City
business, excepting therefrom those duties and responsibilities
conferred upon other City officials by state statute, other applicable
laws, rules and regulations promulgated by the state and county
agencies, decisional law or other ordinances of the City.
B. To supervise and coordinate the administration of all departments and
offices, except those set forth in § 4-24, in consultation with the
Commissioners of each of the respective departments.
C. To represent the City, when directed by the Board of Commissioners, in
its relations with the federal, state and county governments and with
other municipalities; and to evaluate, when requested by the
Commissioners in charge of the various departments, the City's interest
in contracts, franchises and other business transactions.
D. To study the administrative and other operations of the City and make
recommendations for plans and programs to meet the changing needs
of the City.
E. To attend all meetings of the Board of Commissioners, as required.
F. To continually review and maintain the personnel policies and practices
of the City and recommend to the Mayor and Commissioners proposed
changes for a more efficient operation of the City.
G. To recommend the nature, location and extent of public improvements
in conjunction with the appropriate department head and to coordinate
the execution of same when authorized by the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners.
H. To implement and enforce the policies of the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners with respect to the compiling and release of public
information.
I. To receive from each department, office and board their annual budget
requests and to review and transmit same, along with his/her comments
and recommendations, to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners.
§ 4-23 UNION CITY CODE § 4-23
1:30
J. To consult with the Mayor, Commissioner of Revenue and Finance, the
City Auditor and the Chief Financial Officer on the preparation of the
tentative budget, record changes, additions and deletions thereof and
to submit the final recommendations made by the Administrator, in
coordination with the Mayor, Commissioner of Revenue and Finance,
City Auditor and Chief Financial Officer, in the form required by law,
together with an analysis of the various items of expenditure and
revenue and such explanatory comments as may be required.
K. To maintain a continuing review of the City's insurance program with
the insurance representatives for the City and recommend to the Board
of Commissioners any changes or modifications to the plan of insurance
in force at that time.
L. To assist the Board of Commissioners in negotiating contracts for the
City, as authorized by and subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
M. To act as a liaison on behalf of the City with all utility companies serving
any portion of the City to be sure that such utilities are providing
adequately for the needs of the residents of the City.
N. To assure that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the City are complied with.
O. To investigate and pursue federal and state aid projects and other aid
programs for which the City may qualify, including the administration of
all community development grants, whether state or federal.
P. To require each department to maintain adequate inventory records of
all equipment and materials owned and used by the City, and to arrange
for the disposal of all inadequate or obsolete materials when directed to
do so by the Board of Commissioners.
Q. To keep the Board of Commissioners currently informed of all matters
within his/her jurisdiction by such reports, verbally or in writing, as
(s)he deems advisable or as may be requested by the Commissioners,
and to submit an annual written report of his/her work accomplished at
the request of the Commissioners for the benefit of the public.
R. To see that all money owed to the City is promptly paid, and that the
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all of the
City's claims.
S. To execute and enforce the laws of the State of New Jersey and
ordinances and resolutions of the City in such a manner as the
Commissioners may prescribe.
T. To supervise the work of consultants retained by the Board of
Commissioners, such as engineers, planning consultants and others,
and to keep the Commissioners fully informed as to the work of such
consultants.
§ 4-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-23
1:31
§ 4-24. Police and Fire Department exemption.
The City Administrator shall not supervise or coordinate the administration
of the Police and Fire Departments. These departments shall remain under
the control and direction of the Commissioner of the Department of Public
Safety.
§ 4-25. Conflict of interest.
The City Administrator shall devote full time to the interests of the City.
§ 4-26. Residency requirement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136, the person appointed as City Administrator
may be someone other than a resident of the City.
§ 4-27. Limitation of authority.
Nothing in this article shall derogate from or authorize the City
Administrator to exercise the powers and duties of the elected and
appointed officials of the City.
§ 4-28. Office of Personnel.
U. To perform such other duties as may be assigned to him/her from time
to time by the Mayor and/or members of the Board of Commissioners.
A. Established. There is hereby established within the office of the City
Administrator the Office of Personnel which shall be responsible for the
coordination of all personnel records and compliance with provisions of
all laws and regulations regarding the management of the personnel
records, systems and procedures required by law, including, but not
limited to, the maintenance of the personnel records, the processing of
required documents and records with and on behalf of the New Jersey
Department of Personnel or any other state or federal agency requiring
same, the coordination with the other City departments to ensure that
appointments and examination notices as may be required from time to
time are posted and that notices of any federal or state agency
regarding employment and required to be distributed for employee
notification are posted and/or distributed, and such other related duties
as the Board of Commissioners or the City Administrator shall assign.
B. Personnel Officer. Under the direction of the Board of Commissioners
and the supervision and responsibility of the City Administrator, the
Office of Personnel shall be managed and operated by the Personnel
Officer.
C. Duties of Personnel Officer.
(1) The Personnel Officer shall plan, organize and implement all
related and required activity with the Office of Personnel, and shall
§ 4-23 UNION CITY CODE § 4-28
1:32
perform such other duties of like nature as, from time to time, may
be assigned to him/her by the City Administrator.
(2) This title is for a confidential position within the City which shall
serve as a resource and assist the City Administrator and the Board
of Commissioners in the collective bargaining process, including,
but not limited to, negotiations and the processing of any
disciplinary actions.
D. Job specification; salary. The overall job specifications for this position,
as applicable, shall be as promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Personnel. The salary shall be as established, and amended from time to
time, by the City Salary Ordinance.
§ 4-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-28
1:33

ARTICLE VI
Corporation Counsel
§ 4-29. Appointment of licensed attorney.
There will be a Corporation Counsel who is a duly licensed attorney of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 4-30. Terms of office.
The Corporation Counsel shall serve for a term of one year.
§ 4-31. Duties.
The Corporation Counsel shall be the attorney of record in all proceedings
wherein the City or any of its officers, boards, bodies or commissioners shall
be a party growing out of their official position or duties. The Corporation
Counsel shall advise all City officials, City bodies and personnel as to all
matters relating to City government, when requested to do so, except for
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment, and shall supervise the
execution, preparation and enforcement of all contracts, deeds, documents,
statutes, ordinances, resolutions or legal correspondence. The Corporation
Counsel shall prosecute and defend all legal matters for or against the City,
or any of its officials, departments, employees or personnel, and in general,
shall be counsel for the entire City as well as all of its officials, departments,
employees and personnel, except for the Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Adjustment. Nothing herein shall preclude the appointment of special
counsel as from time to time may be deemed to be in the best interests of
the City.
§ 4-32. Approval of deeds, contracts and documents.
Before any deed, contract or other document or any compact agreement,
ordinance, resolution or other document or matter having legal
consequences shall be considered, the same shall be submitted to the
Corporation Counsel for his/her opinion as to legality and legal form, and
(s)he shall endorse thereon or communicate with respect thereto his/her
opinion as to the legality and form of the document or matter.
§ 4-33. Reports.
The Corporation Counsel shall report to the department to which (s)he
is assigned, and shall prepare a report, if requested by the Board of
Commissioners as a whole.
§ 4-34. Authority to enter into agreements, compromises or
settlements.
The Corporation Counsel may enter into any agreement, compromise or
settlement of any controversy or litigation in which the City is involved,
subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 4-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-35
1:35
§ 4-35. Compensation.
The Corporation Counsel shall be compensated through a contract with the
law firm with which (s)he is associated in accordance with an agreement for
such fees as shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners. The law firm
shall be compensated by the City for services rendered and reimbursed by
the City for disbursements made and expenses incurred, within the limits of
available appropriations. The Corporation Counsel shall also receive a fixed
salary to attend regularly scheduled Commission meetings.
§ 4-35 UNION CITY CODE § 4-35
1:36
ARTICLE VII
Municipal Court
§ 4-36. Establishment; powers.
There shall be a Municipal Court in the City pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City of
Union City, Hudson County." The Municipal Court shall have a seal bearing
the impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held in the City
Hall of the City or such other place as the Board of Commissioners shall
designate from time to time, and shall exercise all the functions, powers,
duties and jurisdiction conferred by law upon municipal courts.
§ 4-37. Municipal Judges; powers and duties; qualifications.
§ 4-38. Municipal Court Administrator.
A. There shall be two municipal judges of the Municipal Court who shall
each serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment and
until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
B. Each municipal judge shall have and possess the qualifications and
shall have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers and
jurisdiction conferred by law or ordinance. They need not be residents
of the City, and shall be attorneys at law of the State of New Jersey.
Whenever a Municipal Judge shall be unable to sit as such, that Judge
may designate any other Judge of any Municipal Court (except a
nonattorney Judge) or an attorney at law to sit for him/her temporarily
and hold the Municipal Court. Any such designation shall be made in
writing and shall be filed in the Court, and any person so designated,
while sitting temporarily, shall possess all the powers of the Municipal
Judge.
A. Position established. There is hereby created the office of Municipal
Court Administrator.
B. Appointment; term. The Municipal Court Administrator shall be
appointed by and be responsible to the Director of Public Affairs. Such
appointment shall be for a term of two years.
C. Qualifications.
(1) Qualifications for the position of Municipal Court Administrator are
as follows:
(a) Five years of Municipal Court experience.
(b) A knowledge of budgeting, staff training, evaluation,
requirement for short- and long-range planning.
§ 4-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-38
1:37
§ 4-39. Interpreter.
(c) Organizational abilities and the ability to provide effective
policies and procedures and prepare statistical and other
reports as to any finding, conclusion and recommendations.
(d) The ability to assign and supervise work assignments.
(2) Additional consideration shall be given to applicants with bilingual
ability in Spanish.
D. Duties. The Municipal Court Administrator shall:
(1) Supervise and have charge of office procedures and administrative
functions of the Court.
(2) Prepare and supervise the annual budget for the Municipal Court.
(3) Supervise the development and maintenance of computerized
traffic case processing.
(4) Supervise the collection of fines and disbursement of funds.
(5) Assure the proper maintenance of all necessary recordkeeping.
(6) Oversee criminal case processing and maintenance and control of
the Court calendar.
(7) Supervise the work performed by the nonjudicial staff.
(8) Institute and plan for short- and long-term goals and objectives of
the Municipal Court.
(9) Prepare or direct the preparation of statistical, financial, progress
and other reports related to the work of the Court, as may be
required by regulation, directed by the Director of Public Affairs or
requested by the Judge, complete with findings, conclusions and
recommendations, where applicable.
(10) Supervise the maintenance of all required and necessary records of
the Court.
(11) Study and develop effective and improved methods of Court
functioning, especially the mechanization and computerization of
Court operation.
(12) Procure supplies and services for the Court.
(13) Such other duties required or assigned for the efficient and
effective operation of the Municipal Court.
E. Compensation. The Municipal Court Administrator shall receive a
salary as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 4-38 UNION CITY CODE § 4-39
1:38
A. Position established. There is hereby created the position of interpreter,
assigned to the Municipal Court, in the Department of Public Affairs.
B. Responsibilities. The interpreter shall:
(1) Interpret and explain Municipal Court policies and procedures in
the Spanish language to non-English-speaking persons.
(2) Translate written statements into English or Spanish language
relevant to any Court proceedings.
(3) Perform various clerical tasks as required by the Court.
C. Qualifications. The qualifications of the interpreter, assigned to the
Municipal Court, shall be:
(1) The ability to read, write, speak and understand English sufficiently
to perform the duties of the position.
(2) A thorough knowledge of the concerned Spanish language.
(3) The ability to interpret and translate the Spanish language and to
be courteous with individuals.
(4) Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental
defects which would impair the proper performance of the required
duties or which might endanger the health and safety of oneself or
others.
D. Appointment; salary. The appointment of the interpreter shall be made
by the Director of the Department of Public Affairs. The salary shall be
as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 4-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39
1:39

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Revenue and Finance
§ 4-40. Chief Financial Officer.
§ 4-41. Tax Collector. [Amended 12-2-2003]
The Tax Collector shall:
A. Position established. There is hereby established the position of Chief
Financial Officer in the Department of Revenue and Finance.
B. Duties.
(1) The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.10 and shall be responsible for the proper financial
administration of the City under the Local Government Supervision
Act (1947) [N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-1 et seq.]; the Local Bond Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.); the Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et
seq.); the Local Fiscal Affairs Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.); the
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.), and such
other statutes and such rules and regulations promulgated by the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services, the Local
Finance Board or any other state agency, as may pertain to the
financial administration of the municipality.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall supervise all the fiscal concerns
for the City and make quarterly reports on the subject to the
Director and the Board of Commissioners.
A. Have, perform and exercise all the functions, powers and duties of a
collector of taxes, as provided by general law and this code, and as the
Board of Commissioners, by ordinance, shall provide, including, but not
limited to, the preparation and mailing of new tax bills, the enforcement
of tax collections by tax sales or other means prescribed by general law,
and the maintenance of tax accounting records, as authorized and
approved by law.
B. Receive and collect all funds assessed or raised by taxation or
assessment for any purpose and all current taxes and delinquent real
and personal taxes and charge and receive penalties according to law.
C. Proceed promptly to enforce the payment of all delinquent taxes or
assessments in the manner prescribed by law and forward to the
Corporation Counsel for foreclosure a list of all tax liens held by the
City.
D. Report to the Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance all
receipts, deposits and cash on hand belonging to the City.
§ 4-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-41
1:41
E. Process any property tax refund or delinquency of less than $5, or the
cancellation of same, without further action on the part of the Board of
Commissioners.
F. Issue redemption statements and collect a fee as set forth in § Section
3-12 of these Revised General Ordinances.
G. Provide computer printouts, certificates of discharge and duplicate bills
in the amounts as set forth under Chapter 155, Fees.
H. Review and recommend policies to the local governing body that would
in anyway affect the normal operations of the tax collection function.
I. Consult with the Municipal Finance Director and Municipal Auditor to
maintain accounting and reporting procedures.
J. Prepare and mail all final tax bills after establishing the accuracy of said
tax duplicates.
K. Consult with the Tax Assessor, Municipal Finance director, and
Municipal Administrator regarding the exact format and amount of
information outlined on tax bills and information regarding tax appeals.
L. Establish appropriate accounting and recording procedures as required
by state statute to enhance efficient and accurate record keeping
utilizing modern accounting techniques and system controls to provide
detailed and timely data for audits.
M. Receipt, reconciliation, deposit, and recording of all cash received to
special account ledgers, tax lien ledgers, foreclosed property ledgers,
and delinquent ledgers.
N. Develop administrative procedures for dealing with delinquent
accounts to increase the percentage rate of collection and reduce the
rate of uncollected or delinquent accounts, including telephoning,
personal visits, newspaper releases of delinquent accounts, and/or
separate mailing for delinquent accounts.
O. Establish and maintain accurate listings of all unpaid tax items.
P. Prepare a listing of properties to be sold, accurate descriptions of all
property, the name of the owner and listing of all taxes, assessments,
and other charges for preparation of tax sale.
Q. Distribute public notices of the time and place of all tax sales which
include a description of said property and total amount due at the time
of the sale, and the placing of notices in designated public places, and
the publishing of same in an area newspaper pursuant to state statute.
R. Conduct of tax sales on all delinquent property at least once each year.
S. Deliver certificates of sale to all purchasers.
§ 4-41 UNION CITY CODE § 4-41
1:42
§ 4-42. Office of Tax Assessor.
T. Distribute notifications concerning homestead rebates, tenant rebates,
and notification to respective owners regarding their eligibility for
federal flood insurance.
U. Interview and evaluate candidates for subordinate positions in the Tax
Collector's office and recommend candidates to the Department
Director.
V. Supervise and assign work and duties to the Assistant Tax Collector and
other subordinate employees.
W. Ensure that all subordinate employees are at the appropriate levels of
competence through certification, on the job training, formal training,
and educational programs.
X. Evaluate work performance of subordinate personnel and recommend
disciplinary actions (up to and including discharge) for all subordinate
employees.
Y. Assist in the gathering of information and provide input into grievances
involving employees in her office.
A. Established. There shall be an office of the Tax Assessor, the head of
which shall be the Tax Assessor, who shall be appointed for a term of
four years commencing on July 1 of the year in which (s)he is appointed.
There shall also be such deputy and Assistant Assessors as may be
authorized from time to time, whose duties shall be to assist the Tax
Assessor.
B. Duties of the Tax Assessor.
(1) The Tax Assessor shall:
(a) Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and
duties prescribed by law for a municipal assessor.
(b) Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel
of real property assessed or exempted, establish and maintain
files, records and procedures required for the evaluation and
assessment of personal property pursuant to law.
(c) Maintain a current Tax Map of the City as a public record and
record on it all changes in ownership or character of the real
property assessed, employing for the purpose the facilities of
other departments as provided by this Code.
(d) Be subject to supervision and control by the County Board of
Taxation and be governed by such rules, orders or directions as
may be issued by the County Board.
§ 4-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-42
1:43
§ 4-43. City Auditor.
It shall be the duty of the City Auditor to supervise the accounting records of
the City and to certify to the correctness of all reports of the Chief Financial
Officer, Collector and Supervisor of Accounts, to audit the accounts of the
City and to generally supervise the accounting work in the Department of
Revenue and Finance. The City Auditor shall perform such other duties as,
from time to time, may be assigned to him/her by the Director of Revenue
and Finance.
§ 4-44. Supervisor of Accounts.
It shall be the duty of the Supervisor of Accounts to examine and audit all
payrolls, bills and claims which are to be paid by the City. The Supervisor
of Accounts shall also examine, verify, and compare with the contracts on
file all certificates for payments presented by the City Engineer; criticize
all claims for payment whatsoever made against the City, making such
comments in writing as (s)he thinks proper for the benefit of the Director
of Revenue and Finance; certify to the Director of Revenue and Finance all
claims against the City, including all payrolls; countersign all checks for the
payment of services or claims; keep the general books of account for the
City and shall render each month to the Director of Revenue and Finance
and to the Board of Commissioners a statement of the appropriation
accounts, properly certified to by the City Auditor; and perform such other
duties that, from time to time, may be assigned to him/her by the Director
of Revenue and Finance.
(2) On and after July 1, 1971, no person may be an assessor or deputy
assessor unless (s)he holds a Tax Assessor certificate. This
requirement shall not apply to anyone who has served in office
continuously from July 1, 1967. However, a person approved to
office after receiving a Tax Assessor certificate and thereafter
serving in office for four consecutive years, and a person who
received a Tax Assessor certificate on or before June 30, 1969,
while actually in office, and having prior to June 30, 1969, served in
office for four consecutive years, shall be entitled to tenure
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.31.
C. Tax Assessor Trainee. [Added 7-3-2007]
(1) There shall be in the office of the Tax Assessor a Tax Assessor
Trainee who shall work under the close supervision of the Tax
Assessor.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Tax Assessor Trainee to receive training
in the accumulation of data that will be used in establishing a
system of valuation of real property, to learn the proper techniques
and methods involved in assessing and appraising real property, to
learn to use all types of electronic and manual systems and records
containing tax assessment data and to perform such duties as are
assigned by the Tax Assessor.
§ 4-42 UNION CITY CODE § 4-45
1:44
§ 4-45. Payment of claims; payroll account.
A. Payment of claims.
(1) Presentation of claim; approval.
(a) Any person claiming payment from the City shall present a duly
certified claim voucher, as furnished and approved by the
Board of Commissioners, to the head of the department
wherein the services, materials, supplies were furnished, who
shall affix his/her signature thereto if the claim voucher meets
with his/her approval and attach thereto proof that the
services, materials or supplies were in fact received by the
City.
(b) The head of the department shall submit the claim voucher to
the director of the department for his/her approval. The claim
voucher shall then be forwarded to the Supervisor of Accounts
for examination and approval and thereafter shall be
forwarded to the Director of Revenue and Finance for
examination and approval and for the preparation of a
resolution for the payment of the claim voucher to the City
Clerk.
(c) The City Clerk shall present a resolution for consideration and
approval at the next regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners. The Board may also reject any claim presented
to it stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved
claim shall be referred back to the Clerk with such instructions
as the Board may give him/her at the time of disapproval.
(d) It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes indicating that the Board has by formal action
approved the same, with appropriate record as to any claims
disapproved or rejected.
(2) Disbursement. If the resolution is adopted by the Board, a copy
shall be forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer who shall prepare
the necessary checks for payment. Checks shall be signed by the
Mayor, Chief Financial Officer and Director of the Department of
Revenue and Finance. After preparing checks for the payment of
claims, the Chief Financial Officer shall record them in a proper
book of account and thereafter mail or distribute the checks to the
claimants.
(3) Travel expenses. In the case of reimbursement for actual and
necessary traveling expenses, itemized claims supported by
receipts where available should be presented in order to obtain
reimbursement for expenses incurred by local officials where
authorized to travel by the City.
(4) Payroll account.
§ 4-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-45
1:45
(a) The Supervisor of Accounts shall prepare payrolls for
employees paid on an annual basis and a per diem or hourly
basis. Payrolls for per diem and hourly work or services shall
be submitted to the Supervisor of Accounts by the Director or
chief clerk of each department showing dates, hours, rates and
total earnings for preparation of payrolls and payroll checks.
The Supervisor of Accounts shall duly certify that the services
have been rendered and the amount specified is in fact due and
owing to the employee or employees. Payrolls shall then be
approved by the Director of the department and presented to
the Board of Commissioners for approval and, after approval,
shall be paid in due course. If there is no scheduled meeting of
the Board of Commissioners prior to the regular payroll
payment date, then approval shall be at the next regular
meeting of the Board following date of payment of payrolls.
The Supervisor of Accounts shall have payrolls approved by the
proper certifying authorities.
(b) The payroll period shall be biweekly. In the event of a holiday
falling on a payday, payment shall be advanced to the
preceding workday.
(c) The Supervisor of Accounts and the Chief Financial Officer
shall present to the Board of Commissioners payroll claims
drawn to the order of the City of Union City Payroll Account
and deposit funds and draw checks, as follows:
[1] In advance for all employees whose salaries are on an
annual or weekly basis when such salaries are due and
payable prior to the next regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners.
[2] In advance for all employees whose compensation is on an
hourly or daily basis when the compensation has been
approved by the director of the department and has been
certified by the Supervisor of Accounts and Chief Financial
Officer.
[3] From time to time the Chief Financial Officer, upon receipt
of a check for the amount due such payroll account, shall
deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account,
charging appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.
[4] The Chief Financial Officer shall thereafter draw checks on
the payroll account to the employees entitled to payment
therefrom.
[5] In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the
Supervisor of Accounts and Chief Financial Officer shall,
and it shall be their duty to, see that such error or
adjustment is properly corrected and appropriate record
made thereof.
§ 4-45 UNION CITY CODE § 4-45
1:46
(d) The City Chief Financial Officer shall establish and maintain a
payroll account in a bank that accepts government funds and
meets the reserve requirements established by the State of
New Jersey under New Jersey's Government Units Depository
Protection Act. All payroll checks shall be signed, manual or
facsimile signatures, by the Mayor, Chief Financial Officer and
the Director of the Department of Public Affairs. [Amended
5-21-2013]
B. Payment of claims between meetings.
(1) Each Commissioner shall submit, in writing, a list of bills to be paid
in between meetings of the Board of Commissioners. That list can
be a list for the fiscal year or the list can be submitted on an ad hoc
basis for bills that must be paid in between meetings. This list must
be submitted to the City Business Administrator and to the
Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer of the City.
(2) All bills to be paid must be accompanied by the appropriate
voucher which has been executed by the vendor, the Commissioner
in charge of that department, as well as any other officer required
to sign vouchers for the approval of payments.
(3) The bill, with all supporting documentation, must then be
submitted to the Administrator or, in his/her absence, the
Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer, for the purpose of certifying and
approving the payment of this bill. The Administrator or, in his/her
absence, the Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer is the approving
officer for all bills to be paid by this method. Before the approving
officer can approve a payment of a bill, the Commissioner
requesting the payment must sign the voucher for that bill.
(4) The approving officer must certify that the work has been
performed or the product has been received by the City and, based
on information from the Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer, that
there are proper and sufficient funds for this payment as well as
legal authorization to pay same.
(5) Once the claim has been approved and the approving officer has
certified that the claim can be paid, the bill can be presented to the
Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer or other agent of the City who is
drawing the check for the payment of this claim. The checks must
still be signed by all the appropriate parties as any other claim paid
by the City.
(6) As long as the procedure set forth in this subsection is complied
with the Commissioner, Administrator and/or Treasurer/Chief
Financial Officer with regard to the payment of bills in between
Board of Commissioner's meetings, then the Board is required to
ratify the payment of these bills at its next regular meeting.
§ 4-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-46
1:47
§ 4-46. License Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the License Inspector to collect all license moneys
which may be due to the City under any statute of the state or any ordinance
of the City, giving proper receipts and acquittances for the moneys paid
to him/her and making payments of the moneys thus received to the Chief
Financial Officer. The License Inspector shall perform such other duties of
like nature as from time to time may be assigned to him/her by the director
of the department that the License Inspector is assigned to by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 4-47. Deputy Director.
§ 4-48. Municipal Treasurer.
A. Established; term. There is hereby established the position of Deputy
Director in the Department of Revenue and Finance, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:72-9. The Deputy Director shall serve during the term and at
the pleasure of the Director.
B. Duties. The Deputy Director shall assist the Director in organizing,
developing, directing, supervising and performing the work involved in
the management of the Department. The Deputy Director shall assist
the Director in developing and preparing the departmental budget,
operational policy, work programs and budgetary policies; evaluate the
effectiveness of work programs and procedures of all units with the
Department; promote close coordination of planning efforts; develop
effective work methods for subordinates; undertake special studies
pertaining to Department functions; establish and maintain helpful and
cooperative relations with civic and business organizations; and
perform any other duties assigned to him/her by the Director. In the
absence of the Director, the Deputy Director shall serve in his/her
capacity but shall not be authorized to act at meetings of the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Qualifications. Relevant experience in public or private sector
organization is required. Persons with mental or physical disabilities
are eligible as long as they can perform the essential functions of the
job after reasonable accommodation is made to their known limitations.
If the accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the
employer undue hardship, such person may not be eligible.
A. Established. There is hereby established the unclassified title of
Municipal Treasurer in the Department of Revenue and Finance.
B. Duties. The duties for this position are as provided by the job
description of the New Jersey Department of Personnel and as required
by the applicable statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey as
they apply to the operations and management of municipal finance.
Responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
§ 4-46 UNION CITY CODE § 4-48
1:48
(1) Under direction of the Director and the Chief Financial Officer,
supervises and performs the work involved in the disbursement,
accounting and auditing of funds received and disbursed, and in
negotiation of loans and sale of bonds.
(2) Does related work as required which shall include, but not be
limited to, supervising and performing the work involved in
preparation of varied financial reports and statements.
(3) Supervises and performs the work involved in negotiation of loans
and sale of bonds.
(4) Prepares budgets.
(5) Be able to assign suitable related work and instructions to
subordinates.
(6) Be responsible for supervising work operations and/or functional
programs and have responsibility for evaluating personnel
supervised by this position, including recommendations to the
Chief Financial Officer and Director regarding personnel matters.
(7) Plans and installs auditing and accounting systems and forms.
(8) Handles correspondence pertaining to the Treasurer's office.
(9) Prepares suitable reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
(10) Responds to inquiries of a technical nature.
(11) Assists in the direction and establishment and maintenance of
extensive bookkeeping and other needed records and files.
(12) Be required to learn and utilize various types of electronic and
manual recording and information systems used by the City and
related agencies.
C. Qualifications. The Municipal Treasurer shall be required to be certified
as a municipal finance officer by the Division of Local Government
Services in the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, and
should have five years of supervisory accounting experience in work
involving the installation, operation and auditing of large scale systems
of accounts, two years of which shall have been in municipal accounting
or auditing.
D. Salary. The salary for the Municipal Treasurer shall be as provided by
the salary ordinance adopted, and amended from time to time, by the
Board of Commissioners.2
2. Editor's Note: A section titled "Joint purchasing agreement," which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 4-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-48
1:49

ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Works
§ 4-49. Deputy Director.
§ 4-50. Recycling Coordinator.
A. Established; term. The position of Deputy Director in the Department of
Public Works is established. The Deputy shall serve during the term of
the Director of the Department but may be removed by his/her principal
at any time, and such removal shall not be reviewable.
B. Holding other office. If an employee of the City is designated to perform
the duties of a deputy in addition to the performance of the ordinary
duties of the office, the expiration of the term of the principal office or
removal from the office of deputy shall not affect his/her right to the
office held before his/her designation as deputy, the duties of which
office (s)he has continued to perform.
C. Duties.
(1) The Director shall prescribe the powers and duties of the Deputy
and the acts of such deputy shall, in all cases, be as legal and
binding as if performed by the Director, but the Deputy shall not be
authorized to act for the Director at meetings of the Board of
Commissioners.
(2) The list of duties of the Deputy shall be placed on file with the City
Clerk immediately after the appointment shall have been made and
the list may be amended from time to time at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works.
A. Position established. There is hereby created the position of Recycling
Coordinator under the direction of the Director of Public Works. The
Recycling Coordinator shall plan, coordinate, develop, implement and
promote the efficient disposal of all recyclable materials.
B. Qualifications.
(1) The requirements for the position of Recycling Coordinator shall be
one year experience in:
(a) Planning and coordinating the activities of a group of
individuals and influencing and motivating such individuals or
groups in resolving problems of mutual concerns; and/or
(b) Justifying, defending, negotiating or settling matters among
individuals who have diverse viewpoints, goals or objectives
which require the achievement of a common understanding of
a problem and developing a satisfactory solution through
persuasion or arriving at a compromise and developing
suitable alternatives; and/or
§ 4-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-50
1:51
(c) Gaining compliance with established policies and regulations
by persuasion or negotiation; and/or
(d) Exchanging ideas, information and opinions with others in
order to formulate policies and programs and/or arrive jointly
at decisions, conclusions of solutions; and/or
(e) Determining or interpreting work procedures for a group of
workers, assigning specific duties to them, maintaining
harmonious relations among them and promoting efficiency;
and/or
(f) Influencing people in favor of a product, service, idea or point
of view.
(2) In addition to the above mentioned, the Recycling Coordinator
must have some knowledge of objectives of a recycling program,
work/project planning and organization methods and techniques to
make the public aware of the objectives of a recycling program and
to elicit public support, also knowledge of techniques used in public
speaking, speech presentation and preparation of reports
containing findings, conclusions and recommendations.
C. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Recycling Coordinator to:
(1) Plan, coordinate and develop the recycling program for a
jurisdiction for the efficient disposal of recyclable material such as
metal cans, glass bottles, used oil or paper products.
(2) Develop and implement plans for promoting the recycling program.
(3) Write the jurisdiction's recycling proposals, applications for grants
and prepare drafts of recycling contracts.
(4) Consult with concerned officials for the purpose of expanding and
improving the recycling program and its efficiency.
(5) Coordinate recycling program activities with the collection of other
solid waste materials, whether by private contractor or by the City.
(6) Oversee the work performed on site by contractors or public
employees.
(7) Inspect the general quality of the work and/or compliance with
contractual agreement and/or adherence to specifications.
(8) Contact vendors and contractors to request information on the
prices of materials and/or services to develop cost projections of
recovering recyclable materials.
(9) Write and distribute educational material, press releases and other
informational materials to promote the recycling program and
encourage participation of residents in the program.
§ 4-50 UNION CITY CODE § 4-50
1:52
(10) Prepare correspondence to contractors, cooperating agencies and
City officials to provide information and answer inquiries regarding
the recycling program.
(11) Determine where disposal units for recyclable materials should be
placed within the jurisdiction, based on the greatest impact of
accessibility by citizens.
(12) Negotiate recycling contracts with private firms to provide the
greatest revenue return for the recyclable material.
(13) Recommend the purchase of equipment such as crushing machines
so as to reduce the bulk of the transported product to the
contracted recycling firm.
(14) Determine to what extent material needs to be segregated,
identified and handled (moved from collected area to storage area,
etc.) in order to prepare it for disposal.
(15) Determine the type of equipment and personnel, including
voluntary help, needed in order to accomplish the segregation,
identification and handling of material.
(16) Arrange for space, equipment and personnel to carry out the
disposal activities in order to perform these activities in an
efficient, economical and proper manner.
(17) Inspect any operational aspect of the recycling program in order to
evaluate the adequacy and appropriateness of policies and
procedures guiding the program.
(18) Analyze which items have the greatest recovery value in order to
determine which materials will be segregated, sorted or disposed.
(19) Analyze handling procedures from initial receipt to final disposition
in order to determine the need for improving or changing approach
or technique.
(20) Ensure the cleanliness of the recyclable disposable locations.
(21) Develop and maintain harmonious relations with government,
professional and civic groups and industry personnel.
(22) Speak before various groups to apprise them of the purpose and
goals of the recycling program and to elicit their support.
(23) May prepare cost estimates on the cost and revenue acquired from
this program.
(24) Establish and maintain needed records and files.
D. Appointment; compensation. The appointment of the Recycling
Coordinator shall be made by the Director of the Department of Public
§ 4-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-50
1:53
§ 4-51. Street Cleaning Department.
Works and the salary shall be as set forth in the annual Salary
Ordinance.
A. Establishment; personnel. There shall be a Street Cleaning Department
which shall be under the direct supervision and control of the
Commissioner to which the Department is assigned. The Department
shall consist of a Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent and
such supervisors and other personnel as may, from time to time, be
deemed necessary and appropriate by the Commissioner in conjunction
with the Committee of Streets and Sewers of the Board of
Commissioners. All appointments to the Department shall be made by
the Mayor.
B. Concentration of workers. The Commissioner, at any time in case the
needs of the City require it, may temporarily concentrate any or all of
the members of the Department and the supervisors thereof in any part
of the City for any work properly assignable to the Department.
C. Qualifications of workers.
(1) No person shall be appointed either Supervisor or a member of the
Street Cleaning Department unless (s)he is residing in the City and
is physically fit to perform the duties required of him/her pursuant
to the terms of this section. Persons with physical or mental
disabilities are eligible so long as they can perform the essential
functions of the job, after reasonable accommodation is made for
their known limitations, unless such accommodation imposes
undue hardship upon the City or the performance of such duties
poses a direct threat to the health or safety of such person or
others.
(2) In the event sufficient qualified persons are not found living within
the City may be made in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-1 et seq.
D. Duties of Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep the records of
the Commissioner and to keep the records of the Street Cleaning
Department. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep an accurate record
of time devoted by each member of the Department to the service of the
City and for that purpose (s)he shall create and be in charge of a set of
time records in which this record shall be accurately set out. The Clerk
shall examine all claims for payment and shall certify to the correctness
of such claims or shall append his/her criticism to the same. The Clerk
shall perform such other clerical work as may be assigned by the
Commissioner.
§ 4-50 UNION CITY CODE § 4-52
1:54
§ 4-52. Building Department.
The Building Department shall be established in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code, and be under the direction of the department
director to which it is assigned by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 4-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-52
1:55

ARTICLE X
Department of Parks and Public Property
§ 4-53. Superintendent.
§ 4-54. Deputy Director.
A. Superintendent of Parks and Public property. There shall be a
Superintendent of Parks and Public Property.
B. Duties of Superintendent.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Parks and Public
Property to take charge of and control the various parks and
playgrounds of the City, and with the aid of the park keepers to
keep the same in a clean and proper condition, and to perform such
other duties as may be assigned by the Director.
(2) The Superintendent of Parks and Public Property shall have the
right to assign the several park keepers to take charge of the
several parks and public properties of the City, or (s)he shall have
the right to call upon all of them for service in any one of such parks
or public properties.
A. Established; term. There is hereby established the position of Deputy
Director in the Department of Parks and Public Property, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:72-9. The Deputy Director shall serve during the term and at
the pleasure of the Director.
B. Duties. The Deputy Director shall assist the Director in organizing,
developing, directing, supervising and performing the work involved in
the management of the Department. The Deputy Director shall assist
the Director in developing and preparing the departmental budget,
operational policy, work programs and budgetary policies; evaluate the
effectiveness of work programs and procedures of all units within the
Department; promote close coordination of planning efforts; develop
effective work methods for subordinates; undertake special studies
pertaining to Department functions; establish and maintain helpful and
cooperative relations with civic and business organizations; and
perform any other duties assigned to him/her by the Director. In the
absence of the Director, the Deputy Director shall serve in his/her
capacity, but shall not be authorized to act at meetings of the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Qualifications. The Deputy Director shall have relevant experience in
public or private organization. Persons with mental or physical
disabilities are eligible as long as they can perform the essential
functions of the job after reasonable accommodation is made to their
known limitations. If the accommodation cannot be made because it
would cause the employer undue hardship, such persons may not be
eligible.
§ 4-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-54
1:57

ARTICLE XI
Department of Public Safety
§ 4-55. Deputy Director.
§ 4-56. Urban Enterprise Zone.
A. Established; term. There is hereby established the position of Deputy
Director in the Department of Public Safety pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:72-9. The Deputy Director shall serve during the term and at the
pleasure of the Director.
B. Duties. The Deputy Director shall assist the director in organizing,
developing, directing, supervising and performing the work involved in
the management of the Department. The Deputy Director shall assist
the Director in developing and preparing the departmental budget,
operational policy, work programs and budgetary policies; evaluate the
effectiveness of work programs and procedures of all units within the
Department; promote close coordination of planning efforts; develop
effective work methods for subordinates; undertake special studies
pertaining to Department functions; establish and maintain helpful and
cooperative relations with civic and business organizations; and
perform any other duties assigned to him/her by the Director. In the
absence of the Director, the Deputy Director shall serve in his/her
capacity, but shall not be authorized to act at meetings of the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Qualifications. The Deputy Director shall have relevant experience in
public or private organization. Persons with mental or physical
disabilities are eligible as long as they can perform the essential
functions of the job after reasonable accommodation is made to their
known limitations. If the accommodation cannot be made because it
would cause the employer undue hardship, such persons may not be
eligible.
A. Urban Enterprise Program Coordinator.
(1) Established; term and salary range. There is hereby established the
position of Urban Enterprise Zone Program Coordinator in the
Department of Public Safety. The urban enterprise zone program
coordinator shall serve during the term and at the pleasure of the
Mayor.
(2) Duties. The Coordinator shall organize, direct and supervise the
retail and service establishments along Bergenline Avenue and
Summit Avenue to improve UEZ conditions for both merchants and
shoppers.
(3) Qualifications. The Coordinator shall have specific experience and
ability to administer such a program. This experience should
include knowledge of the state's urban enterprise zone regulations
§ 4-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-56
1:59
§ 4-57. City Engineer. [Added 9-15-2009]
There shall be assigned to the office of the Director of Public Safety a City
Engineer who shall be appointed for a three-year term as an independent
and extensive experience in economic development activities
involving retail and service establishments. The Coordinator should
be bilingual and have a very in-depth knowledge of the community
and experience in areas of government/public sector relations.
B. Urban Enterprise Zone (UEZ) Development Corporation.
(1) Authority granted to create UEZ Development Corporation. The
City is hereby authorized to create a nonprofit corporation to the be
known as the "UEZ Development Corporation of the City of Union
City," and the Corporation Counsel to the City is hereby authorized
to execute a certificate of incorporation containing provisions
authorized by and consistent with this Subsection B.
(2) Purpose of UEZ Development Corporation. The purpose of the
corporation to be included in the certificate of incorporation shall
include the following:
(a) To monitor, administer and implement the zone development
plan approved by the Board of Commissioners of the City.
(b) To formulate and draft proposals for projects for public
improvement of the UEZ or to increase eligible municipal
services in the UEZ, as set forth in the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, hereinafter called the Act, under N.J.S.A.
52:27H-88.
(c) To procure funding for projects for public improvement of the
UEZ or to increase eligible municipal services from moneys
deposited in the Enterprise Zone Assistance Fund and credited
to the account maintained by the State Treasurer for the UEZ
in the City by submitting proposals for the projects for public
improvement or to increase eligible municipal services to the
New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority, only after such
proposals have been jointly adopted after public hearing by the
Board of Commissioners and the UEZ Development
Corporation, as provided in the Act, under N.J.S.A. 52:27H-88.
(d) To utilized the expertise of the UEZ coordinator in formulating
and drafting proposals for projects for public improvement of
the UEZ or to increase eligible municipal services in the UEZ.
(e) To monitor, administer and implement projects for public
improvement of the UEZ or to increase eligible municipal
services in the UEZ for which funding from the enterprise zone
assistance fund has been procured.
§ 4-56 UNION CITY CODE § 4-57
1:60
contractor to the City. The City Engineer shall be compensated based upon
an annual stipend of $1,000 payable in four quarterly installments.
§ 4-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-57
1:61

ARTICLE XII
Department of Public Affairs
§ 4-58. Deputy Director.
§ 4-59. Public Defender.
A. Established; term. There is hereby established the position of Deputy
Director in the Department of Public Affairs, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:72-9. The Deputy Director shall serve during the term and at the
pleasure of the Director.
B. Duties. The Deputy Director shall assist the Director in organizing,
developing, directing, supervising and performing the work involved in
the management of the Department. The Deputy Director shall assist
the Director in developing and preparing the departmental budget,
operational policy, work programs and budgetary policies; evaluate the
effectiveness of work programs and procedures of all units with the
Department; promote close coordination of planning efforts; develop
effective work methods for subordinates; undertake special studies
pertaining to Department functions; establish and maintain helpful and
cooperative relations with civic and business organizations, and
perform any other duties assigned to him/her by the Director. In the
absence of the Director, the Deputy Director shall serve in his/her
capacity, but shall not be authorized to act at meetings of the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Qualifications. The Deputy Director shall have relevant experience in
public or private organization. Persons with mental or physical
disabilities are eligible as long as they can perform the essential
functions of the job after reasonable accommodation is made to their
known limitations. If the accommodation cannot be made because it
would cause the employer undue hardship, such persons may not be
eligible.
A. Establishment. There shall be the position of Municipal Public Defender
in the Department of Public Affairs who shall perform his/her duties
under the Director of that Department.
B. Requirements for position. The requirements for the position of
Municipal Public Defender shall be possession of a valid New Jersey
license to practice law and a member in good standing of the New
Jersey Bar. Persons with physical or mental disabilities are eligible so
long as they can perform the essential functions of the job, after
reasonable accommodation is made for their known limitations, unless
such accommodation imposes undue hardship upon the City or the
performance of such duties poses a direct threat to the health or safety
of such person or others.
§ 4-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-59
1:63
§ 4-60. Division of Inspections.
C. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Public Defender to
represent and give legal counsel to indigents charged in the Municipal
Court with disorderly person or other petty offenses.
D. Application for representation.
(1) In order to obtain the services of the Public Defender, an
application must be filed with the Municipal Court on a form to be
provided by the City. The Municipal Court Judge shall make a
decision as to whether a defendant is indigent after reviewing each
defendant's application. This determination shall be based upon
whether the defendant has the present financial ability to secure
competent legal representation and to provide all other necessary
expenses of representation.
(2) The Municipal Court Judge shall assess an application fee, as set
forth in Chapter 155, Fees, from each defendant who makes an
application for the services of the Public Defender. This fee shall be
due regardless of whether the applicant is found to require the
services of the Public Defender. However, the Municipal Court
Judge may waive this fee, in whole or in part, if the Judge
determines, in his/her discretion, that this application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on such defendant.
(3) The defendant's inability to pay the application fee shall in no way
affect or reduce the rendering of service to him/her. In the case of a
defendant who is unable or unwilling to pay the application fee and
for whom the fee was not waived, such fee shall become a lien, and
the City may collect the fee consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:6A-1,
2A:158A-19 or in any other manner as permitted by law.
A. Established. There is hereby established in the Department of Public
Affairs the Division of Inspections which shall be responsible for all
inspection activities of the City municipal government, except for the
operations of the Construction Code Official's office which is
established as per the Uniform Construction Code.
B. Director of Inspections. Under the direction of the Department Director,
the Division of Inspections shall be supervised by the Director of
Inspections who shall plan and organize all inspection operations within
the Division. With regard to any inspection activity related to the health
codes of the federal, state, county or local government, the Division
Director shall also be subject to the input and direction of the Health
Officer as provided by N.J.A.C. 8:52-2.1. The Director of Inspections
shall perform such other duties of like nature as, from time to time, may
be assigned to him/her by the Director of the Department.
C. Qualifications; salary. The overall job specifications for this position, as
applicable, shall be promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
§ 4-59 UNION CITY CODE § 4-60
1:64
§ 4-61. Purchasing Agent.
Personnel. The salary shall be as established by the City Salary
Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
A. Position established. There is hereby created the position of Purchasing
Agent in the Department of Public Affairs.
B. Qualifications.
(1) Qualifications for the position of Purchasing Agent shall be as
follows:
(a) Graduation from a four-year course at an accredited college or
university. Applicants who do not meet the above educational
requirements may substitute additional work experience as
described in Subsection B(1)(b) herein, on a year-for-year
basis.
(b) Five years of experience in the writing of purchase
specifications and in the purchase of equipment, materials and
supplies on a larger scale and accreditation by the State of
New Jersey as a certified agent, or in the process of being
accredited as a certified purchasing agent, or shall make all
attempts to obtain certification.
(c) Appointees may be required to possess a valid New Jersey
driver's license.
(d) A thorough knowledge of:
[1] The accepted procedures used in making large-scale
purchases.
[2] Laws, rules and regulations affecting purchasing.
[3] Accepted preparation of specifications of commodity
markets, marketing practices and commodity pricing
methods.
[4] Application of bookkeeping methods to procurement
practices.
(e) Ability to interpret market prices and trends and apply such
interpretations to procurement problems; to establish and
maintain harmonious working relationships; to review and
prepare specifications; to recommend suitable action on bids;
to use good English in the preparation of reports and to
establish and maintain adequate purchasing and other records.
(2) Persons with physical or mental disabilities are eligible so long as
they can perform the essential functions of the job, after reasonable
accommodation is made for their known limitations, unless such
§ 4-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-61
1:65
accommodation imposes undue hardship upon the City or the
performance of such duties poses a direct threat to the health or
safety of such person or others.
C. Responsibilities and duties. The Purchasing Agent shall:
(1) Establish and develop accepted purchasing methods and records in
accordance with prescribed laws, rules, regulations, standards,
policies and procedures.
(2) Review requisitions for the operation and maintenance of
equipment, materials and supplies.
(3) Locate and investigate suitable reputable sources of supplies and
prepare specifications.
(4) Review submitted bids for content and, after thorough analysis,
make recommendations for the acceptance or rejection of such
bids.
(5) Communicate directly with vendors, by telephone or
correspondence.
(6) Interview vendors' representatives and employees regarding
specifications and deliveries; handle complaints by taking the
proper remedial action.
(7) Record the claims of vendors for materials and services.
(8) Prepare periodic reports and statements.
(9) Assist in the preparation of temporary and final appropriation
budgets and appropriate transfers.
(10) Confer with departmental representatives on the standardization
of supplies used and the need for specialized equipment.
(11) Establish and maintain needed records and files.
(12) Supervise the activities of assigned personnel.
D. Compensation. The salary of the Purchasing Agent shall be as set forth
in the Salary Ordinance.
E. Purchasing procedure. The Purchasing Agent is designated,
empowered and authorized to make all purchases of supplies, materials
and equipment necessary for the efficient operation of the City and to
sell such personal property of the City in accordance with the terms and
conditions set forth in Subsection G below.
(1) Requisition forms required. The Purchasing Agent shall maintain a
stack of prenumbered order blanks and requisition slips in his/her
office from which necessary forms shall be supplied to the heads of
various departments.
§ 4-61 UNION CITY CODE § 4-61
1:66
§ 4-62. Purchase of American-made products.
(2) Awarding of bids and orders.
(a) The Board of Commissioners, at intervals to be fixed by it, shall
solicit proposals by public advertisement for the furnishing of
all materials and supplies usually required by it or any
department under its control and shall award a contract
therefor to the lowest responsible bidder.
(b) When any supplies, materials or equipment are required which
the City is authorized by law to purchase without first publicly
advertising for bids, it shall be the duty of the Purchasing
Agent to purchase such materials, supplies or equipment in the
open market, after having obtained, where possible, at least
three prices and to award the order to the lowest responsible
bidder.
(3) Purchasing guidelines.
(a) Each department shall follow the guidelines promulgated by
the Purchasing Manual which shall be on file in the office of the
Chief Financial Officer and the Purchasing Agent and known as
Schedule A. This manual may be amended periodically, upon
approval by the Board of Commissioners.
(b) No purchase or commitment to a vendor shall be made for
goods or services prior to the certification of the availability of
funds by the Chief Financial Officer.
(c) All departments shall forward requests for purchases for the
City to the Purchasing Department.
(d) All requests for certification of available funds shall be made
by appropriate personnel in the Purchasing Department.
(e) Each vendor must conform to the proper purchasing and
encumbrance procedures prior to the City honoring or paying
any claim.
F. Preparation of contracts and resolutions. All resolutions and contracts
necessary to be drawn to carry out the terms and provisions of this
section shall be prepared by the Purchasing Agent, who is hereby
authorized to secure the assistance of the City Clerk and the Law
Department to assist in the proper preparation thereof.
G. Sale of City property. The Purchasing Agent shall sell such personal
property of the City, including all surplus and obsolete materials,
supplies and equipment which in the opinion of the head of any of the
departments, is deemed unsuitable or not needed for further public use,
but only after soliciting and obtaining bids therefor and subject to the
approval of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 4-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-62
1:67
A. Restrictions on purchase.
(1) It shall be the policy of the City that it shall not purchase, lease,
rent or take on consignment goods and/or services produced under
sweatshop conditions and that the guidelines, criteria and
procedures listed below shall be enacted.
(2) The procedures and guidelines set forth herein shall apply to the
manufacture, laundering and/or distribution of items of apparel
and/or textiles, such as, but not limited to, clothing, headwear, lines
and fabric, as well as any other industry designated by the Mayor,
based on the provisions established herein, which are vulnerable to
sweatshop compensation.
B. Selection of vendors. In order to ensure that the City contracts with
vendors that have responsible employment practices, the following
criteria will be used in contracting for goods and services:
(1) The City shall not purchase goods or services produced outside of
the United States of America, unless similar goods or services
produced in the United States of America are unavailable, where
allowed by law.
(2) The City, whenever possible and allowed by law, shall only contract
with vendors with responsible labor practices, as defined in
Subsection C.
C. Labor practices. The City shall require of every bidder for City
contracts covered under Subsection B, and annually from every vendor
of goods or services covered thereunder:
(1) Disclosure of all subcontractors and sites. The bidder or vendor
shall identify the name and address of each subcontractor to be
used, as well as the address of all locations, including
subcontractor locations, directly involved in providing goods or
services covered by this section. Such information will be
considered public information and will be maintained by the
awarding agency or authority.
(2) Certification of compliance with responsible labor practices. The
standards set forth below constitute responsible labor practices for
City contractors. The bidder or vendor shall certify that each
location, including subcontractor locations, directly involved in
producing or distributing goods or services covered by this section
meets these standards.
(a) Compensation. Wage and benefit levels must be sufficient to
meet basic needs and provide some discretionary income for a
family of four, a "living wage." For employment within the USA,
this shall mean an average production wage of at least $7 per
straight-time hour in 1997 dollars, along with total
compensation, which shall be defined as any combination of
§ 4-62 UNION CITY CODE § 4-62
1:68
wages and of health and retirement benefits, of at least $8.15
per hour, or as shall be amended from time to time by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics for the United States Department of
Labor.
(b) Rights. The company respects worker's rights to speak up
about working conditions without fear of retaliation. The
company shall certify that in a signed affidavit attached to any
bid/proposal, that:
[1] Due process and just cause procedures are used for
discipline or discharge, with recourse to arbitration,
where applicable.
[2] The successful company complies with federal, state and
local wage and hour legislation.
[3] The company complies with all laws, regulations and ILO
standards governing the workplace which cover subject
matter not preempted by federal law.
[4] The company shall not use child labor, forced labor and/or
corporal punishment.
[5] The company does not discriminate in hiring, promotion or
compensation on the basis of race, disability, national
origin, religion, gender, sexual preference or political
affiliation.
(c) Safety and health. The company shall also certify that it
complies with all state and local fire codes and building codes.
(d) Environment. The company shall also certify that it complies
with a federal, state and local environment legislation.
(e) Foreign goods and services. If the City must purchase foreign
produced goods and/or services, then the company producing
such goods and/or services must additionally adhere/certify to
the following practices:
[1] The company respects workers' rights to form unions of
their own choosing without employer resistance.
[2] The company does not discriminate in hiring, promotion or
compensation on the basis of union preference.
[3] The company's workplace is free from physical, sexual or
verbal harassment.
[4] The company's employees are not required to work more
than 48 hours per week without overtime pay or less if the
law of the country in which the company is located sets a
shorter workweek.
§ 4-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-62
1:69
§ 4-63. Senior Citizens' Recreation Leader.
[5] The company complies with all laws, regulations and ILO
standards governing the workplace.
[6] The company provides a safe and healthy work
environment, including implementation of sound injury
and illness prevention practices.
(f) Filing of false information. The filing of false information under
this section shall be a violation of this Code and punished
accordingly. The City, at its discretion and as allowed by law,
may terminate a contract or ban a vendor from holding
contracts with the City for a period of five years for filing false
information or for failing to file information required under this
section. The City shall require correction and remediation of
violations of the standards listed in this subsection, prior to
renewing commerce with the contractor. The City may
terminate a contract, if permitted by law for failure to meet the
standards listed in this section. The City may require further
proof of compliance with the standards listed in this section.
Upon request, the contractor or subcontractor will make all
relevant records available to the City or its designee.
(g) Policy. It is the policy of the City that the guidelines for
uniforms or other clothing items purchased by voucher or
allowance by City employees shall require that the uniforms or
other clothing items be made in the USA, unless a product is
manufactured in the USA is unavailable as permitted by law.
The guidelines shall also incorporate the labor practice set
forth in Subsection C(1)(a) through (e) above. Uniform apparel
or other clothing items whose providers, manufacturers, or
subcontractors fail to adhere to these practices shall be
deemed unacceptable under the uniform or other clothing
guidelines established for any voucher or uniform allowance
system.
A. Establishment of position. There shall be the position of Senior Citizens'
Recreation Leader established in the Department of Public Affairs of
the City.
B. Responsibilities. The person appointed shall be responsible for
organization, development and leadership in all phases of recreational
programs for senior citizens; shall conduct activities with assigned
groups and shall do related work as required by the Department of
Public Affairs. That person shall organize, promote and lead groups in a
variety of programs designed to meet the recreational needs of senior
citizens; assist in directing recreation programs, socials and special
events; report to his/her supervisor and the Commissioner of the
Department of Public Affairs, orally or in writing, on groups or
individuals, plans and problems; recommend action and carry out
§ 4-62 UNION CITY CODE § 4-63
1:70
§ 4-64. Artist Collective. [Added 11-17-2009]
policies in leading such special activities; oversee the use of needed
equipment and supplies and keep necessary records.
C. Qualifications. The person appointed as Senior Citizens' Recreation
Leader shall have graduated from high school or vocational high school,
or possess an approved high school equivalent certificate; special
training or experience in work with senior citizens; considerable
knowledge of the problems involved in the leadership of recreational
activities for senior citizens; the ability to use good judgment in safety
and first aid with senior citizens, coworkers and supervisors. Persons
with physical or mental disabilities are eligible so long as they can
perform the essential functions of the job, after reasonable
accommodation is made for their known limitations, unless such
accommodation imposes undue hardship upon the City or the
performance of such duties poses a direct threat to the health or safety
of such person or others.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established an advisory body assigned
to the Department of Public Affairs which shall be known as the Union
City Artist Collective. The Committee shall consist of nine members
who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall
include the City's Poet Laureate, the City Historian, and the Curator of
the City's Art Gallery at City Hall. All members shall be residents of the
City who shall serve without compensation.
B. First members; subsequent members; terms. The first Committee
members shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of
this section, and their terms of office shall commence upon the date of
the appointment and end on July 1, the year following their
appointment. All subsequent appointments shall be for the respective
period of two years, to take effect on July 1. The term of each appointee
shall be designated in the resolution of appointment.
C. Organization. The Committee shall organize within 30 days after the
appointment of its total membership for the remainder of the fiscal year
and thereafter annually by the election of either the Poet Laureate, the
City Historian and the Curator of the City Hall Art Gallery to serve as
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and secretary.
D. Purpose. The advisory body organized under this section shall advise
the Board of Commissioners in the development of art programs of
interest to the local artist community and the public and shall:
(1) Represent the City in art exhibits outside the City proper.
(2) Conduct programs and conferences open to all local artists of
different disciplines.
(3) Serve as a networking group for the arts in the City.
§ 4-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-64
1:71
(4) Perform such other duties as the Board of Commissioners may
prescribe from time to time.
§ 4-64 UNION CITY CODE § 4-64
1:72
ARTICLE XIII
Police Department
§ 4-65. Established. [Amended 6-20-2006; 7-18-2006; 9-16-2008;
1-20-2009; 8-3-2009; 7-20-2010; 6-21-2011]
§ 4-66. Composition. [Amended 6-20-2006; 7-18-2006]
The establishment of the Table of Organization for the Union City Police
Department does not require that all positions be filled, but rather that
the numbers of sworn officers in each rank/position shall not exceed those
set forth in this article unless the Table of Organization is amended by the
Board of Commissioners and is subject to the funding of such positions by
the adoption of an appropriate budget and a Salary Ordinance by the Board
of Commissioners. Any such municipal Salary Ordinance shall serve as a
modification of this Table of Organization, although not set forth within this
section of the Code of the City of Union City.
§ 4-67. Police Chief.
The Police Chief shall be the head of the police force, and (s)he shall be
directly responsible to the Director of Public Safety for the efficiency and
routine day-to-day operations thereof. The Police Chief shall have, pursuant
to policies established by the Director of Public Safety, the authority to:
A. There is hereby created in and for the City of Union City, a Police
Department, which shall not exceed the following Table of
Organization: [Amended 5-21-2013; 11-18-2014]
Rank/Position Number
Chief of Police 1
Deputy Police Chiefs 0
Police Captains 3
Police Lieutenants 11
Police Sergeants 26
Police officers 140
Special law enforcement officers
(Class II)
35
B. In addition, civilian employees, including but not limited to laborers,
telephone operators, clerks, computer personnel, school traffic guards,
and special police officers may be hired at the discretion of the Director
of Public Safety.
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers
and personnel.
§ 4-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-67
1:73
§ 4-68. Rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Safety, from time to time, shall adopt rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department and fix and enforce
penalties for violation of such rules and regulations.
§ 4-69. Qualifications; age limitations.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
force.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such of his/her authority as (s)he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his/her direction
and supervision.
E. Faithfully and promptly obey and cause all personnel of the Police
Department under him/her to obey all rules, regulations and orders.
F. In case of riot, insurrection or threatening thereof, (s)he shall take
command of the Police Department in person and direct its movements
and operations in discharge of its respective duties.
G. Be responsible for the investigation and adjudication of all complaints
concerning performance of services or duties performed by members of
the Department.
H. Maintain a constructive relationship with the media and the public.
I. Be responsible for the maintenance of a daily police attendance record
in which each member shall record his/her rank and time of reporting
and leaving duty, complaints and matters pertaining to the Police
Department.
J. Report at least weekly to the Director of Public Safety in such form as
shall be prescribed by such Director on the operation of the force
during the preceding week, and make such other reports as may be
requested by the Director.
K. Designate an officer to perform the duties of the Police Chief in his/her
absence.
A. Qualifications. The qualifications for the position of Chief of Police and
every member of the Police Department are set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-122, as amended, and by the New Jersey Department of
Personnel.
B. Age limitations. The age limitations for police officers are set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127, as amended and interpreted. No officer shall be
appointed who is under 18 years of age, unless that appointment is
permitted through an exception set forth in the New Jersey statutes.
§ 4-67 UNION CITY CODE § 4-70
1:74
§ 4-70. Oath of office.
Every member of the Police Department, before entering upon the
performance of his/her duties, shall take and subscribe an oath or
affirmation faithfully and impartially to discharge the duties of his/her office
and shall file such oath or affirmation with the City Clerk.
§ 4-71. Duties of Department.
The Police Department shall:
§ 4-72. Removal or suspension from office.
No member of the Police Department shall be suspended, removed, fined or
reduced in rank for any cause and in any manner except in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 et seq., as amended, and the regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 4-73. Special law enforcement officers. [Amended 5-21-2013]
The appropriate authority may appoint, from time to time, special law
enforcement officers in accordance with New Jersey statutes for terms
A. Preserve the public peace; prevent crime; detect and arrest offenders
against the penal laws and ordinances effective within the City of Union
City; suppress riots, mobs and insurrections; disperse unlawful and
dangerous assemblages; and preserve order at all elections, public
meetings and assemblages.
B. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control
and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the
use of streets by vehicles and persons, and to make rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the Charter, ordinances and general
law for such purposes.
C. Remove all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other public
places; inspect and observe all places of public amusement or
assemblage and all places of business requiring any state or City
license or permit.
D. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
E. Enforce the laws and ordinances in effect within the City and prevent
the violation of them by any person and appropriately attend to all
persons legally charged with the violation of any law or ordinance.
F. Provide for the attendance of its police officers or civilian employees in
court as necessary for the prosecution and trial of persons charged with
crimes and other violations of the law, and cooperate fully with the law
enforcement and prosecuting authorities of federal, state and county
governments.
G. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police.
§ 4-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-73
1:75
not exceeding one year. They shall possess and exercise all the powers
and duties provided by such statutes during their term in office, but shall
not be continued as regular members of the Police Department and shall
not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize special law
enforcement officers, when on duty, to exercise the same powers and
authority as regular members of the Police Department, including the
carrying of firearms and the power of arrest, provided that the officers are
qualified to do so pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., and as amended.
The special law enforcement officers' salary range shall be $18 to $20 per
hour.
§ 4-74. Bomb disposal agreement.
A. Findings.
(1) The City of Jersey City is the only municipality in Hudson County
with a professional bomb disposal unit.
(2) The City of Jersey City has agreed to provide bomb disposal
services free of charge to any Hudson County municipality which
agrees to indemnify it for the provision of these services in the
event of litigation.
(3) It is in the best interest of the City of Union City to avail itself of the
bomb disposal unit services of the City of Jersey City.
B. Purpose. The City of Union City acknowledges that the City of Jersey
City is the only municipality in Hudson County which has a trained
bomb disposal unit as part of its police force. In the past this unit has
been dispatched to various Hudson County municipalities in emergency
situations. Although no incidents or accidents have occurred to date
regarding the bomb disposal services, the possibility of such an
accident or incident is very real. The City of Union City recognizes that
it may be required to call upon the bomb disposal services of the City of
Jersey City in the future. It is therefore the intention of the City of Union
City to represent and indemnify the City of Jersey City from any and all
liability in connection with the provision of bomb disposal services to
the City of Union City even if the City of Jersey City performs these
services negligently.
C. Indemnification.
(1) The City of Union City shall not sue or in any way hold liable the
City of Jersey City, its agents and employees for the provision of
bomb disposal services to the City of Union City or any of its
residents, even if the services are performed negligently.
(2) The City of Union City shall represent, defend and indemnify the
City of Jersey City, its agents and employees for any bomb disposal
services provided by the City of Jersey City to the City of Union City,
or its residents, from any claim or cause of action brought by
anyone, even if the services are performed negligently.
§ 4-73 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:76
§ 4-75. Drug testing policy.
A. Policy. The Union City Police Department recognizes that substance
abuse has had a profound effect upon society. In acknowledging this,
the Police Department, in accordance with the directives issued by the
Office of the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey, has
implemented the following rules and regulations by which members of
this agency shall be required to submit to drug testing procedures.
B. Applicability. This policy applies to the following:
(1) Applicants. Applicants for a position as a law enforcement officer
who, if appointed, will be responsible for the enforcement of the
criminal laws of the state and will be authorized to carry a firearm
under N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6.
(2) Law enforcement officer trainees. Law enforcement officer trainees
who are subject to the Police Training Act, hereinafter called the
"Act," while they attend a mandatory basic training course.
(3) Sworn law enforcement officers. Sworn law enforcement officers
who are responsible for the enforcement of the criminal laws of
New Jersey, come under the jurisdiction of the Act and are
authorized to carry a firearm under N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6.
C. Who shall be tested.
(1) Applicants. Applicants for a position as a law enforcement officer
shall be required to submit a urine specimen at any time prior to
appointment as a law enforcement officer.
(2) Law enforcement officer trainees. Law enforcement officer trainees
will be required to submit one or more urine samples for testing
while attending a mandatory basic training course. All drug testing
conducted during mandatory basic training will comply with the
rules and regulations established by the Police Training
Commission. Individual trainees may also be required to submit a
urine specimen for testing when there exists reasonable suspicion
to believe that the trainee is illegally using drugs. A trainee shall be
ordered to submit to a drug test based on reasonable suspicion only
with the approval of the County Prosecutor, the chief executive
officer of the trainee's agency or the academy director.
(3) Sworn law enforcement officers. Sworn law enforcement officers
shall be subject to drug testing under any of the following
conditions:
(a) Urine specimens shall be ordered from a sworn law
enforcement officer when there exists reasonable suspicion to
believe that the officer is illegally using drugs. Urine
specimens shall not be ordered from an officer without the
approval of the County Prosecutor or the Chief of Police.
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:77
(b) Urine specimens may be ordered from sworn law enforcement
officers who have been randomly selected to submit a drug
test. Random selection shall be defined as a method of
selection in which each and every sworn member of the law
enforcement agency, regardless of rank or assignment, has an
equal chance to be selected for drug testing each and every
time a selection is conducted.
(c) Urine specimens may be collected from sworn law
enforcement officers during a regularly scheduled and
announced medical examination or a fitness-for-duty
examination. However, the collection and analysis of these
specimens are not governed by this policy.
D. Notification of drug testing procedures.
(1) Applicants. Applicants for positions as law enforcement officers
shall be required to submit urine samples for drug testing. Prior to
the submission of any samples for a drug test, the applicant shall be
required to complete a form which advises the applicant that (s)he
is required to submit a urine specimen as a condition of being
considered for employment. This form shall also advise the
applicant that a negative test result is a condition of employment
and that a positive test result will result in:
(a) The applicant being dropped from consideration for
employment.
(b) The applicant's name shall be reported to the Central Drug
Registry maintained by the New Jersey Division of State Police.
(c) The applicant shall be precluded from consideration for future
law enforcement employment for a period of two years.
(d) The applicant shall be advised that if (s)he is currently
employed by another agency as a sworn law enforcement
officer, and (s)he tests positive for illegal drug use, the
applicant's employing agency shall be notified of the test
results, and (s)he shall be permanently barred from future law
enforcement employment in New Jersey.
(2) Law enforcement officer trainees.
(a) Law enforcement officer trainees who are newly appointed as
law enforcement officers shall be informed that drug testing is
mandatory during basic training. Newly appointed officers
shall also be informed that a negative test result is a condition
of employment, and that a positive result would necessitate the
following:
[1] The officer's termination from employment.
§ 4-75 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:78
[2] The officer's name shall be reported to the Central Drug
Registry maintained by the New Jersey Division of State
Police.
[3] The officer being permanently barred from future law
enforcement officer employment in New Jersey.
(b) In addition, newly appointed officers shall be further informed
that the refusal to submit to a drug test shall result in dismissal
from employment and a permanent bar from future law
enforcement employment in New Jersey.
(3) Sworn law enforcement officers. Sworn law enforcement officers
shall be required to submit a urine specimen for drug testing under
either of the following circumstances:
(a) Reasonable suspicion testing.
[1] A sworn law enforcement officer may be ordered to submit
to a drug test when reasonable suspicion exists to believe
that the officer is illegally using drugs. Prior to an officer
submitting to a drug test under such circumstances, a
written report shall be prepared which documents the
basis for the reasonable suspicion. This report shall be
reviewed and approved by the County Prosecutor or the
Chief of Police before a reasonable suspicion test may be
ordered. Under emergent circumstances, approval may be
obtained based upon a verbal report of the facts which
form the basis for reasonable suspicion.
[2] Every sworn law enforcement officer is hereby advised
that negative test result is a condition of employment. A
positive test result shall result in the following actions:
[a] The officer shall be immediately terminated from
employment.
[b] The officer's name shall be reported to the Central
Drug Registry maintained by the New Jersey Division
of State Police.
[c] The officer shall be permanently barred from future
law enforcement officer employment in New Jersey.
[3] In addition, an officer who refuses to submit to a drug test
based upon reasonable suspicion after being lawfully
ordered to do so is subject to the same penalties as any
officer who tests positive for the illegal use of drugs.
(b) Random drug testing. As referenced earlier in this policy, this
agency shall implement a program which shall provide for the
random testing of its sworn personnel for drugs. Any officer
who submits a sample for random drug testing which results in
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:79
a positive result, or any officer who refuses to submit to a
random drug test as ordered by a superior officer shall be
subject to the following actions:
[1] The officer shall be immediately terminated from
employment.
[2] The officer's name shall be reported to the Central Drug
Registry maintained by the New Jersey Division of State
Police.
[3] The officer shall be permanently barred from future law
enforcement employment in New Jersey.
E. Random drug testing policy and procedures.
(1) The frequency of random drug testing shall be determined by the
Chief of Police with notice to the Director of Public Safety and
remains within his/her discretion. Random drug testing shall not be
implemented until these rules and regulations establishing these
procedures have been in effect for a minimum of 60 days.
(2) All sworn members of this agency, regardless of rank or
assignment, shall be eligible for random drug testing.
(3) The number of officers to be tested each time a random selection
takes place shall be no more than 10% of the total number of sworn
officers at the time of selection. [Amended 2-3-2015]
(4) All sworn officers shall be placed in a pool from which a random
selection shall be made. Selections shall be made by use of a
computer based on a random number system which shall ensure
that every officer has an equal statistical chance of being selected.
Officers who are selected for a random drug test are not removed
from the computer database for future selections. Therefore it is
possible for an officer to be selected several times in any given
year. In addition, the computer shall generate an alternate
selection list which shall be utilized in the event that an officer who
has been selected for random sampling is excused from giving a
sample. See Subsection E(10) below, describing those
circumstances which would exempt an officer from submitting a
sample, and which would then require that the corresponding
officer on the alternate selection list be selected to give a sample.
(5) The internal affairs unit shall be responsible for the maintenance of
records pertaining to the selection process and the subsequent
testing of personnel, including all pertinent reports and forms
which may be required.
(6) A representative of each of the collective bargaining units which
represent sworn officers shall be permitted to witness the selection
process. Each representative shall be notified of the time and place
§ 4-75 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:80
for each selection process. The union representatives shall not be
informed of the identity of any officer who has been randomly
selected to submit a urine specimen. Further, the selection process
shall not be delayed due to the unavailability or tardiness of any
union representative.
(7) Any member of this Department who discloses the identity of an
officer selected for random testing, or discloses the fact that a
random test is scheduled to take place prior to the collection of
urine specimens, shall be subject to discipline.
(8) The internal affairs unit shall be responsible for the selection,
notification, collection, monitoring, chain of custody, storage and
transport of urine specimens to the State Toxicology Laboratory
and any subsequent recordkeeping which is necessary to ensure
that the testing process is conducted in a prompt, efficient and
confidential manner.
(9) Officers who have been selected for a drug test based upon random
sampling shall be notified by the internal affairs unit and shall
immediately report to the collection facility at the date and time
specified. An officer who refuses to comply with an order directing
that a urine specimen be given shall be subject to the same
penalties as those officers who test positive for the illegal use of
drugs.
(10) Circumstances may arise in which an officer who has been selected
to submit a sample as part of random procedure may not be
available. The following conditions will require that an officer who
has been selected to submit a sample be excused from giving a
sample for that particular selection only. The next officer shall then
be selected from the alternate selection list and shall be required to
comply with this directive. Conditions allowing the selection of an
alternate are:
(a) An officer who is currently on authorized sick leave for a period
of time at least 24 hours prior to the selection process, and who
remains on sick leave at the time of selection.
(b) An officer who is utilizing previously approved vacation, time
owed, personal day or other compensatory time off such as
bereavement leave, military or maternity leave, approved leave
of absence and other compensatory time off as provided for in
both the PBA and FOP contracts. [Amended 5-21-2013]
F. Specimen acquisition procedures.
(1) Preliminary acquisition procedures.
(a) A member of the internal affairs unit shall serve as the official
monitor of the specimen acquisition process. As needed, staff
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:81
may be supplemented for this purpose at the discretion of the
Chief of Police, on notice to the Director of Public Safety.
(b) The monitor shall always be a member of the same sex as the
individual being tested. If there is no member of the same sex
available from internal affairs to collect a specimen, then the
Department may request that a member of the same sex from
another law enforcement agency serve as the monitor of the
process.
(c) The monitor of the specimen acquisition process shall be
responsible for:
[1] Ensuring that all documentation is fully and accurately
completed by the individual who is submitting the
specimen.
[2] Collecting specimens in a manner that provides for
individual privacy while ensuring the integrity of the
specimen.
[3] Complying with chain of custody procedures established
for the collection of urine specimens and their subsequent
submission to the New Jersey State Toxicology Laboratory
for analysis.
(d) Prior to the submission of a urine specimen, an applicant for a
law enforcement position shall execute a form consenting to
the collection and analysis of his/her urine for illegal drugs.
This form shall also advise the applicant that a negative test
result is a condition of employment, and that a positive test
result will result in the following actions:
[1] The applicant will be dropped from consideration for
employment.
[2] The applicant's name shall be reported to the Central Drug
Registry maintained by the New Jersey Division of State
Police.
[3] The applicant shall be precluded from being considered
for future law enforcement employment for a period of two
years.
[4] Applicants shall not complete a medical questionnaire
prior to the submission of a specimen unless they have
already received a conditional offer of employment.
[5] Applicants who have not received a conditional offer of
employment can be required to complete a medical
questionnaire if, following the submission of their
specimen to the State Toxicology Laboratory for analysis,
the law enforcement agency receives a report indicating
§ 4-75 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:82
that the specimen tested positive for a controlled
substance.
(e) Prior to the submission of a urine specimen, a trainee enrolled
in a basic training course shall complete a form that advises
the trainee that a negative test result is a condition of
employment, and that a positive test result will result in the
following actions:
[1] The trainee shall be dismissed from basic training.
[2] The trainee shall be dismissed from employment as a law
enforcement officer by the appointing authority.
[3] The trainee's name shall be reported to the Central Drug
Registry maintained by the New Jersey Division of State
Police.
[4] The trainee shall be permanently barred from future law
enforcement employment in New Jersey.
(f) This form shall also advise the trainee that a refusal to
participate in the testing process carries the same penalties as
a specimen which yields a positive result. Trainees shall also
complete a medical questionnaire which clearly describes all
medications, both prescription and over-the-counter
(nonprescription), that were ingested within the past 14 days.
(g) Prior to the submission of a urine specimen, sworn law
enforcement officers shall complete a medical questionnaire
which clearly describes all medications, both prescription and
over-the-counter, that were ingested within the past 14 days.
(2) Specimen collection.
(a) Throughout the test process, the identity of individual
applicants, trainees and sworn law enforcement officers shall
remain confidential. Individual specimens shall be identified
throughout the process by use of social security numbers. At
no time shall an individual's name appear on any form or
specimen container sent to the State Toxicology Laboratory.
(b) Specimens will be collected utilizing equipment and supplies
approved by the State Toxicology Laboratory. Under no
circumstances may a specimen be collected and submitted for
analysis in a specimen container that has not been approved by
the State Toxicology Laboratory.
(c) Urine specimens will be acquired and processed in accordance
with procures established by the State Toxicology Laboratory
as indicated below:
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:83
[1] After the monitor has inspected the appropriate forms for
accuracy, and upon confirming same, shall then allow the
applicant, trainee or sworn law enforcement officer to void
into the specimen collection container.
[2] After a specimen has been produced, the individual shall
seal the specimen container and deliver it to the monitor.
[3] Once the monitor is satisfied that the required
documentation is accurate and (s)he has inspected the
specimen container to determine that a specimen has been
produced, the monitor shall take possession of the
specimen and ensure that it is delivered to the State
Toxicology Laboratory for analysis.
(d) Individuals will void without the direct observation of the
monitor unless there is reason to believe that the individual
will adulterate the specimen or otherwise compromise the
integrity of the test process. Under these circumstances, the
production of a specimen may be directly observed by the
monitor. Internal affairs shall document the facts underlying
the belief that an individual may adulterate a specimen or
compromise the integrity of the test process.
(e) Individuals that initially are unable to produce a urine
specimen may remain under the supervision of the test monitor
until the monitor is satisfied that the individual cannot produce
a specimen. While the individual is under the supervision, the
monitor may allow the individual to drink fluids in an attempt
to induce the production of a specimen. If the individual
remains unable to produce a specimen after a reasonable
period of time, the monitor may have the individual examined
by a doctor to determine whether the inability to produce a
specimen was the result of a medical or physical infirmity, or
constituted a refusal to cooperate with the drug testing
process.
(f) Trainees and sworn law enforcement officers shall have the
option to provide the monitor with a second urine specimen at
the same time the first specimen is collected, as indicated
below:
[1] The second specimen shall be collected in the same
fashion as the first specimen. The monitor shall take
possession of the second specimen and place it in a
secured refrigerated storage area within the property
room.
[2] Internal affairs shall maintain the specimen in the property
room for a period of 60 days or until the agency receives
notification from the State Toxicology Laboratory that the
§ 4-75 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:84
first specimen tested negative for the presence of
controlled substances.
[3] The second specimen shall be released from the custody of
internal affairs under the following circumstances:
[a] When internal affairs is notified by the State
Toxicology Laboratory that the first specimen tested
positive for a controlled substance.
[b] The individual whose specimen tested positive informs
internal affairs that (s)he wishes to have the specimen
independently tested.
[c] The individual officer must designate a laboratory that
is licensed as a clinical laboratory by the New Jersey
Department of Health under the New Jersey Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Act to conduct the
independent test.
[d] A representative of the licensed clinical laboratory
designated by the individual officer takes possession
of the second specimen in accordance with accepted
chain of custody procedures within 60 days of the date
the specimen was produced.
[e] Under no circumstances shall the second specimen be
released directly to the individual officer.
G. Submission of specimens for analysis.
(1) The State Toxicology Laboratory within the Division of Criminal
Justice will constitute the sole facility for the analysis of law
enforcement drug tests. Law enforcement agencies are not
permitted to use any other facility or laboratory for purposes of
analyzing urine specimens.
(2) Urine specimens should be submitted to the State Toxicology
Laboratory as soon as possible after their collection. In the event a
specimen cannot be submitted to the laboratory within one working
day of its collection, then it shall be stored in a controlled-access
refrigerated storage area within the property room until
submission to the State Toxicology Laboratory.
(3) The internal affair unit shall be responsible for the transportation
of specimens to the State Toxicology Laboratory. However, should
internal affairs choose to have specimens delivered to the State
Toxicology Laboratory by commercial courier, the following
procedural safeguards must be taken:
(a) All submissions must be by next day delivery.
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:85
(b) In addition to the sealed container, all submission must be
packaged in manner that includes two additional seals to
provide for the integrity of the test specimens.
(c) It is understood that the State Toxicology Laboratory must
reject specimens that it has reason to believe have been
subject to tampering.
H. Analysis of specimens. The State Toxicology Laboratory will utilize the
following test procedures to analyze urine specimens for law
enforcement agencies:
(1) All specimens will be subject to an initial test utilizing fluorescence
polarization immunoassay analysis.
(2) Those specimens that test positive for a controlled substance
following the fluorescence polarization immunoassay shall be
subject to a gas chromatography/mass spectrophotometry analysis
to confirm the presence of a controlled substance.
(3) In the event a specimen is confirmed to be positive for a controlled
substance following the gas chromatography/mass
spectrophotometry, a medical review officer at the laboratory shall
compare the test results with the medical questionnaire submitted
with the specimen to determine whether any substance listed on
the questionnaire would explain the test result. The medical review
officer may direct the agency that collected the specimen to obtain
further information from the individual being tested concerning the
medications listed on the questionnaire. In the event the
questionnaire does not explain the test result, the medical review
officer shall issue a report indicating that the specimen tested
positive.
(4) The State Toxicology Laboratory shall analyze each specimen for
the following substances and their metabolites:
(a) Amphetamine/methamphetamine.
(b) Barbiturates.
(c) Benzodiazepine.
(d) Cannabinoids.
(e) Cocaine.
(f) Methadone.
(g) Phencyclidine.
(h) Opiates.
(5) The analysis of each specimen shall be done in accordance with
procedures adopted by the State Toxicology Laboratory. These
§ 4-75 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:86
procedures shall include, but are not limited to, security of the
test specimens, chain of custody, metabolite cutoff levels and the
issuance of test reports.
(6) The Chief of Police may request that one or more specimens be
analyzed for the presence of steroids. [Added 2-3-2015]
I. Drug test results.
(1) The State Toxicology Laboratory shall notify this agency of any
positive test results from the specimens submitted for analysis. All
reports of positive test results shall be in writing and sent to this
agency within 15 working days of the submission. The State
Toxicology Laboratory, upon request, will provide this agency with
written documentation that one or more specimens submitted for
analysis tested negative.
(2) The State Toxicology Laboratory shall not report a specimen as
having tested positive for a controlled substance until the specimen
has undergone a confirmatory test, and the medical review officer
has reviewed the results of that test with a medical questionnaire
pertinent to that specimen.
(3) The Police Department shall notify the applicant, trainee or sworn
law enforcement officer of the results of a positive test as soon as
practicable after receipt of the report from the State Toxicology
Laboratory. Upon request, the individual may receive a copy of the
laboratory report.
(4) Under no circumstances may an agency or any individual resubmit
a specimen for testing or ask that a particular specimen within the
possession of the State Toxicology Laboratory be retested.
J. Consequences of a positive test result.
(1) For an applicant.
(a) When an applicant tests positive for illegal drug use:
[1] The applicant shall be immediately removed from
consideration for employment by this agency.
[2] The applicant shall be reported to the Central Drug
Registry maintained by the Division of State Police by the
law enforcement agency to which the individual applied.
[3] The applicant shall be precluded from consideration for
future law enforcement employment by any law
enforcement agency in New Jersey for a period of two
years.
(b) Where the applicant is currently employed by another agency
as a sworn law enforcement officer, the officer's current
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:87
employer shall be notified of the positive test result. Under
these circumstances, the officer's current employer is required
to dismiss the officer from employment and also report his/her
name to the Central Drug Registry maintained by the Division
of State Police.
(2) For a trainee. When a trainee tests positive for illegal drug use,
subject to rules adopted by the Police Training Commission:
(a) The trainee shall immediately be dismissed from basic training
and suspended from employment by his/her appointment
authority.
(b) The trainee shall be terminated from employment as a law
enforcement officer, upon final disciplinary action by the
appointing authority.
(c) The trainee shall be reported to the Central Drug Registry
maintained by the Division of State Police.
(d) The trainee shall be permanently barred from future law
enforcement employment in New Jersey.
(3) For a sworn law enforcement officer. When a sworn law
enforcement officer tests positive for illegal drug use:
(a) The officer shall immediately be suspended from all duties.
(b) The officer shall be terminated from employment as a law
enforcement officer, upon final disciplinary action.
(c) The officer shall be reported to the Central Drug Registry
maintained by the Division of State Police by his/her employer.
(d) The officer shall be permanently barred from future law
enforcement employment in New Jersey.
(4) Refusal to be tested.
(a) Officers who refuse to submit to a drug test when randomly
selected are subject to the same penalties as those officers who
test positive for the illegal use of drugs.
(b) A sworn law enforcement officer who resigns or retires after
receiving a lawful order to submit a urine specimen for drug
testing and who does not provide the specimen shall be
deemed to have refused to submit to the drug test.
K. Consequences of refusal to submit to drug test.
(1) Applicants. Applicants who refuse to submit to a drug test during
the preemployment process shall be immediately removed from
consideration for law enforcement employment and barred from
consideration for future law enforcement employment for a period
§ 4-75 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:88
of two years. In addition, the appointing authority shall forward the
applicant's name to the Central Drug Registry and note that the
individual refused to submit to a drug test.
(2) Trainees. Trainees who refuse to submit to a drug test during basic
training shall be immediately removed from the academy and
immediately suspended from employment. Upon a finding that the
trainee did, in fact, refuse to submit a sample, the trainee shall be
terminated from law enforcement employment and permanently
barred from future law enforcement employment in New Jersey. In
addition, the appointing authority shall forward the applicant's
name to the Central Drug Registry and note that the individual
refused to submit to a drug test.
(3) Sworn law enforcement officers. Sworn law enforcement officers
who refuse to submit to a drug test ordered in response to
reasonable suspicion or random selection shall be immediately
suspended from employment. Upon a finding that the officer did, in
fact, refuse to submit a sample, the officer shall be terminated from
law enforcement employment and permanently barred from future
law enforcement employment in New Jersey. In addition, the
appointing authority shall forward the applicant's name to the
Central Drug Registry and note that the individual refused to
submit to a drug test.
(4) Testing positive. A sworn law enforcement officer who tests
positive for illegal drug use or refuses to submit to a drug test, and
who resigns or retires in lieu of disciplinary action or prior to the
completion of final disciplinary action, shall be reported by his/her
employer to the Central Drug Registry and shall be permanently
barred from future law enforcement employment in New Jersey.
L. Recordkeeping.
(1) Maintaining of records. The Union City Police Department Internal
Affairs Unit shall maintain all records relating to the drug testing of
applicants, trainees and law enforcement officers.
(2) For all drug testing. For all drug testing, the internal affairs unit
drug testing records shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) The identity of those ordered to submit urine samples.
(b) The reason for that order.
(c) The date the urine specimen was collected.
(d) The monitor of the collection process.
(e) The chain of custody of the urine sample from the time it was
collected until the time it was received by the State Toxicology
Laboratory.
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:89
(f) The results of the drug testing.
(g) Copies of notifications to the subject.
(h) For any positive result or refusal, appropriate documentation
of disciplinary action.
(3) For random drug testing. For random drug testing the records shall
also include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) A description of the process used to randomly select officers
for drug testing.
(b) The date selection was made.
(c) A copy of the document listing the identities of those selected
for drug testing.
(d) A list of those who were actually tested.
(e) The date(s) those officers were tested.
(4) Confidentiality of records. Drug testing records shall be maintained
with the level of confidentiality required for internal affairs files
pursuant to the New Jersey Internal Affairs Policy and Procedures.
M. Central drug registry.
(1) The Union City Police Department shall notify the Central Drug
Registry maintained by the Division of State Police of the identity of
applicants, trainees and sworn law enforcement officers who test
positive for the illegal use of drugs or who refuse an order to
submit a urine sample. Notifications to the Central Drug Registry
shall include the following information as to each individual:
(a) Name and address of submitting agency.
(b) Name of the individual who tested positive.
(c) Last known address of the individual.
(d) Date of birth.
(e) Social security number.
(f) SBI number, if applicable.
(g) Substance the individual tested positive for or circumstances
of the refusal to submit a urine sample.
(h) Date of final dismissal or separation from the agency.
(i) Whether the individual was an applicant, trainee or sworn law
enforcement officer.
(j) Gender.
§ 4-75 UNION CITY CODE § 4-75
1:90
§ 4-76. Domestic Violence Victim Assistance Program. [Added
3-4-2003]
(k) Race.
(l) Eye color.
(m) Date of the drug test or refusal.
(2) Notifications to the Central Drug Registry shall be sent to:
Division of State Police
State Bureau of Identification
Central Drug Registry
P.O. Box 7068
West Trenton, NJ 08628-0068
(3) Information contained in the Central Drug Registry may be
released by the Division of State Police only under the following
circumstances:
(a) In response to an inquiry from a law enforcement agency as
part of the background investigation process for prospective or
newly appointed personnel.
(b) In response to a court order.
(4) The certification section of the notification form must be completed
by the Chief or Director and notarized with a raised seal.
A. Findings. In 1991, the New Jersey Legislature passed the Prevention of
Domestic Violence Act of 1991, N.J.S.A. 2C:25-17 et seq. ("the Act"),
having determined that domestic violence is a serious crime against
society with victims from all social and economic backgrounds.
Pursuant to the Act, crisis intervention teams of trained residents can
be formed to assist police authorities in dealing with domestic violence
cases. The Union City Domestic Violence Victim Assistance Program
("UCDV-VAP") would assist victims of domestic violence by providing
information on available resources and referrals, and acting as a liaison
with the police and other agencies, as appropriate.
B. Establishment of team; qualifications for membership; appointment;
coordinator.
(1) There is hereby created the UCDV-VAP, or "team." The Team shall
consist of an unlimited number of volunteers who shall be at least
21 years of age and a bona fide resident of Union City, or an
employee thereof. All team members shall serve without
compensation. Interested persons shall complete an application
form supplied by the Union City Police Department, be
§ 4-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-76
1:91
§ 4-77. Off-duty details. [Added 10-6-2009]
fingerprinted by the Police Department and subject to a
background check. Conviction of any crime, as defined under the
New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, shall disqualify a person from
membership on the Team.
(2) Members of the team shall be appointed by resolution of the
Commission upon recommendation of the Chief of Police or
Director of Public Safety. The Commission, by resolution, shall also
appoint team coordinators as needed. Team coordinators shall
supervise the program, coordinate scheduling and perform other
duties related to the program as directed by the Chief of Police.
(3) All coordinators and team members shall be supervised by the
Police Department and shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of
Police.
C. Training program. No person may serve as a team member unless he or
she shall have first completed 40 hours of training, specializing in
domestic violence crises response team matters. This training further
provides confidentiality protection to team members in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 2A:84A-22 et seq.
D. Functions and duties. The functions and duties of the team shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) Meeting with victims of domestic violence to provide support,
compassion and advice;
(2) Providing information on available resources, appropriate
agencies, hot lines and serving as a liaison with police and other
agencies as appropriate; and
(3) Providing such other functions and duties as may be established by
the Police Department.
E. Annual report. The Chief of Police shall prepare and submit to the
Director of Public Safety an annual report summarizing the activities of
the team and any recommendations deemed by the Police Chief to be
appropriate.
A. The Chief of Police shall establish regulations within the Police
Department providing for the control, coordination, scheduling and
approval of off-duty police details which conform to all applicable New
Jersey State Attorney General guidelines and other controlling
regulations. The Chief may modify such regulations from time to time to
remain consistent with prevailing regulations or by other grounds that
he believes justify such change. A copy of such regulation shall be
provided to the Director of Safety and filed with the City Clerk.
§ 4-76 UNION CITY CODE § 4-77
1:92
§ 4-78. Emergency Medical Service. [Amended 6-20-2006;
5-21-2013]3]
B. The fees paid for hiring police officers shall be set by ordinance, and the
current rate set is $60 per hour. In the case of nongovernmental
agencies, $1 per hour shall be collected by the City as an administrative
fee, and $2 per hour shall be collected on behalf of the police union
representing the officer. The remaining $57 per hour shall be paid to
the officer working the detail. In the case of governmental agencies or
"special" details paid by the Union City Police Department, no fee shall
be deducted and the full $60 per hour shall be paid to the officers
working the details.
C. All details shall be paid the same way irrespective of the rank of the
officer working the detail.
D. All off-duty police details which include the use of a police vehicle shall
have an additional charge of $10 per hour. [Added 7-15-2014]
A. Department assignment. The Emergency Medical Service is designated
as a service within the Police Department.
B. Budget. The funding for the Emergency Medical Service shall be within
the Police Department line items in the City budget.
C. Medical Director. The City of Union City shall employ a Medical
Director whose duties and qualifications shall be as follows:
(1) The Medical Director shall be a physician who is licensed by the
New Jersey State Board of Medical Examiners to practice medicine.
(2) The Medical Director shall be responsible for providing medical
quality assurance oversight regarding the administration of BLS
services by the provider's crewmembers. Medical quality
assurance oversight shall include, but is not limited to, review of
utilization of the AED, as well as interpretation of treatment
protocols and documentation standards.
(3) The Medical Director shall oversee training of all EMTs and
continuing education for all EMTs in the City EMS.
(4) The Medical Director shall address patient care complaints
regarding services rendered by EMTs as needed.
(5) The Medical Director make recommendations for improving the
City's EMS services and shall communicate recommendations as to
EMS services to the EMS Department.
(6) The Medical Director shall review EMS standard operating
procedures on a periodic basis.
3. Editor's Note: This section was originally under the article titled "Fire Protection."
§ 4-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-78
1:93

ARTICLE XIV
Department of Health
§ 4-79. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Health, the head of which shall be the
Health Officer. Except for the legislative powers vested in the Board of
Commissioners, the Department of Health shall possess all of the functions,
powers and duties of a local Board of Health under Title 26 of the Revised
Statues of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-80. Health Officer.
The Health Officer, in the Department of Health, shall have the
responsibility to fulfill the City's statutory obligation to provide burials for
indigents as required by law.
§ 4-81. Chief Public Health Investigator.
A. Position established. There is hereby created the position of Chief
Public Health Investigator in the Health Department of the City.
B. Appointment; duties. The appointment of the Chief Public Health
Investigator shall be made by the director of the Department of Public
Affairs. The person appointed as Chief Public Health Investigator shall
be under the direction of the Director of the Department of Public
Affairs and, under the director, shall take the lead over other Public
Health Investigators; assist in making routing inspections and
investigations of complaints by the Department of Health and perform
related work as may be required, including complaints of alleged
violations of the Sanitary Code and local health ordinances; perform
surveys to determine insect and rodent infestation; inspect alleyways
and vacant lots for trash and litter so as to determine compliance with
local ordinances; refer food-related violations to sanitary inspectors;
distribute literature concerning public health campaigns within the
community; prepare and/or review case histories and reports of
investigations; answer inquiries and give information relating to health
laws; maintain required records and files; coordinate the annual dog
census and assist investigators with the preparation of court cases.
C. Qualifications.
(1) The qualifications of the Chief Public Health Investigator shall be
as follows:
(a) Graduation from high school or vocational high school, or
possession of an approved high school certificate, or the
equivalency thereof in education and experience.
(b) Ten years of experience in field investigations; four years of
experience as a supervisor of Public Health Investigators.
§ 4-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-81
1:95
§ 4-82. Public Health Investigator.
(c) Considerable knowledge of local and state health laws and
standards; also of the problems and procedures involved in
investigations relative to sanitary conditions and of the
philosophy of maintaining public health standards.
(d) Ability to comprehend rules and regulations; to take and
assume the lead in public health investigations; to interview
persons of varying backgrounds; to use tact and courtesy in
making investigations; to observe and analyze significant
conditions; to prepare suitable reports; and to keep and
maintain suitable records and files.
(2) Persons with physical or mental disabilities are eligible so long as
they can perform the essential functions of the job, after reasonable
accommodation is made for their known limitations, unless such
accommodation imposes undue hardship upon the City or the
performance of such duties poses a direct threat to the health or
safety of such person or others.
A. Position established. There is hereby created the position on Public
Health Investigator in the Department of Health of the City.
B. Duties.
(1) The Public Health Investigator, under the direction of his/her
immediate superior or the Commissioner of the Department of
Public Affairs, shall assist in making routine inspections and
investigations of complaints received by the Health Department
and shall do related work as required by the Board of Health.
(2) The Public Health Investigator shall be required to investigate
complaints of alleged violations of the Sanitary Code and local
health ordinances; inspect alleyways for trash and litter so as to
determine compliance with local ordinances; investigate complains
of inadequate heat in apartments and homes in order to determine
if there is any violation of local ordinances; work an assigned
district checking on any visible health violations for referral to the
sanitary inspectors; inspect buildings for the presence of rodents
and other health nuisances; distribute literature concerning public
health campaigns within the community; assist in taking the dog
census; prepare case histories and reports of investigations;
answer inquiries and give information relating to the health laws;
conduct simple and routine metric testing with the use of individual
audiometer tests and follow up on all defects found by referral to
the family physician with notification of the defects found; and
maintain records and files.
C. Qualifications. The Public Health Investigator shall have graduated
from high school or vocational high school, or possess an approved high
§ 4-81 UNION CITY CODE § 4-82
1:96
§ 4-83. Physician of Department of Health.
school equivalent certificate or any equivalency in education and
experience. The Public Health Investigator shall have some knowledge
of local and state health laws and standards; of the problems and
procedures involved in investigating sanitary conditions; and of the
philosophy of maintaining public health standards. The Public Health
Investigator shall have the ability to comprehend established rules
and regulations; to interview persons of varying backgrounds; to use
tact and courtesy in making investigations; to observe and analyze
significant conditions; to prepare suitable reports; and to maintain
suitable records and files. The Public Health Investigator shall be in
good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental defects
which would impair the proper performance of the required duties or
which might endanger the health and safety of oneself or others.
A. Position established. There is hereby created the position of Physician
in the Department of Health of the City.
B. Duties. Under the direction of the Health Officer of the City, it shall be
the duty of the Physician to provide medical services in the Health
Department pertaining to child clinics, including immunizations,
examinations and related care of children; immunization programs,
including the administration of vaccines for influenza, measles and
related sicknesses or diseases. The Physician shall keep needed records
and further assist in the city-wide health programs, including the
examination, immunization and testing programs involving any and all
of the citizens of the City, together with other City medical services
rendered by the City, exclusive of those rendered to the public school
system.
C. Qualifications. The qualifications of the Physician of the Health
Department shall be as follows:
(1) Formal and other education and training showing attainment of the
level represented by graduation from a medical school with the
degree of doctor of medicine.
(2) Three years of experience as a practicing physician.
(3) Possession of a valid New Jersey license to practice medicine.
(4) A thorough knowledge of the accepted principles of medicine and
medical practice, of the proper attitudes used in treating persons
who are unable to pay for medical service and of keeping needed
records.
(5) The ability to treat sick people successfully, to make proper
diagnosis of illnesses and to give proper medical advice.
(6) Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental
defects.
§ 4-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-84
1:97
§ 4-84. Health Educator.
A. Position established. There is hereby created the position of Health
Educator for the Health Department in the Department of Public
Affairs.
B. Appointment; compensation. The Health educator shall be appointed
by, and under the direction of, the Director of the Department of Public
Affairs. The salary of the Health Educator shall be as set forth in the
annual Salary Ordinance.
C. Qualifications. The qualifications for the position of Health Educator
shall be as follows:
(1) Possession of a master of public health degree in health education
from an accredited school of public health or a master's degree in
community health education from an accredited program.
(2) Two years of full time paid experience in a large-scale community
health or public health program.
(3) A thorough knowledge of modern health education techniques and
practices, of the principles in organization and administration of
public health programs, of the principles and most effective
methods of disseminating information, of developing community
support and cooperation, and of analyzing and evaluating
community health needs and resources.
(4) The ability to read, write, speak and understand English sufficiently
to perform the duties of this position, including to plan, organize
and develop effective work methods; to assess community health
needs and resources; to work effectively with various groups and
organizations; to stimulate desire for improved public health; to
communicate ideas and knowledge effectively; to analyze and
interpret health data; to prepare clear, concise and informative
reports; and to establish and maintain records and files.
(5) Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental
defects which would impair the proper performance of the required
duties or which might endanger the health and safety of oneself or
others.
D. Duties.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Health Educator, under the Director, to
plan, organize and direct a program of public health practices and
community health resources, promote community action for
improved public health and do related work as required.
(2) It shall be the further duty of the Health Educator to:
(a) Assist the local Health Officer in planning and organizing.
§ 4-84 UNION CITY CODE § 4-84
1:98
§ 4-85. Right of entry.
(b) Assist and guide various civic, fraternal, health and volunteer
organizations in organizing and developing study programs in
public health problems.
(c) Assist various community organizations in developing and
improving their health education activities by providing
consultation and guidance.
(d) Assist individuals and groups in developing sound personal
health practices.
(e) Visit and give talks before members of health, civic and welfare
organizations, including health councils, parent/teacher
associations and tuberculosis leagues, to interpret the
objectives, standards and policies of the local Health
Department.
(f) Create a public awareness of health needs and stimulate
constructive action to improve it by preparing and distributing
health literature, by conducting lectures and by showing films
and slides.
(g) Prepare press releases, pamphlets and statements relating to
the programs and functions of local clinics and the Health
Department.
(h) Coordinate the health education activities of various
community organizations.
(i) Assist hospital, clinic and Health Department staffs in
presenting health information to patients and other individuals
by providing them with educational mechanisms and advice on
the effective techniques of health education.
(j) Study and assess the health education needs of the community
and analyze the knowledge, interest, beliefs and practices of
people in the community to determine possible barriers to the
health education process.
(k) Assist instructional and school administrators in the planning,
developing and presenting of a health education program to
students.
(l) Evaluate community health resources and health education
programs.
(m) Prepare suitable reports and maintain records and files.
A. Inspection of premises. The Board of Commissioners, its agents and
employees, including the Health Officer, shall have the right to inspect
any premises in the City if they have reason to believe that any
§ 4-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-85
1:99
§ 4-86. Rules and regulations. [Amended 5-21-2013]
The Board of Commissioners and the Health Officer may make rules and
regulations which interpret or amplify any provision of this section or
other health regulations, or for the purpose of making the provisions of
this section or any other health regulation more effective. No regulation,
however, shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this
section or other health ordinance in this Code, and no regulation shall
impose any requirements which is in addition to or greater than the
requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any provision
of this section or other health ordinance in this Code.
provision of this chapter is being violated, or as part of a regular
program of inspection.
B. Search warrant. If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses to
permit entry for the purpose of inspection, the Health Officer may apply
to the Municipal Judge for a search warrant. The application shall be
based upon an affidavit setting forth that the inspection is part of a
regular program of inspection or that conditions and circumstances
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or unsanitary
or unhealthy condition exists on the premises. If the Judge is satisfied as
to the matters set forth in the affidavit, (s)he shall authorize the
issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of the
premises.
§ 4-85 UNION CITY CODE § 4-86
1:100
ARTICLE XV
Fire Protection
§ 4-87. North Hudson Regional Fire and Rescue.
A. North Hudson Regional Fire and Rescue. Fire protection, rescue and
emergency services for Union City is the responsibility of North Hudson
Regional Fire and Rescue pursuant to the consolidated municipal
services agreement for the formation of a joint meeting entered into by
resolution dated December 30, 1998, by the Town of Guttenberg, the
Township of North Bergen, the City of Union City, the Township of
Weehawken and the Town of West New York as authorized by N.J.S.A.
40:48B-1.
B. Local enforcement. Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act, P.L. 1983, c .383, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., and the Uniform Fire
Code at N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq., shall be locally enforced in the City of
Union City.
C. Agency designation. The local enforcing agency shall be the Fire
Prevention Bureau of the City, which is hereby created in the
Department of Public Safety.
D. Organization of the Fire Prevention Bureau. The Fire Prevention
Bureau shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire
Official or a Fire Prevention Specialist, certified as a Fire Official, who
shall report to the Director of Public Safety.
E. Appointments; qualifications; term of office; removal.
(1) Appointment and qualifications of the Fire Official. The Fire Official
and Fire Prevention Specialist shall be certified by the state and
appointed by the Director of Public Safety.
(2) Appointment and qualifications of inspectors and other employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the Director of Public Safety upon recommendation of
the Fire Official. All life hazard use inspectors shall be certified by
the state.
(3) Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of office in
accordance with civil service laws, rules and regulations. Any
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
(4) Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other
employees of the agency shall be subject to removal by the City for
just cause and in accordance with civil service laws, rules and
regulations.
(5) Appointment of legal counsel. Corporation Counsel is hereby
appointed as legal counsel to assist the agency enforcing the
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 4-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-87
1:101
F. Duties. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code
in all buildings, structures and premises within the established
boundaries of the City other than one- and two-unit owner-occupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and buildings,
structures and premises owned or operated by the federal government,
interstate agencies or the state, and shall faithfully comply with all the
pertinent requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform
Fire Code.
G. Board of appeals. Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved
by any action of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Hudson County Construction Board of Appeals.
H. Enforcement; violations and penalties. Enforcement and violations and
penalties shall be managed in conformity with the Uniform Fire Safety
Act, the Uniform Fire Code and all other laws of the State of New
Jersey.4
4. Editor's Note: A section titled "Emergency Medical Service," which immediately followed
this section, was moved to § 4-78 at time of adoption of Code, 5-21-2013.
§ 4-87 UNION CITY CODE § 4-87
1:102
ARTICLE XVI
Boards and Commissions
§ 4-88. Planning Board.
There shall be a Planning Board, as more fully set forth in Chapter 225,
Land Use Procedures.
§ 4-89. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Adjustment, as more fully set forth in
Chapter 225, Land Use Procedures.5
§ 4-90. Library Board.
§ 4-91. Board of Education.
A. Management of libraries and reading rooms. The free public libraries
and reading rooms of the City shall be under the management of a
Board of Trustees, to be known as the "Library Board of the City of
Union City."
B. Membership. The Library Board shall be composed of nine members,
who shall be appointed in the manner set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:54-9.
Members of the Board shall receive no compensation. [Amended
4-19-2005]
C. Powers and duties. The Board shall have such powers and duties as
provided by law.
A. District established. At the annual school election on April 30, 1991, the
voters of the City voted "Yes" to change the status of the school district
from a Type II District to a Type I District.
B. Board of Education established. [Amended 3-4-2003]
(1) Establishment. There is hereby established a Type I Board of
Education consisting of seven members.
(2) Appointment. The Mayor, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:12-7 shall
appoint the members of the Board of Education.
(3) Terms.
(a) Except as set forth in Subsection B(3)(b) below, members of
the Board of Education shall be appointed for a three-year
term, and they shall serve after the expiration of their
respective terms until the appointment and qualification of
their successors.
5. Editor's Note: A section titled "Environmental Commission," which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 4-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-91
1:103
§ 4-92. Historic Preservation Advisory Committee. [Added
10-5-2005]
(b) The first set of appointments to the Board of Education after
the effective date of this subsection shall be for the following
terms: one member shall be appointed for a one-year term; a
second member shall be appointed for a two-year term, and a
third member shall be appointed for a three-year term, all
commencing on May 16.
(4) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term.6
A. There is hereby established in the City of Union City a committee which
shall be known as the "Historic Preservation Advisory Committee."
B. Membership. The Committee shall be comprised of not fewer than
seven nor more than nine members, all of whom shall be citizens and
residents of the City of Union City serving without pay. The
Construction Official shall serve as a member ex officio of the
Committee.
C. Term of office; supervisory assignment.
(1) Members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners and
serve a three-year term.
(2) The Committee is assigned to the Director of Public Safety.
(3) Members of the Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the Board
of Commissioners.
D. Organization and rules of procedures.
(1) The Committee shall adopt rules and procedures for the
transaction of the business which shall include the selection of a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson and any other officers necessary
for Committee business.
(2) All Committee meetings shall comply with the Open Public
Meetings Act at N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.
E. Purpose and duties. The primary purposes of the Historic Advisory
Committee shall be to report to the Board of Commissioners with
regard to:
(1) The identification of historic sites within the City.
(2) Promotion of historic preservation in the City.
6. Editor's Note: Sections titled "Taxicab Commission" and "Multiple Dwelling Emergency
Commission," respectively, which immediately followed this section, were repealed
5-21-2013.
§ 4-91 UNION CITY CODE § 4-92
1:104
§ 4-93. Shade Tree Committee. [Added 11-20-2007]
(3) The preparation of a survey of the City for the purpose of
identifying historic structures and places which have special
historic or cultural value.
(4) Recommending to the Board of Commissioners the implementation
of an historical preservation program including the collection and
preservation of historic materials related to the City.
(5) Recommending projects of commemoration, including the erection
of monuments, historic markers and guide signs undertaking such
other duties as may be delegated to it by the Board of
Commissioners.
(6) Developing programs to educate children about the City's history.
F. Limitations. The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall be
advisory in nature and shall have no authority to manage, establish or
regulate historic preservation programs or property without the
express authorization of the Board of Commissioners.
G. Budget. The Board of Commissioners shall annually appropriate an
amount not exceeding $5,000 to fund the lawful work of the Committee.
A. Establishment of an advisory body; appointment. There is hereby
established an advisory body which shall be known as the Shade Tree
Committee of the City of Union City. The Committee shall consist of five
members who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners and
shall include the Director of the Department of Public Works, or his
designee, who shall be residents of Union City and shall serve without
compensation.
B. First members; subsequent members; terms. The first Committee
members shall be appointed within 60 days after the effective date of
this section, and their terms of office shall commence upon the date of
the appointment and end on July 1 the year following their
appointment. All subsequent appointments shall be for the respective
period of two years, to take effect on July 1. The term of each appointee
shall be designated in the resolution of appointment.
C. Organization. The Committee shall organize within 30 days after the
appointment of its total membership for the remainder of the fiscal year
and thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as
Chairperson and another as secretary.
D. Functions. The Shade Tree Committee organized under this section
shall advise the Board of Commissioners upon the following matters:
(1) The planting and care of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery planted in any public street plaza or park, including the
§ 4-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-93
1:105
§ 4-94. Feral Cats Advisory Committee [Adopted 1-19-2010]
trimming, spraying, care and protection of such trees and
shrubbery.
(2) The use of the grounds surrounding such trees and shrubs as may
be necessary to ensure the proper growth, care and survival.
(3) The removal of any tree or shrub dangerous to public safety.
(4) The adoption of any ordinance or regulations necessary for the
proper care and protection of trees, shrubs and parks within the
City.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established an advisory body which
shall be known as the "Feral Cat Advisory Committee of the City of
Union City." The Committee shall consist of seven members who shall
be appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall include the City
Health Officer, or his designee, who shall be residents of the City of
Union City and shall serve without compensation.
B. First members; subsequent members; terms. The first Committee
members shall be appointed within 60 days after the effective date of
this section, and their terms of office shall commence upon the date of
the appointment and end on July 1, the year following their
appointment. All subsequent appointments shall be for the respective
period of two years, to take effect on July 1. The term of each appointee
shall be designated in the resolution of appointment.
C. Organization. The Committee shall organize within 30 days after the
appointment of its total membership for the remainder of the fiscal year
and thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as
Chairperson and another as Secretary.
D. Advisory functions. The Feral Cat Advisory Committee organized under
this section shall advise the Board of Commissioners upon the following
matters:
(1) The development and implementation of a program to control the
overpopulation of feral and abandoned cats in Union City.
(2) The development of a community outreach program intended to
educate City residents regarding feral cats and their
overpopulation.
(3) Any other matters that the Board of Commissioners refers to the
Committee.
§ 4-93 UNION CITY CODE § 4-94
1:106
ARTICLE XVII
Authorities
§ 4-95. Parking Authority.
§ 4-96. Housing Authority.
A. Establishment. A body corporate and politic is hereby created pursuant
to and in conformity with N.J.S.A. 40:11A-4, to be known as the "Parking
Authority of the City of Union City."
B. Members; terms. The Parking Authority shall consist of seven persons
as Commissioners of the Authority. The Commissioners who are first
appointed shall be designated to serve for the terms of one, two, three,
four and five years, respectively, from the date of their appointment, but
thereafter Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of five years,
except that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
C. Membership; appointment. No Commissioner of this Authority may be
an officer or employee of the City. A Commissioner shall hold office until
his/her successor has been appointed and has qualified. A certificate of
the appointment or reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed
with the City Clerk, and this certificate shall be conclusive evidence of
the due and proper appointment of the Commissioner.
D. Quorum; legal counsel. A majority shall constitute a quorum of the
Authority for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising its
power and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the Authority
upon a vote of the majority of the Commissioners present, unless in any
case the bylaws of the Authority shall require a larger majority. The
Authority shall select a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from
among its Commissioners. For such legal services as it may require the
Authority may employ its own counsel and legal staff.
E. Powers. The Commissioners of the Parking Authority shall exercise all
the powers and authority granted and be subject to all the provisions of
Chapter 11A of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and such
other statutes now or hereafter enacted applicable to parking
authorities.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established the Housing Authority of
the City of Union City. This Authority shall constitute a body corporate
and politic exercising public and essential government functions and
having all the powers conferred, necessary or convenient, to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:14A et seq., as
amended and supplemented.
B. Findings.
(1) There exists in the City blighted areas, or areas in the process of
becoming blighted, which impair economic values and tax
§ 4-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-96
1:107
§ 4-97. Joint Sewerage Authority.
revenues, cause an increase in and spread of disease and crime,
and constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals and welfare
of the residents of the City.
(2) These conditions necessitate excessive and disproportionate
expenditures of public funds for crime prevention and punishment,
public health and safety, fire and accident protection and other
public services and facilities.
(3) There are also certain areas where the condition of title, the
diverse ownership of land, the street or lot layouts, or other
conditions prevent a proper development or redevelopment of such
areas.
(4) The clearance, replanning and preparation for rebuilding of such
areas and the prevention or the reduction of blight and its causes
are public uses and purposes for which public money may be spent
and private property acquired, by eminent domain or otherwise,
and are governmental functions.
(5) Redevelopment activities will stimulate more residential
construction, the production of better housing and more desirable
neighborhoods and community development at lower costs. It is
necessary in the public interest that preparation for such projects
be made now.
A. Creation. Pursuant to the Sewerage Authorities Law, constituting
Chapter 138 of the Laws of New Jersey of 1946, N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et
seq., there is hereby jointly created and established a public body
corporate and politic, as an agency and instrumentality of the City of
Hoboken, the City of Union City and the Township of Weehawkin,
hereinafter called the "municipalities," under the corporate name and
title of the "North Hudson Sewerage Authority." This Authority and the
Town of West New York, within the territorial boundaries of the
municipalities, shall have and may exercise all of the powers provided
for in the Sewerage Authorities Law, together with any other powers
which may hereafter be conferred upon sewerage authorities by law,
and by any other statute pertinent to a sewerage authority or sewerage
utility. The territory of West New York shall be part of the Authority,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14A-4(m), and upon the terms and conditions
contained herein.
B. Composition.
(1) That nine members of the Authority shall be appointed by
resolution of the governing bodies in the manner provided in the
Sewerage Authority Law. Three of the members shall be appointed
by the governing body of the City of Hoboken, two by the governing
body of the City of Union City, two by the governing body of the
§ 4-96 UNION CITY CODE § 4-97
1:108
Township of Weehawkin and two by the governing body of the Town
of West New York.
(2) It shall be a condition of continued membership on the Authority
that members be and remain residents within the district of the
Authority. If a member ceases to be a resident of the district, his/
her membership on the Authority shall thereupon cease, and the
appropriate municipality shall appoint another person to complete
the term to which (s)he had been appointed.
C. Compensation. Each such member shall receive such compensation for
the services as such member, not in excess of $5,000 in any one year, as
shall hereafter be determined by resolution of the Authority, provided
that any member of the Authority may also be reimbursed for necessary
expenses incurred in the discharge of such member's duties as a
member of the Authority.
D. Bylaws: action taken by affirmative vote. All action to be taken by the
Authority shall be by the affirmative vote of not less than seven
members of the authority, and such voting requirement shall be made a
part of the bylaws of the Authority.
§ 4-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-97
1:109

ARTICLE XVIII
Agencies
§ 4-98. Redevelopment Agency.
A. Title. The title of the agency is the "Union City Redevelopment Agency."
B. Duration. The redevelopment agency shall cease to exist five years from
October 1, 1999.
C. Terms of Commissioners.
(1) Number of members; appointment. There shall be seven
Commissioners of the Redevelopment Agency, who shall be
appointed by the Board of Commissioners by a majority vote of
those present at the meeting establishing the appointments.
(2) Terms.
(a) The terms for these Commissioners shall be five years, except
that the first appointees shall be designated as one having a
term of one year, one having a term of two years, two having
terms of three years, one having a term of four years and two
having terms of five years.
(b) Each Commissioner shall hold office for the term of his/her
appointment and until his/her successor has been appointed
and qualified.
(3) Requirements. Two Commissioners may be officers or employees of
the City.
(4) Vacancies. Vacancies for the unexpired term shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment.
D. Commissioner appointments.
(1) Terms.
(a) A Commissioner who is a member of the governing body shall
serve only a one-year term.
(b) All other commissioner shall be appointed in staggered terms
in accordance with the Subsection C.
(2) Certificate of appointment or reappointment. A certificate of
appointment or reappointment of each Commissioner shall be filed
with the Clerk.
(3) Compensation; reimbursement. A Commissioner shall receive no
compensation for his services but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the discharge of
his/her duties, including travel expenses.
§ 4-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-98
1:111
§ 4-99. Community Development Agency.
(4) Quorum. Four Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the
purposes of conducting business and exercising powers and all
other purposes. Action may be taken upon the affirmative vote of a
majority, but not by less than four Commissioners present, unless in
the case that the bylaws of the agency shall require a larger
number.
(5) Officers. The agency shall select a Chairman and a Vice Chairman
from among the Commissioners, and it shall employ an Executive
Director who shall be its secretary.
E. Conflicts of interest.
(1) Conflict. No Commissioner or employee of an agency shall acquire
an interest, direct or indirect, in any redevelopment project, or in
any property included or planned to be included in a project, nor
shall (s)he have any interest, indirect or direct, in any contract or
proposed contract for materials or services to be furnished or used
in connection with the project.
(2) Disclosure. If any Commissioner or employee of any agency owns
or controls an interest, direct or indirect, in any property included
or planned to be included in a project, (s)he shall immediately
disclose same, in writing, to the agency and a disclosure shall be
entered into the minutes of the agency. Failure to disclose such an
interest shall constitute misconduct in office. An employee making
such a disclosure shall not participate in any action by the agency
affecting the property.
(3) Removal. A Commissioner may be removed by action of the Board
of Commissioners after being given a copy of the charges at least
10 days prior to a hearing and an opportunity to be heard. A record
of these proceedings, together with the charges and findings, shall
be filed with the office of the Clerk of the City.
F. Executive Director. An Executive Director of a Redevelopment Agency
shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-12 et seq.
G. Vested authority. All redevelopment authority in the City, both
residential and commercial, shall be vested in the Union City
Redevelopment Agency.
A. Established. There is hereby established a Community Development
Agency which shall be under the authority of the Mayor.
B. Organization.
§ 4-98 UNION CITY CODE § 4-99
1:112
(1) There shall be an Executive Director and such administrative,
professional and advisory staff as the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners shall approve.
(2) The Executive Director, under the supervision and direction of the
Mayor, shall have the responsibilities of coordinating all the
programs and eligible activities for which the City receives grants
under the Act.
C. Powers and duties.
(1) The Community Development Agency shall be responsible for
coordinating all of its committed programs and eligible activities
for which the City receives grants under the Act. In this connection,
the Agency shall assist the Mayor in preparation of all applications
for grants under the Act, from the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, or through cooperation with
Hudson County in connection with applications to be made by
Hudson County under the Act.
(2) The Community Development Agency shall work with City and Cityaffiliated
agencies to facilitate comprehensive programs of
rehabilitation and preservation of public, private, commercial and
industrial properties; to stimulate economic activity and expansion;
to provide adequate City services to facilitate community and
economic development; and to identify programs and activities
which would benefit from Community Development Agency funds.
(3) The Executive Director, in the carrying out of all programs and
eligible activities under the Act, shall aid in the preparation of
applications for funding under the Act and shall serve as the liaison
between the City, the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, Hudson County and such other public
authorities whose approval and/or clearances are required.
D. Budget. The Executive Director, for carrying out the duties of the
Community Development Agency, shall submit a budget for the
forthcoming year to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners for their
review and action, which budget shall include all anticipated expenses
for administrative, professional and advisory services and operating
expenses anticipated for the forthcoming year.
§ 4-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-99
1:113

ARTICLE XIX
Personnel Policies
§ 4-100. Adoption of civil service.
§ 4-101. Hiring of relatives by Commissioners.
A. Classification of employees. The New Jersey Civil Service Commission
has made a survey of all municipal officers and employees, covering the
duties, salaries and respective departments of the employees of the City
and has submitted to the Board of Commissioners three separate and
distinct schedules.
B. Schedules adopted. The classes of positions and the duties assigned
thereto, as set forth in the three schedules referred to above and
incorporated herein by reference, are hereby created and adopted.
(1) Schedule 1.
(a) Schedule 1, as amended, modified and supplemented, shall be
a complete list of the employees of the City, giving the class
and jurisdiction, service and division to which the position
occupied by each employee has been allocated, and salaries to
be paid.
(b) Schedule 1 is hereby made a part of this section and is
incorporated herein by reference as though set forth at length.
The schedule shall be filed with the City Clerk and kept on file
for the use and examination of the public.
(2) Schedule 2. Schedule 2 shall be comprised of class specifications,
in alphabetical order, including definitions, examples of work,
education and experience requirements, and knowledge and
abilities.
(3) Schedule 3. Schedule 3 shall contain the following:
(a) An alphabetical list of titles of full-time positions in the
classified service, with divisional classifications.
(b) An alphabetical list of titles of part-time positions in the
classified service, with divisional classifications.
(c) A schematic list of titles of full-time positions in the classified
service, with divisional classifications.
(d) An alphabetical list of titles in the unclassified service, with the
statutory or other provisions placing the positions in the
unclassified service.7
7. Editor's Note: An original section titled "Residency requirements," which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 4-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-101
1:115
§ 4-102. Harassment policy.
A. Prohibited. No Commissioner shall hire any person(s) who is related to
such Commissioner to work in his/her department, nor shall any such
relative, as defined in Subsection B, be assigned to work under the
direction or supervision, direct or otherwise, of such related
Commissioner.
B. Related defined. Persons deemed related shall include all members of
the related family, including spouse, children, parents, brothers, sisters,
direct line aunts and uncles, nieces and nephews, grandparents,
grandchildren and in-laws by reason or relation to any of the above.
C. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to eliminate the potential for
preferential treatment of relatives of the appointing authority, not to
deprive any citizen of any equal opportunity for employment with the
City.
D. Exceptions.
(1) Nonpaying positions. This subsection shall not preclude the
appointment of any relative to any nonpaying appointed position.
(2) Existing employees. This subsection shall not affect the existing
rights of any employee as of December 3, 1986, nor deprive any
employee of any promotional rights in his/her normal career
development.
(3) Civil service. This subsection shall not affect the rights of any
employee, or a potential employee, who appears on a present civil
service list for promotion or appointment existing as of December
3, 1986. This exception does not apply to provisional or unclassified
appointments.
A. General policy. The City of Union City has a strong commitment to
provide a work environment free from unlawful harassment based on
sex, race, color, religion, national origin, age, disability, ancestry,
atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait (AHCBT), liability for service
in the Armed Forces of the United States, creed, handicap, marital
status, nationality, genetic information, refusal to submit to genetic
testing, refusal to provide genetic information or race of that person or
of that person's spouse, partners, members, stockholders, directors,
officers, managers, superintendents, agents, employees, business
associates, suppliers or customers (collectively the "protected
classifications"). The City will not tolerate unlawful harassment. Acts or
incidents of unlawful harassment should be promptly reported in
accordance with the procedures outlined below. The City will promptly
investigate all reports of unlawful harassment. Employees who violate
this policy will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
discharge from employment. Employees who violate this policy also risk
personal legal liability.
§ 4-101 UNION CITY CODE § 4-102
1:116
B. Violations. Conduct that may violate this policy and result in
disciplinary actions includes the following:
(1) Unwelcome remarks and actions based on the protected
classifications. This may include, but is not limited to,
inappropriate jokes, comments or posted materials.
(2) Threats or suggestions that an employee's employment work status
will be adversely affected based upon the protected classifications.
(3) Affecting or denying employment opportunities or benefits to an
employee based upon the protected classifications.
(4) Engaging in a negative tangible employment action based upon the
protected classifications.
(5) Retaliation against an employee who has reported any alleged
violation of this policy or participated in an investigation related to
this policy.
C. Sexual harassment.
(1) Definition. Sexual harassment is defined as any unwelcome
advance or request for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual
nature where:
(a) Submission is made explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of employment;
(b) Submission or rejection is used or is threatened to be used as
the basis of employment decisions; or
(c) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work or creates an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
(2) Difference from sexual attraction or flirtation. Sexual harassment is
different from sexual attraction or flirtation. Sexual harassment is
unwelcome sexual attention which is demeaning and causes the
recipient distress. Sexual harassment does not refer to occasional
compliments. However, comments or behavior which may be
intended to be complimentary may be viewed by the recipient as
unwelcome and a form of sexual harassment.
D. Care to be exercised by supervisors and managers. Special care must
be exercised by supervisors and managers whose actions or remarks
may be mistakenly perceived as unlawful harassment. The subordinate
may feel inhibited and may not disclose the unwelcome actions or
remarks by the supervisor or person of higher rank. However, unlawful
harassment is not limited to employees of different rank.
E. Complaint; investigation.
§ 4-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-102
1:117
§ 4-103. Grievance procedure under Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(1) Complaint. Any employee or supervisor, male or female, who
believes that (s)he is being subject to unlawful harassment or who
has knowledge of a violation of this policy should report the
incident or pattern of activity either orally or in writing to the
Commissioner in charge of the department and to the Mayor. If the
complaint involves a direct supervisor, the employee is not required
to report the complaint to the direct supervisor. The complaint
should then be made to the Mayor or to another Commissioner.
Every effort will be made to make available to an employee
reporting such an incident or pattern of activity an appropriate
person with whom the employee will feel comfortable to discuss
his/her concerns.
(2) Investigation. Once a complaint has been registered, a prompt and
thorough investigation will proceed. After the complaint is
investigated, an appropriate representative of the City will reply to
the complaining party. If the City determines that unlawful
harassment has occurred in violation of this policy, the City will
undertake immediate and appropriate corrective action up to and
including termination of employment.
A. Adoption. The City of Union City does hereby adopt the within
grievance procedure for the handling of any grievance prohibited by
the United States Department of Justice regulations implementing Title
2 of the Americans With Disabilities Act, hereinafter referred to as ADA.
B. Coordinator; appointment; term. The Mayor shall appoint an employee
of the City to coordinate ADA compliance efforts, hereinafter referred
to as the "ADA Coordinator," to serve for a term of one year.
C. Submission of grievance.
(1) Grievances alleging any action prohibited by the United States
Department of Justice regulations implementing Title 2 of the ADA
must be addressed to the individual designated by the Mayor as the
ADA Coordinator. Grievances submitted to any other employee or
agent of the City shall not be considered.
(2) A grievance may be filed in writing or verbally. The aggrieved party
must provide his/her name and address and briefly describe the
alleged violation of the regulations.
D. Filing time for grievance. A grievance shall be filed within 30 days after
the grievant becomes aware of the alleged violation. Grievances in
which the aggrieved party became aware of same before this within
grievance procedure was in place must be filed with the ADA
Coordinator within 90 days of March 19, 2002.
E. Responsibilities of the ADA Coordinator.
§ 4-102 UNION CITY CODE § 4-103
1:118
(1) Investigation of grievance. The ADA Coordinator shall promptly
conduct an investigation as to the allegations. These rules
contemplate informal but thorough investigations, affording all
interested parties and their representatives, if any, an opportunity
to submit evidence relevant to the grievance.
(2) Determination of investigation. A written determination as to the
validity of the grievance and a description of action to be taken, if
any, shall be issued by the ADA Coordinator and a copy forwarded
to the grievant within 10 days after the filing of the grievance.
(3) Maintaining records. The ADA Coordinator shall maintain the files
and records of the City relating to grievances filed.
F. Appeal of determination. The grievant can request a reconsideration of
the case in instances where (s)he is dissatisfied with the determination
of the ADA Coordinator. The request for reconsideration shall be made,
in writing, within 10 days to the Board of Commissioners with a copy
thereof being provided to the ADA Coordinator.
G. Rights of grievant.
(1) The right of a person to prompt and equitable determination of a
grievance filed hereunder shall not impair the grievant's pursuit of
other remedies such as the filing of an ADA complaint with the
responsible federal department or agency. Use of this grievance
procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
(2) These rules shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of
interested persons to meet appropriate due process standards and
to assure that the City complies with the ADA and implementing
regulations.
H. Copies of grievance procedures posted. A copy of this grievance
procedure, as well as a statement advising the name of the individual
designated by the Mayor to be the ADA Coordinator, shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in all public buildings which the City owns and
operates.
§ 4-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-103
1:119

ARTICLE XX
Internet Usage Policy
[Added 9-1-2009]
§ 4-104. Overview.
A. The purpose of a policy on Internet use is not to impose restrictions that
are contrary to City of Union City's established culture of openness,
trust, and integrity but rather to protect City of Union City's employees,
partners, and the government from illegal or damaging actions by
individuals, either knowingly or unknowingly. Internet/Intranet/
Extranet-related systems, including but not limited to computer
equipment, software, operating systems, storage media, network
accounts providing electronic mail, World Wide Web browsing, and FTP
are the property of City of Union City. These systems are to be used for
business purposes in serving the interests of the City, and for our
residents in the course of normal operations. Recognizing that the
Internet/Intranet/Extranet-related systems are the property of the City,
employees do not have any expectation of or right to privacy with
regard to the use of the systems.
B. Effective security is a team effort involving the participation and
support of City of Union City employees and affiliates who deal with
information and/or information systems. While this policy defines how
City employees can and can not use City electronic resources, it can not
cover every conceivable situation. Consequently, common sense and
professional courtesy will still be required. It is the responsibility of
every computer user to know these guidelines and to conduct their
activities accordingly.
C. Additionally, electronic communications may be considered government
records within the meaning of the Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq. (hereinafter "OPRA") and further may be considered
public records within the meaning of the Destruction of Public Records
Law of (1953), N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq. (hereinafter "DPRL")
Accordingly, like paper documents, electronic communications must be
retained and destroyed according to established records management
procedures.
D. The principal purpose of electronic mail (e-mail) and access to the
Internet is for City of Union City business communications, as set forth
at length in the Policy on Internet Usage, and all computer equipment
(and associated hardware and software) are the property of City of
Union City. Occasional personal use is permitted when necessary;
however, any and all e-mail communications sent or received on a City
computer, whether using a City or personal (including password
protected and web-based accounts) e-mail address, are considered part
of the City's business records and may not be considered to be private
or confidential. All Internet activity on City computers, including e-mail
communications, are subject to periodic backup programs. As a result,
§ 4-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-104
1:121
§ 4-105. Scope.
This policy provides rules and guidelines for the proper use of the Internet,
Intranet, Extranet, e-mail, fax machines, and computers. It applies to
employees, contractors, consultants, temporaries, and other workers using
City of Union City Internet or computers, including all personnel affiliated
with third parties. It also applies to all electronic resources owned or
leased by City of Union City. The intent is to prevent wasteful use of
the City's electronic resources, lost time, and inappropriate behavior. It
also covers the actions required of staff to enable compliance with data
protection regulations, avoidance of computer fraud, security breaches, or
software piracy. This policy is also intended to implement retention policies
consistent with the State of New Jersey Division of Archives and Records
Management guidelines and best practices for managing electronic mail.
§ 4-106. General use and ownership.
all such information may be stored on the City's server backup system.
[Added 10-19-2010]
E. Electronic communications with doctors, lawyers, therapists,
accountants, etc., which take place using a City computer, whether
using a City e-mail account or a personal, password protected, webbased
e-mail account, may not be privileged, private or confidential.
[Added 10-19-2010]
F. The City of Union City reserves the right to review and access all
material on the City's media systems, including Internet sites viewed
and personal web-based e-mail accounts accessed on a City computer,
and computers, including hard drives and server backup systems, at
any time. [Added 10-19-2010]
A. It is the intent of City of Union City to provide high-quality computing
facilities to its authorized users. This will allow the City of Union City
to:
(1) Maintain its access to available local, national, and international
information;
(2) Provide an environment that encourages both the sharing of
information and the acquisition of knowledge; and
(3) Provide our residents with rapid access to information.
B. Each computer owned by the City is a business tool. As such,
responsible employees are accountable for the condition of that tool
and for abiding by the computing provisions set forth by the City.
C. City of Union City via the policy and any other instruction shall approve
all City of Union City employees use of the internet and e-mail.
§ 4-104 UNION CITY CODE § 4-106
1:122
§ 4-107. Data security.
D. The City network (local and wide are networks including phones, fax
machines, switches, routers, hubs, and other connected equipment)
may be used only for lawful purposes. Transmission, distribution, or
storage of any material in violation of any applicable law or regulation
is prohibited. This includes, without limitation, material protected by
copyright, trademark, trade secret or other intellectual property right
used without proper authorization.
E. Unauthorized copying of copyrighted material including, but not limited
to, digitization and distribution of photographs from magazines, books
or other copyrighted sources, copyrighted music, and the installation of
any copyrighted software for which City of Union City or the end user
does not have an active license is strictly prohibited.
F. The City retains the copyright to any material created by employees in
the course of their official duties. Copyrighted materials belonging to
entities other than the City may not be transmitted by an employee on
the City Internet or e-mail systems except with permission or as a single
copy for reference only.
G. Related questions should be directed first to your supervisor and then,
if necessary, to the IT Agent.
H. Note: The terms Internet, Intranet (internal City Internet for employee
use only), and Extranet (business-to-business Internet interface
between the City and a business partner) are interchangeable. Any rule
applying to one, likewise, applies to the other.
A. Employees are responsible for ensuring business critical electronic
data/information is backed up and available only to authorized
personnel.
B. Employees must use extreme caution when opening e-mail attachments
received from unknown senders, which may contain viruses, worms, email
bombs, or Trojan horse code.
C. Sharing user names/logon IDs and passwords (network, Windows,
application, etc.) without supervisor permission (emergency basis only)
is forbidden.
D. Data stored on network server drives are automatically backed up by IT
on a daily basis. Lost or damaged files may be restored by contacting IT.
If you store information on your personal computer, you (not IT) have
assumed data backup and recovery responsibility.
E. All PCs, laptops and workstations must be secured with a passwordprotected
screensaver with the automatic activation feature set at 10
minutes or less, or by logging off when the host will be unattended.
§ 4-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-107
1:123
§ 4-108. Network security.
Use of the Internet or electronic mail for the following purposes is strictly
prohibited:
F. Individual users shall be held accountable for knowledgeable use of
their account by others. This includes family and other household
members when work is being done at home.
A. Executing any form of network monitoring which will intercept data not
intended for the employee's host, unless this activity is a part of the
employee's normal job/duty.
B. Circumventing user authentication or security of any host, network, or
account.
C. Using any program/script/command, or sending messages of any kind,
with the intent to interfere with or disable a user's terminal session, via
any means, locally or via the Internet/Intranet/Extranet.
D. Engaging in activities commonly call "hacking" or "cracking."
Examples:
(1) Password sniffing (includes dictionary and brute force password
cracking attacks).
(2) Data manipulation or vandalizing of web pages.
(3) Eavesdropping on network traffic.
(4) Scanning for computer/network vulnerabilities without
authorization.
(5) Networking sniffing.
(6) Pinged floods.
(7) Packet spoofing.
(8) Forged routing information for malicious purposes.
(9) Intentionally launching denial-of-service attacks on any computer
system.
E. Snooping in other individual's e-mail or using masquerading
techniques. Example: Sending e-mail from a mailbox other than the
employee's own, in order to disguise one's identity.
F. Engaging in anonymous activity to avoid being identified in network
security systems. Internet accounts shall be accessed only by the
authorized owner (or his/her designee) of the account.
G. Interfering with or disrupting network users, services, or equipment.
Examples:
§ 4-107 UNION CITY CODE § 4-108
1:124
§ 4-109. Approved software.
§ 4-110. Operation usage.
Use of the Internet or electronic mail for the following purposes is strictly
prohibited:
(1) Introduction of malicious programs into the network or server
(viruses, worms, Trojan horses, e-mail bombs, etc.).
(2) Downloading images, audio files, and/or video files unless they
relate to an explicit business purpose.
H. Connecting a network hardware device (workstations, printers,
scanners, wireless, etc.) to the network without the approval of IT. IT is
responsible for monitoring, tracking, maintaining, and troubleshooting
all network devices.
I. Allowing a modem/router to be connected to or installed on a network
computer. Modem use must be approved by IT and will be installed only
on computers which have no physical connection to the network. This is
necessary for preventing potential third parties from compromising
network security through a back door.
J. Interrupting or disabling the automatic downloading of antivirus
software, software patches, or other IT-approved administrative
software.
K. Disabling the automatic execution of IT-approved software including,
but not limited to, antivirus software.
L. Any other activity that the user knows or should know is inconsistent
with City business and for the security of the City computers.
A. Approved software must be licensed by the original manufacturer prior
to being installed.
B. Screen savers may be installed when approved by IT.
C. Nonsystem wallpapers, e.g., family pictures, are permitted to be
installed, provided that there are no copyright infringements.
D. Instant messaging software must be approved by IT.
E. Playing computer games, including those built into the Windows
operating system, is prohibited.
F. Software that is not part of the City standard suite of software may not
be loaded onto a government computer unless the software has been
approved in advance in writing by IT.
A. Accessing Internet sites with sexually explicit or hate material.
§ 4-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-110
1:125
B. Transmitting threatening, obscene, harassing, discriminatory, or
sexually explicit materials.
C. Accessing gambling sites.
D. Sending or forwarding chain letters. These are e-mails which either ask
you to forward them on to all your friends (or to everyone you know) or
which state that something bad will happen if you do not forward them.
E-mails of this type, which are usually warning about something
(example: computer viruses) are almost certainly hoaxes.
E. Advertising, soliciting, or selling commercial items.
F. Advertising, soliciting, or selling personal items.
G. Conducting personal or commercial business for profit.
H. Engaging in non-City sanctioned fund-raising.
I. Engaging in political activities prohibited by law.
J. Releasing proprietary data or information to unauthorized persons.
K. Auto-forwarding e-mail messages to a commercial e-mail account.
L. Participating in message boards about the City.
M. Sending messages to large groups of people without prior management
approval.
N. Providing information about, or lists of, City employees to parties
outside City of Union City without the Business Administrator's
approval.
O. Using e-mail resulting in inadvertent commitment of the City to a
contract or agreement if it appears to the other party that you have
authority to do so. E-mails sent to external stakeholders must include
the following disclaimer:
"This transmission is confidential and may be legally privileged. If you
are not the intended recipient, please notify the sender by return email
and delete this message from your system. The City of Union
City reserves the right to monitor e-mail communication. No contract
may be concluded on behalf of the City of Union City by e-mail. If the
content of this e-mail does not relate to the business of the City of
Union City, then we do not endorse it and will accept no liability."
P. Using personal e-mail accounts for City of Union City business
purposes.
Q. Using Instant messaging on City computers unless the use is
specifically approved by the appropriate director of the employee's
department.
§ 4-110 UNION CITY CODE § 4-110
1:126
§ 4-111. E-mail etiquette.
R. Accessing chat rooms unless specifically approved in advance for each
occasion by the employee's supervisor.
A. Do not send offensive jokes, frivolous messages, or anything which may
be construed as discriminatory or harassing in nature.
B. Since the confidentiality of e-mail mail cannot be assured, do not type
anything you don't want repeated. Do not try to carry out confidential or
sensitive tasks or air controversial views on e-mail. Ask yourself: Would
I want a member of the public or a jury to read this message?
Remember that all e-mails (even deleted ones) are saved and usually
can be retrieved.
C. Respect privacy and consider this aspect before forwarding messages.
D. Be polite. E-mails can often seem abrupt, even when this is not the
intention. Use professional courtesy and discretion. The use of all
uppercase text in either the subject or the body of an e-mail should also
be avoided as this is deemed to be the e-mail equivalent of shouting.
E. Do not reply with history if it is not necessary especially if it
incorporates a large attachment. Do not send greeting cards.
Voluminous data files attached to e-mails increase network traffic
congestion often resulting in overall response time degradation.
F. Use "reply all" and distribution lists with caution in order to keep the
number of your messages to a minimum and reduce the risk of sending
messages to the wrong people.
G. Check your e-mails regularly. Set the out-of-office flag and arrange for
someone to deal with your e-mail if you are away for an extended
period.
H. Messages should be clearly addressed "To" those from whom an action
or response is expected; "cc" or "bcc" should be used for other
recipients of the message. The use of "bcc" is not recommended since
may consider this to come under the heading of "dirty pool."
I. Delete unwanted or unnecessary e-mail subject to the retention policy
identified below.
J. Unsolicited e-mail, especially with an attachment, may contain a virus,
if in doubt, delete the e-mail or contact the sender to check before
opening.
K. Enter a meaningful "subject" field to help the reader anticipate the
content correctly, and try to keep to one subject per message.
L. Don't use all or part of someone else's message without
acknowledgement. Don't edit someone else's message without making
§ 4-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-111
1:127
§ 4-112. Disclaimer.
§ 4-113. Retention policy.
it clear the changes that you have made and use good judgment when
considering distributing other people's messages without permission.
M. Avoid subscribing to unnecessary mailing lists. Unsubscribe from
mailing lists when they are no longer required.
N. Use discretion before selecting "request read receipt" or "request
delivery receipt" options as this may unnecessarily increase network
traffic thereby retarding overall response time. These options should be
used by exception. They should not be system default selections.
O. Once a message is sent, there is no way to retrieve it. Check carefully
that messages are addressed to the correct recipient(s) before sending.
A. The City reserves the right, to monitor, examine, copy, change, and/or
delete without notice all of its systems configurations, as well as the
files on those systems for such purposes as maintaining business
continuity, responding to a complaint of computer abuse, such as
harassment; or protecting City resources from unauthorized misuse.
B. The City neither guarantees against, nor shall it be responsible for, the
destruction, corruption, or disclosure of personal material on or by its
computer resources. Specifically, the City reserves the right to remove,
replace, or reconfigure its computer resources without formal notice to
employees (despite the fact that advance notice will normally be given).
C. If employees are maintaining personal files on City systems with
appropriate permission, they are advised to locate such files in a root
directory named "personal" to facilitate the identification and backup of
those files.
A. E-mails which are not considered government records under OPRA or
public records under DPRL may be deleted immediately from the
computer system. They are as follows:
(1) Personal correspondence. Any e-mail not received or created in the
course of City business may be deleted immediately, since it is not
an official record. Examples of the type of messages that may be
deleted are unsolicited e-mail advertisements, commonly called
"SPAM," personal messages, or the "Let's do lunch" (not a Citybusiness
meeting over lunch) or "Can I catch a ride?" type of note.
This provision is not intended and not shall not be interpreted to
allow employees to create or receive personal correspondences.
(2) Nongovernmental publications. Publications, promotional material
from vendors, and similar materials that are publicly available to
anyone are not official records unless specifically incorporated into
other official records. This includes LISTERV® messages (other
§ 4-111 UNION CITY CODE § 4-113
1:128
than those you post in your official capacity), unsolicited
promotional material, files copied or downloaded from Internet
sites, etc. These items may be deleted immediately, or maintained
in a "Non-Record" mailbox and deleted at a later time, just as you
might trash unwanted publications or promotional flyers received
in the mail. However, for example, if you justify the purchase
of a "Zip Filing System" by incorporating the reviews you saved
(from the "Files R Us LISTSERV®") in your proposal to your boss,
those LISTSERV® messages become official records and must be
retained in accordance with the retention schedule for purchasing
proposals.
B. Transient documents are considered government records under OPRA
or public records under DPRL and are to be retained as follows:
(1) Much of the communication via e-mail has a very limited
administrative value. For instance, an e-mail message notifying
employees of an upcoming meeting would only have value until the
meeting has been attended or the employee receiving the message
has marked the date and time in his/her calendar.
(2) Transient messages do not set policy, establish guidelines or
procedures, certify a transaction or become a receipt. The informal
tone of transitory messages might be compared to a
communication that might take place during a telephone
conversation or conversation in an office hallway. These types of
records are transient documents and can be scheduled using the
General Retention Schedules established by the State Records
Committee. Transient documents include telephone messages
(such as "While You Were Out" notes), drafts, and other documents
that serve to convey information of temporary importance in lieu of
oral communication. E-mail messages of a similar nature should be
retained until they are no longer of administrative value and then
destroyed.
C. Intermediate documents are considered government records under
OPRA or public records under DPRL and are to be retained as follows:
(1) E-mail messages that have more significant administrative, legal
and/or fiscal value but are not scheduled as transient or permanent
should be categorized under other appropriate record series. These
may include but are not limited to:
(a) General correspondence. Including correspondence from
various individuals, companies, and organizations requesting
information pertaining to agency and legal interpretations and
other miscellaneous inquiries. This correspondence is
informative; it does not attempt to influence agency policy.
(b) Internal correspondence. Including letters, memos, and
requests for routine information; monthly and weekly reports;
§ 4-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-113
1:129
and documents advising supervisors of various events, issues,
and status of ongoing projects.
(c) Minutes of agency staff meetings. Minutes and supporting
records documenting internal policy decisions.
(2) Retention. These categories of e-mail should be retained for the
appropriate period of time per the records retention schedules
approved under the General Retention Schedules for the City.
D. Permanent documents are considered government records under OPRA
or public records under DPRL and are to be retained as follows:
(1) E-mail messages that have significant administrative, legal and/or
fiscal value and are scheduled as permanent also should be
categorized under the appropriate record series. These may
include but are not limited to:
(a) Executive correspondence.
[1] Correspondence of the head of an agency dealing with
significant aspects of the administration of their offices.
Correspondence includes information concerning agency
policies, program, fiscal and personnel matters.
[2] Retention shall be three years, then, periodic review for
transfer to archives in accordance with standards and
protocols.
(b) Departmental policies and procedures.
[1] Includes published reports, unpublished substantive
reports and policy studies.
[2] Retention. Retain until superseded, obsolete or replaced,
then periodic review for transfer to archives in accordance
with standards and protocols.
(c) Minutes of boards, commissions, etc. Including approved
minutes of official bodies, attachments, and transmittal
documents. This does not apply to drafts of minutes or minutes
that have not been approved. Copies may be retained in
electronic form, but retention of hard copy is required.
(2) Retention. Permanent, Periodic review for transfer to archives in
accordance with standards and protocols.
E. Distribution lists are considered government records under OPRA or
public records under DPRL and are to be retained as follows: If you
send to a "distribution list" (not a LISTSERV®, but a specified list of
individuals), you must also keep a copy of the members of that list for as
long as you are required to keep the message itself. It is of little value to
know that the "Security Alert" notice went to "SWAT Team 7," without
§ 4-113 UNION CITY CODE § 4-113
1:130
knowing whether "Arnold S." received the message. Nicknames present
a similar problem.
§ 4-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-113
1:131

ARTICLE XXI
Public Records
§ 4-114. Inspection of public records.
§ 4-115. Fee for copies.
§ 4-116. Copying by person requesting documents.
Where the document in question is more than 100 pages in length, the Clerk
may permit the person requesting the copies to use his/her own copying
machine, provided that there is no risk of damage or mutilation of the
documents and it would not be incompatible with the transaction of public
business. Such determination shall be completely within the discretion of
the Clerk. The fee in such case shall be as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2, all records which
are required by law to be made, maintained or kept on file by any board,
body, agency, department, commission, authority or official of the City
shall be deemed to be public records. Every citizen of the state shall
have the right to inspect such records maintained by the custodian of
the records during regular business hours. During such regular
business hours and under the supervision of a representative of the
custodian, every citizen of the state shall also have the right to copy
such records by hand, and to purchase copies of the records. Copies of
records shall be made available upon the payment of the fee as
established by law.
B. Reviewing of reports, photostats of reports and viewing of accident
photographs shall be conducted at the Detective Division at Police
Headquarters, City Hall, daily Monday to Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Subsection B, where it
shall appear that the records which are sought to be examined pertain
to an investigation in progress by any body, agency, commission, board,
authority or official, the right of examination may be denied if the
inspection, copying or publication of the records would be inimical to
the public interest, provided that this provision shall not be construed
to prohibit any body, agency, commission, board, authority or official
from opening such record or records for public examination if not
otherwise prohibited by law.
A. The fees as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged for copies of
public documents.
B. No searching fees shall be charged if a report is not on file or if formally
requested by any local, county, state or federal law enforcement agency.
C. The same exceptions will be made in the case of request to view
photographs of accidents.
§ 4-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-117
1:133
§ 4-117. Disposition of fees.
A receipt shall be issued for all monies received by the Police Department
for services extended and material distributed by the Police Department, as
hereinabove set forth. All fees collected shall be transmitted daily to the Tax
Collector.
§ 4-117 UNION CITY CODE § 4-117
1:134
Chapter 12
EMERGENCY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 4-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-117
1:135

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Expenses
[Adopted 5-14-2004]
§ 12-1. Findings.
§ 12-2. Procurement of license and provider number; establishment
of payment plan.
All City officers and employees be and hereby are directed to take all
steps necessary to obtain the aforesaid license and provider number and to
establish the aforesaid payment plan based thereon.
§ 12-3. Oversight of plan billing.
The Director of Revenue and Finance and the Chief Financial Officer of the
City will be responsible for overseeing the plan's billing.
§ 12-4. Fees. [Amended 3-16-2010; 5-21-2013]
Fees for emergency medical services shall be charged as provided for in
Chapter 155, Fees.
A. The City of Union City's emergency medical services provides medical
care and transportation by certified trained personnel at the scene and
by transporting sick or injured persons to and from a medical facility.
B. The City advertised and invited bids from companies who provide
emergency medical/ambulance transport billing services.
C. One purpose of this article is to authorize certain fees to be charged to
all persons receiving emergency medical services or ambulance
transport services by the Union City Emergency Medical Services.
D. The City of Union City is about to apply to the New Jersey State
Department of Health and Senior Services for a license to administer an
emergency medical services program.
E. Upon the issuance of said license, the City will apply for a provider
number from the Federal and State Medicare/Medicaid Programs
enabling the City to institute a third-party payment plan (the "payment
plan").
F. Many or most residents have an insurance plan or Medicare/Medicaid
which provides payments to relieve their payment obligations.
G. It is in the best interests of the taxpayers of the City of Union City to
establish the payment plan in accordance with the Health Care Finance
Administration (HCFA) Guidelines so that Union City taxpayers will not
be responsible for copayments.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5
1:137
§ 12-5. Ambulance billing service.
Pursuant to a public bidding and public contracting process, the City shall
retain an ambulance billing service to serve as the third-party administrator
for the identification, processing and collection of all monies due the City
arising from the provision of emergency medical and ambulance transport
services provided by the Union City Emergency Medical Services
(hereinafter "UCEMS"), subject to the following:
§ 12-6. Annual review of records.
The Director of Revenue and Finance and the Chief Financial Officer shall
annually review the plan's cost accounting records, and the Chief Financial
Officer shall obtain the industry average for such charges.
§ 12-7. Adjustment of fees.
The Director of Revenue and Finance and the Chief Financial Officer shall
annually, no later than March 1, adjust the fee for services set forth in § 12-4
in accordance with said industry average and file a certified copy of said
fees with the City Clerk. Such revised fees shall, upon filing with the City
Clerk, have the full force and affect of law as if set forth herein.
§ 12-8. Contracts with hospitals providing advance life support
services.
The Director of Revenue and Finance and the Chief Financial Officer be
and hereby are authorized to enter into contracts on behalf of the City
with various hospitals that provide advance life support (ALS) services to
the patients that are transported by the Union City Ambulance Squad,
allowing the hospitals to bundle-bill Medicare for services rendered. Any
such contracts shall contain a provision whereby the hospital will be
required to reimburse the City for its transportation costs, and the City will
be required to pay the hospital all ALS assessments from money each party
receives respectively within 45 days of receipt of payment.
§ 12-9. Filing of copy.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the applicable federal and/
or state agencies.
A. Union City residents shall not be directly billed for payment of services
from UCEMS, for copays, or for any bill balances not paid by their
insurance company; and
B. The City reserves the right to write off any bill for UCEMS services
rendered to any person who has no insurance coverage for such
services or who meets the low- or moderate-income criteria set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:92-1.3.
§ 12-5 UNION CITY CODE § 12-9
1:138
Chapter 14
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
§ 14-1. Compliance with Statute.
The City of Union City shall comply with the residency requirements as set
forth in the New Jersey First Act, N.J.S.A. 52:14-7.
§ 14-2. Effect on current employees; definitions.
§ 14-3. Applicability; autonomous agencies.
A. No current City employee's employment shall be affected by the fact of
nonresidence at the time that this chapter is finally adopted. Current
employees who are not currently residing in City at the time of final
adoption of this chapter are expressly grandfathered hereunder. The
City reserves all other rights it may have in regards to such employees'
continued employment, except for any claims the City may have against
such continued employment on the grounds of an employee's residency
at the time of the final adoption of this chapter and except as otherwise
set out herein.
B. A bona fide "resident" is defined as any person having a single legal
residence within the City of Union City, as the term "single legal
residence" is defined in N.J.A.C. 4A:4-2.11(c).
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all municipal officers and
employees not otherwise exempt from residency requirements by
statute and also shall not apply to persons rendering special, unique or
professional services to the City of Union City, including but not limited
to doctors, architects, engineers, nurses, scientific or chemical
analysts, attorneys, accountants, auditors and planners, City Clerk,
Deputy City Clerk, subject to the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133 et seq., and Chief Financial Officer, subject to the
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., and Municipal
Judges. Further, when the appointing authority determines that there
are certain specific positions and employments, requiring special
talents or skills which are necessary for the operations of the City and
for which the appointing authority believes would benefit from
expanding the pool of applicants to New Jersey residents who are not
residents of Union City, such positions or employments so determined
shall be filled without reference to residency.
§ 12-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3
1:139
§ 14-4. Failure to maintain residency; investigation; notice of
hearing; failure to appear.
§ 14-5. Extension for compliance.
B. Wherever possible, autonomous or semiautonomous municipal
agencies or authorities of the City of Union City shall adhere to the
residency policy set forth in this chapter when hiring employees, agents
or servants.
C. With respect to the positions of police officer and civilian dispatcher
and candidates for these positions, residency, for purposes of
consideration of appointment to the employ of the City and inclusion on
any Civil Service employment eligibility list for the City, shall be as of
the date of appointment, and residency must be continuously
maintained from the closing date of the examination up to and including
the date of appointment to the employ of the City.
A. Failure of any employee to maintain residency in the City, when
required to do so under the terms of this chapter, shall be cause for
removal or discharge from service.
B. Investigations of residence authorized. The Mayor and Commissioners
of the City of Union City, or a duly appointed agent, are hereby
authorized to investigate into the residency of any officer, employee or
appointee to any board and to require the officer, employee or
appointee to any board to produce proof of bona fide residence. The
standards as set forth in N.J.A.C. 4A:4-2.11 shall be used to make the
residence determination.
C. Notice of charges of nonresidence; hearing. The officer, employee or
appointee to any board shall be given a ten-day notice setting forth the
charge that he is not a bona fide resident of the City of Union City. The
notice shall also set forth the time and place of hearing to be held by the
Mayor and Commissioners, and the officer, employee or appointee to
any board shall be entitled to a full hearing.
D. Failure to appear to comply with requirements shall be cause for
dismissal. Failure of any officer, employee or appointee to any board of
the City of Union City, other than those who have a statutory exemption,
to appear at the time and place of the hearing set forth in the notice or
to comply with the residence requirements shall be sufficient cause for
his removal or discharge from service.
E. In the event an employee does not maintain bona fide residency when
required to do so, the hiring authority shall notify said employee that
failure to again take up bona fide residency in the local unit within six
months of such notification will result in removal or discharge from
service. Such removal or discharge shall take effect on the date
specified in such notice, but any employee so removed or discharged
shall have the right to such appeals as are available pursuant to law.
§ 14-3 UNION CITY CODE § 14-5
1:140
§ 14-6. Hiring of nonresidents: all employees other than police.
A. The Mayor and Board of Commissioners are hereby authorized, upon
written application by the officer or employee and for good cause, to
extend compliance with this chapter for a period up to but not
exceeding six months.
B. No application for an extension of time shall be granted unless it is
submitted to the Mayor, in writing.
C. No application for an extension of time shall be granted unless the
applicant states, in writing, his or her intention to become a bona fide
resident of Union City within the time period, as extended.
D. In considering good cause for an extension of time, the Mayor and
Board of Commissioners shall take into consideration the length of time
the applicant has been a nonresident; problems related to the sale of a
home or in the purchase of a home within Union City; financial
problems concerning existing leases; difficulties in locating suitable
quarters or facilities within Union City; completion of school terms of
the applicant's children; financial hardships; and such other matters
that may create an undue burden on the applicant's family if an
extension of time is not granted.
A. Where the appointing authority shall determine that there cannot be
recruited a sufficient number of qualified residents for available specific
positions or employments, the appointing authority may, in its
discretion, hire nonresidents for such positions or employments; with
applicants to be classified in the following manner in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1.6:
(1) Class I: Residents of Union City.
(2) Class II: Other residents of Hudson County.
(3) Class III: Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(4) Class IV: All other qualified applicants.
B. Within each classification, duly qualified applicants who are veterans
shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are provided by law.
C. The classifications as set forth in this section shall apply only to initial
appointments and not to promotional appointments of persons who are
already employed by the City.
D. When the necessity arises to invoke this section, the hiring authority
shall first appoint all those in Class I and then those in each succeeding
class in the order above listed and shall appoint a person or persons in
any such class only to a position or positions of employment or
employments remaining after all qualified applicants in the preceding
class or classes have been appointed or have declined an offer of
appointment. The preference established by this section shall in no way
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-6
1:141
§ 14-7. Hiring of nonresidents: Police Department.
§ 14-8. Preemption by requirement to eliminate discrimination.
Any requirements concerning eligibility, appointment or promotion
contained in any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter
shall be subject to any order issued by any court, or by any state or federal
agency pursuant to law, with respect to a requirement of action to eliminate
discrimination in employment based upon race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital status or sex.
diminish, reduce or affect the preferences granted pursuant to any
other provisions of the law.
A. Where the appointing authority shall determine that there cannot be
recruited a sufficient number of qualified residents for available specific
positions or employments, the appointing authority may, in its
discretion, hire nonresidents for such positions or employments; with
applicants to be classified in the following manner in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a:
(1) Class I: Residents of Union City.
(2) Class II: Other residents of Hudson County.
(3) Class III: Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(4) Class IV: All other qualified applicants.
B. Within each classification, duly qualified applicants who are veterans
shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are provided by law.
C. The classifications as set forth in this section shall apply only to initial
appointments and not to promotional appointments of persons who are
already employed by the City.
D. When the necessity arises to invoke this section, the hiring authority
shall first appoint all those in Class I and then those in each succeeding
class in the order above listed and shall appoint a person or persons in
any such class only to a position or positions of employment or
employments remaining after all qualified applicants in the preceding
class or classes have been appointed or have declined an offer of
appointment. The preference established by this section shall in no way
diminish, reduce or affect the preferences granted pursuant to any
other provisions of the law.
§ 14-6 UNION CITY CODE § 14-8
1:142
Chapter 16
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 81. Parking — See Ch. 284.
§ 16-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein.
§ 16-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in current
use in the City.
§ 16-3. Parking.
16-3.1. Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A.
39:4-138, or any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
16-3.2. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking
upon the streets or sections of streets where temporary
EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of
Police, his/her designee or in his/her absence the ranking police
officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require
the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with
the free flow of traffic. Notification that the EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are being, or will be, posted shall be given the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to
the posting of the signs.
b. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on the main
traveled or major roadways or portions thereof as described in
Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter. The above
parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
§ 14-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:143
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the
extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
16-3.3. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. When signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule II
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
16-3.4. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. No
person shall park a vehicle on the days and between the hours specified
in Schedule III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
16-3.5. Special parking provisions.
a. Stopping or parking restricted or prohibited on certain private
property. Parking is prohibited at all times on certain private
property owned by the Washington Urban Renewal Corporation or
its successors. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no
person shall park a vehicle, unless vehicles permitted to be parked
shall be properly identified, at any time in or upon the private
parking area of the Washington Towers apartments located at 5th
Street and Central Avenue more particularly referred to as the area
to the east and north of the apartment building at 500 Central
Avenue, and containing parking space for approximately 300 cars,
when not authorized by the Washington Urban Renewal
Corporation or its successors.
b. All night parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner,
operator or corporation to park any truck, tractor, tractor trailer
combination, omnibus, trailer, commuter van or any vehicle having
a gross weight in excess of 4,000 pounds on any streets or parts of
streets in the City between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The
prohibition of this section shall not apply to passenger cars, station
wagons or noncommercial vans, but shall apply to vehicles utilized
as commercial motor vehicles as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
c. Exceptions. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
1. Vehicles of the City, fire apparatus, ambulances or vehicles
engaged in the work of a public utility.
2. Vehicles actually engaged in making deliveries or rendering
services in or upon the property adjacent to the street where
such vehicle is parked.
3. Any recreational motor vehicle, travel trailer or house trailer,
camper or boat trailer, provided that such vehicle is parked on
private property and is parked in a manner so that no portion
of the vehicle on the abutting property shall extend closer to
the street than the front of the main portion of the building
used for occupancy on the same premises, excluding any
porch.
§ 16-3 UNION CITY CODE § 16-3
1:144
d. Violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or subject
to a penalty of 30 days in jail, or both.
16-3.6. Municipal parking lots. There shall be two municipal parking lots.
a. Locations.
1. Underground parking lot. The first municipal parking lot is
located under the municipal building addition, having its
entrance on Palisade Avenue, located near the 37th Street side
of the municipal building. This municipal parking lot shall be
known as the "underground parking lot."
2. Rear parking lot. The second municipal parking lot is located in
the rear of the 38th Street side of the municipal building,
having its entrance on the 38th Street side, behind the Police
Department. This municipal parking lot shall be known as the
"rear parking lot."
b. Access and use of lots. Both parking lots shall be for restricted
parking only.
1. Underground parking lot. Five parking spaces shall be
assigned for the use of the Mayor and members of the Board of
Commissioners. All other parking spaces shall be for the use of
certain City officials as assigned and authorized by the Mayor.
2. Rear parking lot. Parking spaces shall be assigned as follows:
(a) One parking space for the use of the Chief of Police.
(b) Two parking spaces for the use of two Deputy Chiefs of
Police.
(c) Two parking spaces for the use of prisoner transport
vehicles.
(d) Five parking spaces to be assigned by the Director of the
Department of Parks and Public Property for the use of
municipal maintenance vehicles.
(e) One designated parking space for handicapped residents
doing business in the municipal building.
c. Removal of illegally parked vehicles. Any unoccupied vehicle
parked or standing in violation of this section shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
parking, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:145
d. Parking for Commissioners. There are hereby designated five
parking spaces in the municipal parking lot for the exclusive use of
members of the Board of Commissioners. Each space shall be
assigned and marked by proper signage restricting parking to only
those members.
e. Parking for Municipal Judge. There is hereby designated one
parking space in the municipal parking lot for the exclusive use of
the Municipal Court Judge. This space shall be assigned and
marked by proper signage, restricting parking only to the
Municipal Judge.
16-3.7. Residential permit parking program. [Added 7-1-2013 by Ord. No.
16-20138]
a. Residential only parking permit. The current residential parking
program shall be amended as follows, effective January 1, 2014:9
1. At all times, from Monday through Saturday, 24 hours per day,
except on announced holidays, parking shall be permitted only
for those vehicles displaying a valid residential decal, business
placard or visitor hangtag.
2. A resident, for purposes of this subsection shall be defined as:
(a) Any natural person holding title to real property located
within the confines of the City of Union City;
(b) Any natural person occupying on a regular basis any rental
unit pursuant to a written lease either for residential or
commercial purposes;
(c) For a corporation having a principal place of business
within the confines of the City of Union City, its chief
executive or his or her designee; or
(d) Any other person who can legally demonstrate residence
within the City of Union City.
3. The Parking Authority of the City of Union City (hereinafter to
be referred as the "Parking Authority") shall cause appropriate
signs to be posted and updated as necessary, prohibiting all
parking, except parking by the holders of permits, placards
and hangtags, to be granted only under the terms and
conditions found in Subsection b.2.
4. A resident motor vehicle, business motor vehicle, City
employee vehicle, or temporary motor vehicle on which is
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Subsection 16-3.7, as amended.
9. Editor's Note: The Mayor and Commissioners adopted Ord. No. 2-2014 on 1-7-2014,
staying the enforcement of Ord. No. 16-2013 until 7-1-2014; and subsequently adopted an
ordinance on 4-7-2015, staying the enforcement of Ord. No. 16-2013 until 7-1-2016.
§ 16-3 UNION CITY CODE § 16-3
1:146
displayed a valid resident decal, visitor hangtag, or business
or professional parking permit as provided for herein shall be
permitted to stand or be parked within the confines of the City
of Union City without being limited by time restrictions or area
prohibitions established pursuant to this subsection. All other
motor vehicles, other than vehicles where the operator or the
passenger being transported by such a vehicle is physically
disabled and the vehicle displays a license or placard issued
under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, shall be subject to
the prohibitions adopted by this subsection.
b. Residential parking permit: fees; expiration. The following rules
and regulations shall apply as they pertain to the resident-only
parking program:
1. A resident decal of a design specified by the Parking Authority
will be issued to the owner of a vehicle, where such vehicle is
owned or leased by a person residing in the City of Union City,
provided such vehicle is a gross weight of not more than 3.8
tons. Such permit will be issued upon payment of an
administrative fee of $15. City of Union City residents 62 years
of age or older will be exempt from the aforementioned
administrative fee.
2. Proof of the vehicle's owner or lessee must be presented when
applying for a residential decal or visitor hangtags. Without
limitation, acceptable proof of entitlement to a resident decal
shall be established by a minimum of two of the following:
(a) A valid New Jersey driver's license bearing a valid Union
City address;
(b) A valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration for the
vehicle for which the permit is sought, bearing a valid
Union City address;
(c) A current motor vehicle lease, whose named lessee
possesses a valid Union City address;
(d) A deed or lease evidencing a right to possess a dwelling or
commercial unit within the confines of the City of Union
City;
(e) A notarized letter from a landlord reflecting an address
within the City of Union City;
(f) Current bank statements evidencing a valid Union City
address.
3. Resident permits shall expire every third calendar year; and
business permits and professional permits shall expire every
calendar year, as reasonably determined by the Parking
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:147
Authority. Any vehicle bearing an expired resident permit,
business permit or professional permit which shall park on a
street in the City of Union City shall be subject to the same
penalty as a vehicle having no such permit as set forth in
Subsection j.
c. Temporary permits.
1. Any owner of or lessee of any residential or commercial
property in the City of Union City, which owner or lessee does
not possess a valid New Jersey registration or New Jersey
motor vehicle operator's license, shall not be eligible for the
traditional resident permit. Any such owner or lessee, upon
presentation of proof of a deed, mortgage, lease or letter from
the property owner to the Parking Authority, shall receive a
thirty-day temporary resident parking permit. Such permit
shall issue only upon payment of an administrative fee of $10
for said thirty-day temporary permit.
2. Upon expiration of the initial temporary permit, a holder of
such permit may reapply to the Parking Authority for one
additional thirty-day permit pursuant to the terms specified in
Subsection c.1. The subsequent thirty-day resident parking
permit shall be reissued only upon payment of the
administrative fees specified in Subsection c.1.
d. Daily visitor parking permit hangtags. Visitor hangtags of a design
specified by the Parking Authority will be issued to any resident of
the City of Union City who meets the following qualifications and
requirements:
1. A resident who would be eligible for a Parking Permit pursuant
to the qualifications outlined in Subsection a, provided no
other person in the same household has been issued a resident
parking permit.
2. Daily visitor parking permit hangtags may be purchased from
the Parking Authority individually for $1 per daily permit or as
book of 30 daily permits for $25. Visitor hangtags shall not be
resold, transferred or assigned. Visitor hangtags are for use by
visitors only, while visitors are actively visiting the households
to which the hangtags are issued. Use of a visitor permit other
than as permitted by this subsection will constitute a violation
of this subsection and may result in issuance of a summons or
revocation of the applicant's privilege to obtain additional
visitor permits for a period of one year, or both.
3. All daily visitor parking permit hangtags are to be displayed
prominently in the front windshield where they are easily
visible and fully readable from the exterior of the vehicle.
§ 16-3 UNION CITY CODE § 16-3
1:148
4. Daily visitor parking permit hangtags shall not be required on
announced legal holidays.
e. Business permits.
1. Business establishments located in the City of Union City may
obtain a business parking permit for any nonresident employee
or business owner of such business establishment who
commutes into Union City for purposes of fulfilling his or her
obligations to such business.
2. "Union City business establishment" shall be deemed to
include, without limitation, the City of Union City and all its
government agencies, Board of Education, Parking Authority
and day-care centers.
3. All requests for business permits shall be made in writing on a
form designated by the Parking Authority and shall be
executed by the owner, CEO or responsible officer of the
employer (or a director, in the case of the City of Union City, or
the business manager or secretary, in the case of the Union
City Board of Education, or the Chief of Police or his or her
designee, in the case of the Union City Police Department).
4. The Parking Authority shall be entitled to obtain periodic
verification of all relevant information and shall have the
authority to invalidate or not renew any business permit issued
pursuant to this subsection if the information indicates that
nonentitlement is appropriate.
5. The nonresident business owner or employee shall pay a fee of
$50 for a business permit. All fees shall be paid to the Parking
Authority. Business permits shall be valid for a period of one
calendar year. All fees collected by the Parking Authority
pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the veto of the
Board of Commissioners.
f. Exceptions. The restrictions contained herein shall not apply to the
following categories of vehicles under the following circumstances:
1. Service and delivery vehicles. Service and delivery vehicles
bearing commercial license plates and/or the name and
address of a commercial business may park without a resident
permit, business permit or visitor hangtag, provided said
vehicle is in the actual performance of its duties or rendering
the required service, not to exceed four hours.
2. Contractors. Contractors may park in resident parking areas
only after having made application to the Parking Authority
and having provided written documentation from the Union
City Building Department that such work is known, approved
and ongoing. The fee associated with such permits shall not
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:149
exceed $15 per day and may only be used Monday through
Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
3. Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles and public service,
telephone and other utility vehicles may park without a
resident permit, business permit or visitor hangtag during the
time required to render assistance to persons, complete
needed repairs and/or effectuate improvements to any facility
under their control within the area.
4. Nonprofit institutions or corporations. As is reasonably
determined by the Parking Authority, such institution or
corporation which maintains an office in the City of Union City
may be issued resident parking permits for vehicles which are
registered in the name of the nonprofit entity and which are
housed in the City of Union City, without charge, pursuant to
Subsection a.2(c). The issuance of such permit shall be subject
to appropriate and periodic verification as to the continued
qualification for the same as reasonably determined by the
Parking Authority.
g. Authority.
1. The Parking Authority shall have the authority to formulate and
promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this
subsection to effectuate the purposes set out in the preamble
of this subsection.10
2. All fees to be collected pursuant to this subsection shall be set
by the Parking Authority in its reasonable discretion and
subject to the veto of the Board of Commissioners.
3. A schedule of all applicable fees set pursuant to this subsection
shall be available for public inspection during regular business
hours at the office of the Parking Authority and at the office of
the City Clerk.
h. Adjoining communities.
1. In the event that any community adjoining or abutting the City
of Union City shall institute or shall have instituted an
ordinance, resolution, or other policy enforcing a residentsonly
parking program applicable to any street, the center line
of which serves as the boundary between the City of Union City
and the adjoining or abutting community, that in exchange for
reciprocal provisions in the ordinance of the adjoining or
abutting community, those vehicles displaying a valid resident
or visitor permit issued by the adjoining or abutting community
shall have the privilege of parking on that portion of the
10.Editor's Note: The complete text of Ord. No. 16-2013, including the preamble, is on file in
the City offices.
§ 16-3 UNION CITY CODE § 16-3
1:150
boundary street under the jurisdiction of Union City, should the
like privilege be extended to vehicles displaying a valid City
of Union City resident decal or visitor hangtag, allowing same
the privilege of parking on that portion of the boundary street
under the jurisdiction of the adjoining or abutting community.
2. Pursuant to this subsection, the Corporation Counsel shall
evaluate any ordinance, resolution or other policy enforcing
resident-only parking passed by any adjoining or abutting
community and present to the Board of Commissioners its
opinion as to substantial compliance with the terms of this
subsection. The Board of Commissioners shall then exercise its
discretion in determining whether such ordinance, resolution
or policy shall be sufficiently reciprocal to extend such
privileges as provided by this subsection. Further, the
Corporation Counsel shall be authorized to conduct
discussions with any community adjoining or abutting the City
of Union City to assist in negotiations to effect such ordinances
as may be necessary or such modifications to existing
ordinances of the abutting or adjoining communities to render
same to be substantially reciprocal to the terms of this
subsection.
i. Reciprocity with the Township of Weehawken.
1. Those vehicles bearing valid resident parking permits or visitor
hangtags issued by the Township of Weehawken shall be
permitted to park such vehicles on the portions of those streets
under the control of the City, in accord with the terms of this
subsection and any rules and regulations implementing this
subsection as are applicable to vehicles bearing valid City of
Union City parking permits or visitor hangtags, as designated
on the schedule below:
(a) Palisade Avenue, from the southwest intersection of 27th
Street to the northwest intersection of 20th Street.
(b) Park Avenue, from 32nd Street to 49th Street.
2. Those vehicles not bearing a valid parking permit or visitor
hangtag issued by the Township of Weehawken or the
Weehawken Parking Authority, and/or by the City of Union City
or an approved agency thereof, found parked on those portions
of the streets designated above shall be subject to any or all of
the penalty provisions of the resident parking program,
pursuant to this subsection.
j. Violations and penalties.
1. Any vehicle parked on a street in the City of Union City without
a valid and current resident parking permit, temporary permit,
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:151
business permit or daily visitor hangtag shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $60.
2. The Parking Authority may refuse to issue a parking permit to
any person or persons where it finds that the applicant
purposely provided false information on an application thereof.
3. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subsection for a
person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto
to permit the use of such permit on any motor vehicle other
than that for which the permit was issued. Anyone in
possession of a parking permit who misuses or allows the
misuse of a permit is subject to a fine of $100 for the first
offense and a fine of $200 for any subsequent offense.
4. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subsection for a
person to copy, reproduce or otherwise bring into existence a
facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or permits. A violation
of this subsection shall be a disorderly persons offense. The
person committing the aforementioned act shall also be
subject to a penalty of $750 for the first offense and a fine of
$1,200 for each subsequent offense, and/or imprisonment for
not more than five days. A person committing the
aforementioned act may also be sentenced to community
service for up to 30 days for each such violation.
5. In the event that a Union City resident is issued a summons for
a violation of the resident parking program, that resident may,
at the time scheduled for hearing in the Municipal Court:
(a) Produce evidence that the person has in fact been issued a
valid resident parking permit. Such person or persons
shall be afforded a single, one-time affirmative defense to
the alleged violation, regardless of the date upon which
the said permit was issued.
(b) Upon presentation of sufficient evidence that the person
was a resident at the time of the alleged offense, the
person may request an adjournment of the matter from the
court for a reasonable period of time during which time
the person may make an application to the Parking
Authority for a resident parking permit. The person may
then present the resident parking permit at the time of the
adjournment hearing date which shall provide an
affirmative defense to the alleged violation.
(c) The aforementioned affirmative defense offered to the City
resident for a violation of the resident parking program
shall be limited to one violation of the resident parking
program and shall be unavailable for subsequent
violations.
§ 16-3 UNION CITY CODE § 16-3
1:152
6. Any vehicle parked on a street in the City of Union City without
a valid resident permit, temporary permit, business permit or
visitor hangtag will have a two-hour grace period, after which
the vehicle will be subject to being ticketed and towed.
k. Payment of sums to Parking Authority. The Union City Parking
Authority shall receive from the City of Union City the sum of $8 for
each summons written in the City for violation of Subsection j.1 of
the within subsection and a sum equal to 50% for each summons
written in the City for violation of Subsections j.2 and j.3. Said sums
shall be paid to the Parking Authority only for those parking
violations where the applicable fine has been collected by the City
of Union City Municipal Court and paid to the City of Union City.
l. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with
the provisions of this subsection are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency.
m. Severability. All provisions of this subsection are severable, and if
any portion of this subsection shall be held to be invalid, the
remaining portions of this subsection shall not be invalidated.
n. When effective. This subsection shall be effective upon passage,
approval and publication in accordance with law.
o. Codification. This subsection shall be part of the Union City Revised
Ordinances as though codified and fully set forth therein. The City
Clerk shall have this subsection codified and incorporated in the
official copies of the Union City Ordinances.
p. Implementation. This subsection shall take effect at the time and in
the manner as provided by law.
q. Authority to issue summonses. The Parking Authority and the
Union City Police Department shall have the power and the
authority to issue summonses for violations of this subsection;
provided, however, that in the case of a summons issued for misuse
of a resident permit, such summonses shall be issued by the
Municipal Court of the City of Union City.
r. Enforcement. Enforcement of this subsection and further rules and
regulations as may be promulgated from time to time shall be
under the jurisdiction of either the Union City Parking Authority
and/or the Union City Police Department, as determined by the
Director of Public Safety.
16-3.8. Permitted parking in front of private driveways. [Added 2-4-2003]
(a) In general. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.3 et seq., parking
of motor vehicles in front of private driveways shall be permitted in
the following instances; provided, however, that there is not
otherwise space for parking within the driveway, that such parking
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:153
§ 16-4. Traffic restrictions.
is entirely within and parallel to the street, is not otherwise
prohibited and does not interfere with the safe and normal flow of
traffic:
(1) Whenever both the motor vehicle and driveway involved are
owned by the same person;
(2) Whenever the motor vehicle is owned by a member of the same
household as the owner of the private driveway; or
(3) Whenever the owner of the private driveway authorizes the
parking of a motor vehicle in front of the private driveway.11
16-3.9. (Reserved)
16-3.10. Parking of commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles may park on
any street within the City of Union City, subject to the restrictions of
Section 16-3.11. [Added 7-5-2005; amended 10-18-2011]
16-3.11. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16-3.10 above, no
commercial vehicle may park on any City streets between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the commercial vehicle can meet all of
the conditions set forth in Section 16-3.8 of this chapter. [Added
10-18-2011; amended 5-21-2013]
16-4.1. Limiting the use of streets to a certain class of vehicle. Trucks over
four tons' gross weight are excluded from streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule V, attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except for the pickup and delivery of materials.
16-4.2. One-way streets designated. The streets or parts of streets
designated in Schedule VI, attached to and made a part of this chapter,
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
16-4.3. Through streets. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII, attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets.
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where YIELD signs are provided
for in the designations.
16-4.4. Stop intersections designated. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule VIII, attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop
intersections. STOP signs shall be installed as provided therein.
16-4.5. Left turns.
11.Editor's Note: Original subsections (b) through (f), pertaining to permits, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 16-3 UNION CITY CODE § 16-4
1:154
a. No person shall make a left-hand turn on South Marginal Highway
at Pleasant Avenue.
b. No person shall make a left-hand turn on South Bergenline Avenue
at 49th Street. [Added 6-17-2003]
16-4.6. (Reserved)
16-4.7. Traffic control signals.
a. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at certain
intersections as specified in Schedule IX, attached to and made a
part of this chapter. Such installations shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq., and shall conform in design
and be maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
b. A resolution will be adopted setting forth the Traffic Control Signal
Maintenance Program Regulations. [Added 3-21-2006]
16-4.8. No right turns. No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn
when facing a steady red (STOP) indication at any of the locations
specified in Schedule XI, which is attached to and made a part of this
chapter, whenever an official sign is present prohibiting such a turn on
the red signal.
16-4.9. Loading zones. The locations described in Schedule XII, attached to
and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading
zones.
16-4.10. Bus/commuter vehicle stops.
a. Locations. The locations described in Schedule XIII, attached to
and made a part of this chapter, shall be designated as the only
areas within the City that buses or any other commuter vehicles, as
licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation, shall stop for the purpose of loading and unloading
commuters. These locations shall have installed the appropriate
signage and markings, as provided by law.
b. Exceptions. The only exception permitted and in accordance with
the New Jersey Transit Request-A-Stop program, passengers may
request to disembark at areas not designated as "Bus/Commuter
Vehicle Stop" areas only between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 4:00
a.m.
c. Bus stop length. The bus stops lengths shall be as follows:
§ 16-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4
1:155
Near side: 90 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end
of the curb return, property line or crosswalk to the total length of
105 feet.
Far side: 85 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end of
the curb return, property line or crosswalk to the total length of
105 feet.
Mid-block (no intersection on either side of roadway): Standard
length is 135 feet.
d. Locations. [Added 10-21-2003; amended 2-3-2004]
(1) Parking is hereby permitted in the bus/commuter vehicle stops
listed in Schedule XIII between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. the following day, except as follows:
(a) Parking shall not be permitted in the bus stops listed in
Schedule XIII on 30th and 31st Streets; exempt; and
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein with respect to
Bergenline Avenue, parking shall be permitted in the bus
stops listed in Schedule XIII on Bergenline and New York
Avenues, north of Route 495, only between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. Further,
parking shall be permitted in the bus stops along
Bergenline and New York Avenues, south of Route 495,
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, parking shall not be
permitted in the bus stops listed in Schedule XIII on
Bergenline Avenue between 30th Street and 47th Street at
any time.
(2) Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in a bus/commuter
vehicle stop at any time other than that permitted by this
section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe
and proper regulation of parking and operation of buses and
commuter vehicles.
(3) Any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
16-4.11. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in
Schedule XIV, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Four-way STOP signs and
PEDESTRIAN signs shall be installed at the intersections listed in
Schedule X. [Added 11-16-2005]
16-4.12. It shall be unlawful to park or operate any type of vehicle in a
manner that will in any way block or obstruct access to curb cuts
§ 16-4 UNION CITY CODE § 16-4
1:156
§ 16-5. Washington Park Towers regulations.
located on any sidewalk or walkway or any other public place
throughout the City of Union City. [Added 11-16-2005]
16-4.13. Pedestrian crosswalks. [Added 8-5-2008]
a. There should be installed a marked pedestrian crosswalk at the
intersection of Park Avenue and 39th Street at the northwest
corner.
(1) No operator of a vehicle shall fail to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians in or at the marked pedestrian crosswalk at the
intersection of Park Avenue and 39th Street.
(2) Any person violating this section shall be liable to the penalties
set forth in Section 16-6 of this chapter.
b. There shall be installed a marked pedestrian crosswalk at the
intersection of Park Avenue and 41st Street at the northwest
corner.
1. No operator of a vehicle shall fail to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians in or at the marked pedestrian crosswalk at the
intersection of Park Avenue and 41st Street.
2. Any person violating this section shall be liable to the penalties
set forth in Section 16-6 of this chapter.
c. There shall be installed a marked mid-street pedestrian crosswalk
at 900 22nd Street and in-street signs marking the pedestrian
crosswalk which shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
1. No operator of a vehicle shall fail to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians in or at the marked pedestrian crosswalk in 22nd
Street.
2. Any person violating this section shall be liable to the penalties
set forth in Section 16-6 of this chapter.
16-5.1. Parking in designated areas. All vehicles must park only in
designated areas and between the lines provided.
16-5.2. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide and signed with
R7-8, RESERVED PARKING sign and penalty plate, in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
16-5.3. Permit parking. All lots have parking by permit only.
16-5.4. Parking time limited. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than
the time limit indicated upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described:
§ 16-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:157
Name of Lot Time Limit Location
Lot A 30 minutes As indicated on site plan
16-5.5. Reserved parking. Parking Lot A has reserved parking as indicated
on the site plan. All vehicles must be properly identified.
16-5.6. Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of
Streets Sides Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
16-5.7. Tow away. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
16-5.8. Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. STOP signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Main Drive and Central Avenue Main Drive
Road A and 4th Street Road A
Road B and Central Avenue Road B
16-5.9. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
Parking on these streets will be permitted on the sides indicated below:
Name of
Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Main Drive East From south
intersect with
Central Avenue to
north intersect
with Central
Avenue
None
16-5.10. Speed limits.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on all roads shall be 15
miles per hour for their entire length.
§ 16-5 UNION CITY CODE § 16-5
1:158
§ 16-6. Violations and penalties.
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
16-5.11. Installation of signs. All signs, posts or other necessary materials
shall be installed and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked
by the Police Department to ensure installations meet state and federal
specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
16-5.12. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of
this section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $101 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
16-6.1. General penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by
New Jersey Statute, a person convicted of a violation of this chapter or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
16-6.2. Specific penalties. The following penalties shall supplement the
Violations Bureau Schedule of Penalties. [Amended 12-2-2003;
1-18-2005; 10-18-2011; 2-21-2012; 9-1-2015; 12-15-2015]
Description of Violation Penalty
Overtime (meter) parking $23
Fire hydrant/fire zone $100
Clean sweep $33
Prohibited area/trespassing $40
Abandoned vehicle:
First offense $100 and possible loss of
driving privilege for up to two
years
Any subsequent offense Possible loss of driving privilege
for up to five years
Double parking $44
Driveway $40
Sidewalk $38
Bus stop $35
Crosswalk $35
Loading zone $35
Improper parking $35
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6
1:159
§ 16-7. School zones. [Added 2-6-2008; amended 10-6-2015]
The following school zones will have a speed limit of 15 miles per hour:
Description of Violation Penalty
Obstruction $35
No parking during emergencies $35
No parking of any commercial
vehicles on Monday through Friday
from 6:00 p.m. to 8:30 a.m.
Minimum of $150, and not to
exceed $500
No parking of any commercial
vehicles on Saturdays from 2:30
p.m. to 9:30 a.m.
Minimum of $150, and not to
exceed $500
No parking of any commercial
vehicles on Sundays and legal
holidays, except for emergency work
which has been previously
determined and authorized by the
Construction Code Official and City
Engineer
Minimum of $150, and not to
exceed $500
No truck parking (9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.)
$100
Handicapped parking $253
Commercial overtime parking $65
Three dollars of the penalties listed in the specific penalties, above,
shall be dedicated by rider to the Union City Parking Authority for uses
as established by the Authority. One dollar shall be dedicated to the
state pursuant to law. The remainder shall be issued to the City. These
increases proposed shall be subject to all applicable state and local
approvals.
a. Washington School on 39th Street from New York Avenue to Bergenline
Avenue and on 40th Street from New York Avenue to Bergenline Avenue
and on New York Avenue from 39th Street to 40th Street and on
Bergenline Avenue from 39th Street to 40th Street.
b. Roosevelt School on Roosevelt Street from Hudson Avenue to Palisade
Avenue and on 46th Street from Hudson Avenue to Palisade Avenue and
on Palisade Avenue from Roosevelt Street to 46th Street and on Hudson
Avenue from Roosevelt Street to 46th Street.
c. Robert Waters School on 29th Street from Summit Avenue to Central
Avenue and on 28th Street from Summit Avenue to Central Avenue and
on Summit Avenue from 28th Street to 29th Street and on Central
Avenue from 28th Street to 29th Street.
§ 16-6 UNION CITY CODE § 16-7
1:160
d. Edison School on 4th Street from Central Avenue to West Street and on
8th Street from Central Avenue to West Street and on Central Avenue
from 4th Street to 8th Street and on West Street from 4th Street to 8th
Street.
e. Jose Marti School on 18th Street from Summit Avenue to West Street
and on 21st Street from Summit Avenue to West Street and on Summit
Avenue from 18th Street to 21st Street and on West Street from 18th
Street to 21st Street.
f. Jefferson School on 34th Street from Hudson Avenue to Palisade Avenue
and on 35th Street from Hudson Avenue to Palisade Avenue and on
Hudson Avenue from 34th Street to 35th Street and on Palisade Avenue
from 34th Street to 35th Street.
g. Veterans Memorial School on 14th Street from Summit Avenue to
Central Avenue and on 15th Street from Summit Avenue to Central
Avenue and on Summit Avenue from 14th Street to 15th Street and on
Central Avenue from 14th Street to 15th Street.
h. Early Childhood Education Center on Kennedy Boulevard from 22nd
Street to 23rd Street and on Kerrigan Avenue from 22nd Street to 23rd
Street and on 22nd Street from Kennedy Boulevard to Kerrigan Avenue
and on 23rd Street from Kennedy Boulevard to Kerrigan Avenue.
i. Colin Powell Elementary School on New York Avenue from 15th Street
to 16th Street and on Palisade Avenue from 15th Street to 16th Street
and on 15th Street from New York Avenue to Palisade Avenue and on
16th Street from New York Avenue to Palisade Avenue.
j. Emerson Middle School on Bergenline to Palisade Avenue from 18th
Street to 19th Street and on New York Avenue from 18th Street to 19th
Street and on 18th Street from Palisade Avenue to New York Avenue
and on 19th Street from Palisade Avenue to New York Avenue.
k. Union Hill Middle School on Hudson Avenue from 38th Street to 39th
Street and on Park Avenue from 38th Street to 39th Street and on 38th
Street from Hudson Avenue to Park Avenue and on 39th Street from
Hudson Avenue to Park Avenue.
l. Union City High School on Kennedy Boulevard from 24th Street to 26th
Street and on Summit Avenue from 24th Street to 26th Street and on
24th Street from Kennedy Boulevard to Summit Avenue and on 26th
Street from Kennedy Boulevard to Summit Avenue.
m. Hudson School on 19th Street from Cliff Street to Mountain Road and
on 18th Street from Cliff Street to Mountain Road and on Cliff Street
from 18th Street to 19th Street and on Mountain Road from 18th Street
to 19th Street.
n. Academy for Enrichment Advancement on Summit Avenue from 22nd
Street to 23rd Street and on Kerrigan Avenue from 22nd Street to 23rd
§ 16-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-7
1:161
Chapter 22
ORDINANCE GOVERNING POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
§ 22-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY WHOSE CONTRIBUTIONS ARE REGULATED BY THIS
CHAPTER —
Street and on 22nd Street from Kerrigan Avenue to Summit Avenue and
on 23rd Street from Kerrigan Avenue to Summit Avenue.
o. St. Francis Academy on Summit Avenue from 16th Street to 17th Street
and on Central Avenue from 16th Street to 17th Street and on 16th
Street from Summit Avenue to Central Avenue and on 17th Street from
Summit Avenue to Central Avenue.
p. Mother Seton School on New York Avenue from 15th Street to 16th
Street and on Bergenline Avenue from 15th Street to 16th Street and on
15th Street from New York Avenue to Bergenline Avenue and on 16th
Street from New York Avenue to Bergenline Avenue.
q. St. Augustin School on New York Avenue from 39th Street to 40th
Street and on Palisade Avenue from 39th Street to 40th Street and on
39th Street from New York Avenue to Palisade Avenue and on 40th
Street from New York Avenue to Palisade Avenue.
r. Union City Day Care Center on Hudson Avenue from 46th Street to 47th
Street and on Palisade Avenue from 46th Street to 47th Street and on
46th Street from Hudson Avenue to Palisade Avenue and on 47th Street
from Hudson Avenue to Palisade Avenue.
s. Union City Day Care Center on Kennedy Boulevard from 35th Street to
36th Street and on Bergenline Avenue from 35th Street to 36th Street
and on 35th Street from Kennedy Boulevard to Bergenline Avenue and
on 36th Street from Kennedy Boulevard to Bergenline Avenue.
A. An individual, including the individual's spouse and any child/children;
A firm, corporation, professional corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, organization, association, and any other manner and
kind of business entity;
B.
Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interests in a person or entity as defined in Subsections A and
B above and their spouses and child/children;
C.
All partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their
spouses and child/children;
D.
§ 16-7 UNION CITY CODE § 22-1
1:162
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE — Every candidate for the City of Union City
elective municipal office; every candidate committee established by or for
the benefit of a candidate for the City of Union City elective municipal office;
every joint candidate committee established in whole or in part by or for the
benefit of a candidate for the City of Union City elective municipal office;
every political party committee of the City of Union City; every political
party committee of the County of Hudson; and every political committee,
continuing political committee, or other form of association or organization
that regularly engages in the support of candidates for the City of Union
City or County of Hudson elective offices or the City of Union City municipal
or County of Hudson political parties or political party committees. The
terms in the foregoing subsection have the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C.
19:25-1.7.
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES — All
contracts for professional services and extraordinary unspecifiable services
as such term is used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
CONTRIBUTION — The meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By way of
illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans, and
in-kind contributions.
§ 22-2. Awarding public contracts to certain contributors prohibited
Any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, organization or association who has received
or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person described
in Subsection A above, more than $100,000 in compensation or income
of any kind (including, by way of illustration, and not limitation, wages,
salaries, sums paid to independent contractors, benefits, dividends,
profit sharing, pension contributions, deferred contributions, stock,
stock options or gifts), in any twelve-month period prior to the award
of, or during the term of, a contract subject to this chapter; and
E.
All persons who are an affiliate of a business entity as defined in
Subsections A, B and C above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C.
§ 101(2).
F.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the City
of Union City and any of its departments, instrumentalities or
purchasing agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise
contract to procure professional services as such term is defined at
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or
banking, insurance or other consulting service (hereinafter
"professional services"), nor extraordinary unspecified services as such
term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii) and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking
garage management or other consulting and/or management service
(hereinafter "extraordinary unspecified services") from any business
entity if such business entity has solicited or made any contribution to:
i) a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of
any candidate for elective municipal office in the City of Union City or a
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:163
holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract; or ii) to any City of Union City or County of Hudson political
committee or political party committee; or iii) to any continuing
political committee or political action committee that regularly engages
in the support of the City of Union or County of Hudson elections and/
or the City of Union City municipal or County of Hudson candidates,
candidate committees, joint candidate committees, political
committees, political parties, political party committees (hereinafter
"PAC"), in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection C within
one calendar year immediately preceding the date of the contract or
agreement.
B. No business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations
for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the City of Union City
or any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the rendition of
professional services or extraordinary unspecified services shall
knowingly solicit or make any contribution to: i) a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective
municipal office in the City of Union City, or a holder of public office
having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract; or ii) to any
City of Union City or Hudson County political committee or political
party committee; or iii) any PAC between the time of first
communication between that business entity and the municipality
regarding a specific agreement for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services, and the later of the termination of
negotiations or rejection of any proposal, or the completion of the
performance or specified time period of that contract or agreement.
C. The monetary thresholds of this chapter are: i) a maximum of $300 per
calendar year each for any purpose to any candidate or candidate
committee for Mayor or governing body, or $500 per calendar year to
any joint candidates committee for Mayor or governing body, or $300
per calendar year to a political committee or political party committee
of the City of Union City; ii) $500 maximum per calendar year to a
Hudson County political committee or political party committee; and iii)
$500 maximum per calendar year to any PAC. However, for each
business entity party to a contract for professional or extraordinary
unspecified services as defined in Subsection A, or engaged in
negotiations for a contract defined in Subsection A, when such business
entity's contribution is aggregated with all persons defined in § 22-1,
definition of "business entity whose contributions are regulated by this
chapter," by virtue of their affiliation to that business entity party, a
maximum of $2,500 to all City of Union City candidates, candidate
committees, joint candidate committees, and holders of public office
having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, all City of
Union City or Hudson County political committees and political party
committees as described herein combined, without violating Subsection
A of this section.
§ 22-2 UNION CITY CODE § 22-2
1:164
§ 22-3. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this
chapter.
§ 22-4. Contract renewal.
No contract subject to this chapter may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this chapter if it were an initial contract.
§ 22-5. Contribution statement by business entity.
D. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be the City of
Union City Mayor or governing body, if the contract requires approval
or appropriation from the Mayor or governing body, or the Mayor of the
City of Union City, if the contract requires approval of the Mayor, or if a
public officer who is responsible for the award of a contract is
appointed by the Mayor.
E. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this chapter, if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded, nor may any
person who would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract perform substantially all of the obligations described in a
contract for professional or extraordinary services that is subject to this
chapter.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services or extraordinary unspecified services from any business entity,
the County of Hudson or its purchasing agents and departments, as the
case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from said business entity
which is the intended recipient of said contract that he/she/it has not
made a contribution in violation of § 22-2 of this chapter. The City of
Union City, its purchasing agents and departments shall be responsible
for informing the Union City governing board that the aforementioned
sworn statement has been received and that the business entity is not in
violation of this chapter, prior to awarding the contract or agreement.
B. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the City of
Union City any contributions that constitute a violation of this chapter
that are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration
of a contract. The City of Union City, its purchasing agents and
departments shall be responsible for informing the governing body
within 10 business days after receipt of said report from the business
entity or at the next Union City governing body meeting following
receipt of said report from the business entity, or whichever comes first.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-5
1:165
§ 22-6. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract for professional services
or extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of § 22-2 of
this chapter if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable
ELEC report is published, said business entity notifies the municipality in
writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the
recipient of such contribution.
§ 22-7. Exemptions.
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in § 22-2A do
not apply to contracts which are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the meaning of
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4, or are awarded in the case of emergency under N.J.S.A.
40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to a fair
and open process under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq.
§ 22-8. Violations and penalties.
C. The certification required under this section shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the City of Union City or prior
to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall be in
addition to any other certifications that may be required by any other
provision of law.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a City of Union City
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has:
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this chapter;
(2) Knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or
received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be recontributed to a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in the City of Union City, or a holder of
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, or any City of Union City or County of Hudson political
committee or political party committee, or any PAC;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which if made or solicited by the
§ 22-5 UNION CITY CODE § 22-8
1:166
§ 22-9. Citizens private right of action.
In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may
hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations to challenge
violations of this chapter, every person aggrieved by a violation of the
chapter, or any taxpayer or resident of the City of Union City has the right,
consistent with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a court of competent
jurisdiction and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of this chapter
in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain declaratory,
injunctive, or other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to
attorneys fees and costs, arising from or related to a violation of this
chapter.
§ 22-10. Indexing.
The monetary thresholds of the definition in § 22-1 of "business entity
whose contributions are regulated by this chapter" and § 22-2C of this
chapter shall be increased effective March 1 of each calendar year by the
percentage increase, in the prior calendar year, of the consumer price index
for all urban consumers (CPI-U) for the New York-Northern New Jersey-
Long Island region, rounded to the nearest $10. The Clerk of the City of
Union City shall, by no later than April 1 of each calendar year, prepare and
publish the revised thresholds on the official municipal website and in an
official municipal newspaper.
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this chapter;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this chapter; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this chapter.
B. Furthermore, any business entity that violates Subsection A(1) through
(8) shall be disqualified from eligibility for future City of Union City
contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the
violation.
C. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this chapter, or who conspires with another person to
violate any provision of this chapter, or who, with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating a violation of this chapter, solicits another
person to commit it, or aids or agrees, or attempts to aid another person
in planning or committing it, shall be subject to punishment including
fines and/or imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the
ordinances of the City of Union City.
§ 22-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-11
1:167
§ 22-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies. This repealer also expressly includes the repeal of an
ordinance captioned "An Ordinance Establishing That a Business Entity
Which Makes Political Contributions to Municipal Candidates and Municipal
Political Parties in Excess of Certain Thresholds Shall be Limited in its
Ability to Receive Public Contracts From the City of Union City," which was
adopted on March 6, 2012, and becomes effective as of April 1, 2012, shall
be deemed repealed as of the effective date that this chapter becomes law.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 40
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property — See Ch. 329.
§ 22-11 UNION CITY CODE § 22-11
1:168
ARTICLE I
Development Fees
[Adopted 7-21-2009]
§ 40-1. Purpose.
§ 40-2. Basic requirements.
§ 40-3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred
percent affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal Affordable Housing Trust
Funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. the City of Union City shall not spend development fees until COAH has
approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:169
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 40-4. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within the R-1, R, R-MF and R-HFA District(s), residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development, provided that no
increased density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(1) is permitted by way of use variance, the
developer shall be required to pay a development fee based upon
the equalized assessed value of each additional residential unit that
may be realized as a result of the aforesaid approved development.
The development fee will be based upon the equalized assessed
value at the time of the issuance of the first certificate of
occupancy. The fee schedule shall be as follows for projects where a
(d)(1) variance is granted: a fee of 1% for up to five units; a fee of
2% for six to 10 units; a fee of 3% for 11 to 15 units; a fee of 4% for
16 to 20 units; a fee of 5% for 21 to 25 units and a fee of 6% for 26
or more residential units. [Amended 1-6-2015]
(a) In the event a designated redeveloper seeks additional density
beyond that permitted in a redevelopment area, this shall be
accomplished by amendment to the existing Redevelopment
Plan, since a (d)(1) variance, as well as any other type of (d)
variance cannot be granted in a redevelopment area since said
applications must be presented to the Planning Board of the
City. It will be the responsibility of the Planning Board, acting
in concert with the City redevelopment agency and the
§ 40-3 UNION CITY CODE § 40-4
1:170
§ 40-5. Nonresidential development fees.
developer, to set an appropriate amount of either development
fees or provide for the construction of affordable housing units
in the proposed development. In no instance shall any
redeveloper be permitted to construct residential dwellings
in a redevelopment area without either including a certain
percentage of units as being affordable or paying a
development fee to the City accordingly.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure. For example, a preexisting onefamily
dwelling is remodeled into a two-family dwelling. The
development fee is only assessed against the newly added unit.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
§ 40-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-5
1:171
§ 40-6. Collection procedures.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or marketrate
development shall be subject to the development fee of 2.5%,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the City of Union City as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
§ 40-5 UNION CITY CODE § 40-6
1:172
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development, calculate the development fee, and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the City of Union City fail to determine or notify the developer of
the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due
and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set
forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.6).
H. The developer shall pay 100% of the calculated development fee
amount prior to the municipal issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the subject property.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the City of Union
City. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the
Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
§ 40-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-6
1:173
§ 40-7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the City of Union City. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the City of Union
City's affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the City
of Union City shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the
form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the
bank and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the
funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
§ 40-6 UNION CITY CODE § 40-8
1:174
§ 40-8. Use of funds.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the City of Union City's fair
share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartments, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the City of Union City for
past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal fair share plan.
One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development fees
collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal fair share plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. the City of Union City may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
§ 40-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-8
1:175
§ 40-9. Monitoring.
the City of Union City shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring
forms included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the City of Union City's housing program, as
well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms
designed by COAH.
§ 40-10. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the City of Union City to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the
City of Union City has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has
received COAH's approval of its Development Fee Ordinance. If the City
of Union City fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development
fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject
to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The City of Union City shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final site
plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall the City of Union City retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. The City of Union City
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including but not limited to salaries and
benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 40-8 UNION CITY CODE § 40-10
1:176
ARTICLE II
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 7-21-2009]
§ 40-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the City of Union City's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.
§ 40-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the City of Union City to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the City of Union City.
§ 40-13. Establishment of position; compensation; powers and
duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the City of
Union City.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the City of Union
City, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6) which may be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as the City of Union City's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the City of Union
City's fair share plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 40-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-13
1:177
§ 40-14. Administrative powers and duties.
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the City of Union City as described in § 40-14
below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the City of Union City may contract with
or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged
by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the City of Union City,
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection C above. If the City of Union City contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing
program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing
plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
A. Affirmative marketing.
(1) Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative marketing of
affordable housing units in accordance with the affirmative
marketing plan of the City of Union City and the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification.
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
§ 40-13 UNION CITY CODE § 40-14
1:178
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendixes J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
(6) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Union City when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
C. Affordability controls.
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
appropriate county's register of deeds or County Clerk's office after
the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resale and rental.
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing request from unit owners.
(1) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted units
who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the
term of their ownership;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
§ 40-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-14
1:179
bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
(3) Processing requests and making determinations on requests by
owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement.
(1) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which tax
bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such owners
that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund or other appropriate
municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as approved
by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such
affordability controls; and
(7) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
G. The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder.
§ 40-14 UNION CITY CODE § 40-14
1:180
Chapter 46
AIR POLLUTION
§ 46-1. Title and policy.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to be
injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life or to property,
or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property
throughout the City as shall be affected thereby, and excludes all aspects of
employer-employee relationships as to health and safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler, water heater, device,
mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or other apparatus,
or a group or collection of such units in the process of fuel burning for the
generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment shall be considered
incinerators, as herein defined, and not as fuel-burning equipment under
this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively for domestic
cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or scrap, or
facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — A property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Air Pollution
Control Code of the City of Union City."
B. Findings and declaration of policy. It is hereby declared that pollution of
the atmosphere by smoke, cinders, soot, fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors,
odors, dust and other contaminants is a menace to the health, welfare
and comfort of the residents of the City and a cause of substantial
damage to property. For the purpose of controlling and reducing
atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City
to minimize air pollution as herein defined and prohibit excessive
emission of the same, to establish standards governing the installation,
maintenance and operation of equipment and appurtenances relating to
combustion which are a source of air pollution and, in furtherance of
this purpose, to cooperate and coordinate these efforts with the air
pollution control program administered by the Division of
Environmental Quality of the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection Air Pollution Control Program.
§ 40-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:181
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney.
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of a building or
premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without the knowledge of
the owner thereof.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without the
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care
or control of any premises or part thereof, including but not limited to a
dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary,
including but not limited to executor, administrator, trustee, receiver,
guardian or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession
was obtained. Any person who is a lessee or sublessee or all or any part
of any premises, including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling unit,
shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion hereof so leased
or subleased.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except body wastes,
and shall include but not be limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trimmings,
leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, published by the United State Bureau of Mines, or any
chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density
which is approved by the Department of Environmental Protection of the
State of New Jersey, as the equivalent of the Ringelmann's Scale.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive and
shall include but not be limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, tin
cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Any business, trade or industry engaged in
whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material,
including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or
drums.
SMOKE — Small gas-borne particles arising from a process of combustion
in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry and shall include but not be limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 46-3. Open-air burning prohibited.
§ 46-2 UNION CITY CODE § 46-3
1:182
§ 46-4. Incinerator regulations.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life, nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning, except as
provided in Subsection B.
B. The open burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other
method of disposal can be used without hazard to health or property
and the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by the
Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection in accordance with Chapter 11, Section 1.4, of the New
Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
A. Smoke emissions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke
from any incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air;
or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
B. New fires. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply to smoke
emitted during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of
which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a
period of no longer than three consecutive minutes; or to emissions of
such opacity within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of
such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree which is not greater
than the emissions designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart,
for a period of no longer than three consecutive minutes.
C. Visible particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
emission of particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator
which are individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
D. Odors. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
E. Limitation on time of operation. No person shall operate and no owner
or operator of any building in the City shall permit the operation of an
incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any day, and all
operation shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m., including
complete extinction of the fire and removal of material in a safe manner
from the firebox to a noncombustible container, provided that, by
special permit, the Health Officer may, because of exceptional
circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as (s)he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and
welfare of the public or of persons in the vicinity.
§ 46-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-5
1:183
§ 46-5. Air pollution prohibited.
No person or owner of property, and no person having possession or control
of property, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 46-6. Inspections; right of entry; emergency inspections.
§ 46-7. Issuance of search warrant.
A. All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
from time to time by the Health Officer of his/her duly authorized
representatives. All rooms and areas in the building shall be available
and accessible for such inspection which shall be made during usual
business hours if the premises is used for nonresidential purposes,
provided that inspections may be made at other times if the premises is
not available during the foregoing hours for inspection; there is reason
to believe that violations are occurring on the premises which can only
be apprehended and proved by inspection during other than the
prescribed hours; or there is reason to believe a violation exists of a
character which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring
inspection and abatement without delay.
B. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Health Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses
an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take
place only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance
of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by
the Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32. Where the Health Officer or his/her duly authorized
representatives are refused entry or access or are otherwise impeded
or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this code
and subject to the penalties hereunder.
A. The Health Officer, upon affidavit, may apply to the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the City for a search warrant setting forth factually
the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis
for believing that a nuisance or violation of the code may exist on the
premises, including one or more of the following:
(1) That the premises requires inspection according to the cycle
established by the City for periodic inspections of premises of the
type involved.
(2) That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash
soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that violations of this code exist.
§ 46-5 UNION CITY CODE § 46-7
1:184
§ 46-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
Chapter 52
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155. Fire prevention — See Ch. 171.
§ 52-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Ordinance to Provide
for the Regulation and Control of the Installation, Operation and
Maintenance of Alarm Systems in the City of Union City."
§ 52-2. Findings; declaration; purpose.
(3) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
or system, types of incinerator, particular use of premises or other
factors which render systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
B. If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City is satisfied as to the
matters set forth in the affidavit, (s)he shall authorize the issuance of a
search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
A. Findings. The large increase in the number of private alarm systems
and users connected into the Police Department and the number of
false alarms, relative to holdups, burglary and other similar types of
alarms, have resulted in an increasing demand upon public personnel,
as well as upon the present facilities available to the Police Department.
B. Declaration. In addition to the foregoing, the increase in the number of
private enterprises engaged in the alarm business, each with its own
system and equipment, has resulted in conditions that if not remedied
will lead to an unnecessary drain upon the manpower, time, facilities
and finances of the City and its Public Safety Department. If the present
system is not corrected and improved upon, there will follow a
deterioration of the quality of service to all persons subscribing to
alarm services.
C. Purpose.
§ 46-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:185
§ 52-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the words terms and phrases, hereinafter defined,
shall have the following meanings:
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in one or more buildings of one or more
alarm devices or local alarms for the express purpose of affording visual
or audible warning, or both, of an emergency such as a holdup, burglary,
intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or like perils.
CENTRAL STATION — A communications center receiving signals from an
alarm signaling device which is operated for its subscribers. Such central
location is maintained and supervised on a continuous basis by trained
operators who will take appropriate action upon receipt of an emergency
signal from an alarm signal device, including the relaying of such
information directly to the Police Department communications center.
DIAL ALARM — An alarm device that employs an automatic dialing system
precoded to connect with a telephone in police headquarters rather than to
the alarm console with an automatic cutoff.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system by causes other than
those to which the alarm system was designed or intended to respond or
activate.
LOCAL ALARM or PRIVATE ALARM — Any mechanism that constitutes, in
whole or in part, an alarm system that is operated by a private company at
a location other than the property in the City.
OCCUPANT — A person in possession of premises in or upon which an alarm
system exists.
§ 52-4. Dial alarms.
(1) The purpose, therefore, of this chapter, shall be to provide for the
regulation and control of the installation, operation and
maintenance of private alarm systems within the City in order that
the Department of Public Safety may improve the quality of the
alarm services to be rendered to the public and that such services
shall be maintained at the highest level possible.
(2) In addition, the private alarm enterprises retained by owners and
occupants of buildings and enterprises in the City shall be enabled
to perform their services on a basis of standards and requirements
that shall be fair, equitable and impartially applicable to all such
buildings and enterprises.
A. Registration requirements. No dial alarm shall be permitted unless:
(1) It shall first have been registered with the Chief of Police as
hereinafter required.
(2) It shall first have been approved by the Chief of Police after proof
has been submitted that same has been approved by the New
§ 52-2 UNION CITY CODE § 52-4
1:186
Jersey Bell Telephone Company and the performance of a test
alarm conducted by, or on behalf, of the applicant.
(3) Consent to the inspection of the premises where the alarm is
located, during working hours or other mutually agreeable times, is
given.
B. Coded to notify third party. All dial alarms shall be coded as well to
notify a relative, neighbor, or other third party who shall be named in
the registration required by this chapter.
C. Coded to dial Police Department. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial
the Police Department or a special number when designated or
provided by the Chief of Police. It shall be the obligation of the Police
Department communications center to contact the occupant or a
prespecified designee of the occupant when the Police Department
receives an audio response to that occupant's alarm system.
D. Disconnection capability. All dial alarms shall be capable of being
disconnected by the owner or his/her designee to permit a call to the
Police Department in the event that a false alarm occurs.
E. Annual fee. The owner of each dial alarm system shall pay to the City an
annual fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, § 155-3, to cover the cost
of registration and testing and to amortize the cost of the special
telephone line or lines which may be required in police headquarters,
along with ancillary tape devices necessitated by these systems, and
additional record that should be maintained.
F. False alarm procedures; penalties. The owners of dial alarms shall be
governed by the false alarms procedures and penalties set forth in
§ 52-7 of this chapter.
G. Dialing nondesignated number. If any dial alarm shall hereafter be
found to be dialing a telephone number other than the number
designated for dial alarms as specified by the Chief of Police, the
occupant of the building, or other persons in whose name the telephone
is listed shall be forwarded a notice, in writing, by the Chief of Police
requiring compliance with the terms of this chapter. If, within 30 days
after receipt of such notice, the occupant or telephone subscriber shall
fail to comply (s)he shall be liable to a penalty payable to the City in the
sum of $50.
H. Taped contents; regulations. The taped contents of any recorded
message from a dial alarm shall be intelligible and in a form approved
by the Chief of Police. No such message shall be transmitted more than
three times as a result of single stimulus of the mechanism.
I. Sensory mechanism. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be
adjusted so as to suppress false indications and not to be activated by
impulses due to pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light,
§ 52-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-4
1:187
§ 52-5. Local or private alarms.
wind, noises, rattling or vibration of doors, windows or other forces
unrelated to general alarms.
J. Maintenance of components. All components of dial alarms shall be
maintained by the owner or his/her designee in good repair. When
evidence exists that there has been failure to comply with the operation
requirements of this chapter, the Chief of Police is then authorized to
demand that such device be disconnected until such time as compliance
with such requirements is reestablished.
A. Registration required. No person shall install, operate or maintain any
alarm system unless such has been registered with the Chief of Police
as follows:
(1) The alarm system of each permittee shall be deemed registered at
such time as the registration form supplied by the police is
completed and a code number is assigned to the permittee.
(2) An alarm system employing the dial alarm shall be deemed
registered when the annual dial alarm fee is remitted to the City
and the system has been approved by the Chief of Police. (See
§ 52-4.)
(3) A local alarm system shall be deemed registered when the
occupant of the building or store in which it is installed shall have
filed with the Chief of Police a registration form which shall
include, among other data:
(a) The location of the device.
(b) The name of the installer of the device.
(c) The type of device.
(d) Provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures.
(e) A list of persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm.
(f) Any other information as may be required by the Chief of
Police.
B. Supplemental or revised registration. No further or renewed
registration shall be required unless and until there has occurred any
material change in the information previously submitted with respect to
any alarm system. It shall be the duty of an occupant of a building or
store served by an alarm system, within 10 days after a change of
information previously submitted to the City shall have occurred, to file
a supplement or revised registration containing accurate current
information with respect to the data required by the registration form.
§ 52-4 UNION CITY CODE § 52-5
1:188
§ 52-6. Central stations.
In addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter, an alarm
business shall not be granted a license to operate, on all or part of its
services, a central station servicing central alarms unless the Police
Department finds that the central station, if operated, will meet the
following minimum requirements:
§ 52-7. False alarms.
C. Registration fee. A one-time registration fee as set forth in § 155-3 shall
be charged of all permittees desiring to register local or private alarm
systems, central station alarm systems or alarm console systems,
payable at the time of registration. No charge shall be made for the
filing of any amended, revised or supplemental registration.
A. Compliance with the Standard for Central Station Burglar Alarm Units
and Systems (UL 611-1968), issued by Underwriters' Laboratories Inc.,
or American National Standards Institute (ANSI 2.2, 1971) and any
later edition of these standards that may be issued. Such standards are
hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and a copy of the most
recent standards shall be kept on file at the Police Department and be
available for public inspection. The service provided may correspond to
any of the several grades of service listed in the standards, but in no
event shall the owner, claim agent or other person in responsible
control of the location wherein such system is located by present longer
than one hour at such location, after being request to do so by a
representative of the Police Department. Such person shall inspect the
alarm system after each activation to ensure proper operation.
B. Proof of compliance to part of this section shall be provided, in writing,
from the alarm business through its legal representative to the Police
Department, specifying the minimum acceptable standards pertaining
to central stations as outlined in Subsection A above. Such written
proof shall not preclude, but shall be in addition to, physical inspection
of the premises and equipment by the Police Department and shall
further be in addition to and in support of any other section of this
chapter.
C. It shall be the obligation of the central station to contact the occupant
or the prespecified designee of the occupant when the system shall
become activated by having received a visual or audio response to that
occupant's alarm system.
A. Penalty. In case of a false alarm, the Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation to be made and maintain a record of such alarm or alarms
on file. For the first, second and third false alarm in any given calendar
year, a warning shall be issued by the Police Department. For the fourth
false alarm in the same calendar year, a summons shall be issued to the
permittee, incurring a penalty of $50 payable to the Violations Bureau.
For the fifth and subsequent false alarms in the same calendar year,
§ 52-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-7
1:189
§ 52-8. Equipment maintenance; audible alarms.
§ 52-9. Appeals.
Under the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police, or any authorized
representative (s)he may have designated and empowered, shall make a
decision with respect to the installation, operation and maintenance of
any alarm equipment, or with respect to the issuance or denial of any
application relating thereto. Any person aggrieved by such decision may
summonses shall be issued incurring fines of $100. Upon the ninth
false alarm in the same calendar year, a summons will be issued and a
court appearance required. Failure to appear in court will subject the
permittee to such penalties as may be imposed by the court.
B. False alarm opportunity. In the event that a false alarm has been
activated for any reason, the permittee may call police headquarters
and state his/her name, location and the code number which had been
assigned to him/her upon registration within 60 seconds of the
activation of the alarm, and there will be no false alarm charged against
the permittee. If the code number is not given or is given incorrectly, a
false alarm will be charged.
C. Successive malfunctions. In the event of successive malfunctions of a
permittee's alarm system within a proximate time period, due to the
same or related causes which accidentally activate the system, a
permittee shall not be charged for each individual malfunction, but for
only a single false alarm, provided that a charge for the permittee is
applicable.
D. Disconnection; revocation of permit. After the sixth false alarm, and if
the investigation of the Police Department discloses continued abuse of
the privilege of connection with the alarm console and a failure of the
permittee to take remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the City shall
have the right to require disconnection from the alarm console for a
limited or permanent time. No such permit shall be revoked or
suspended without giving the permittee an opportunity to show cause
before the court as to why such action should not be taken, pursuant to
Subsection A above.
A. Licensee and permittee to be responsible for service. The licensee and
each permittee shall be responsible on a twenty-four-hour per-day basis
for service to equipment owned by the licensee and permittee. Such
service shall be provided within the twenty-four-hour period next
following notification by the Police Department of any equipment
malfunction.
B. Disconnection of audible alarms. Notwithstanding Subsection A above,
the Police Department shall have the right to disconnect any audible
alarm if the owner or permittee cannot be contacted or cannot respond
to correct such audible alarm within one hour thereof.
§ 52-7 UNION CITY CODE § 52-9
1:190
within 10 days following the decision, file a written appeal therefrom with
the City Clerk and the Chief of Police, whereupon the Board of
Commissioners shall promptly conduct a hearing and affirm, modify or
reverse the decision from which the appeal has been taken.
§ 52-10. Adoption of rules and regulations; approval required.
The Chief of Police, after prior consultation with the licensee, from time
to time, shall promulgate such rules and regulations in connection with
the provisions of this chapter in order to reasonably provide for efficient
recordkeeping and management of the system, provided that such rules and
regulations, or any revisions thereof, shall not take effect unless and until
first approved by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 52-11. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 58
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
DUI arrests — See Ch. 1, Art. IV.
Outdoor dining — See Ch. 185, Art. IV.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 290,
§ 290-3.
Behavior in establishments selling
alcohol — See Ch. 296.
A. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter, in addition to the
revocation of the license or permit of such person, or any person found
guilty of a failure to comply with any of the rules and regulations duly
promulgated pursuant hereto, shall be subject to a fine or penalty not in
excess of $200.
B. Such maximum fine or penalty in the sum of $200 shall not be
applicable in those instances in which the maximum fine or penalty has
hereinbefore been limited to a lesser amount by this chapter. In the
event of a continuing violation, the violator may be found guilty of as
many separate offenses or counts as the number of days (s)he is proved
to have continued to be in violation of this chapter.
§ 52-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-11
1:191

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-18 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended through Ord. No. 1998-8]
§ 58-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any fluid or solid capable of being converted
into a fluid, suitable for human consumption, and having an alcoholic
content of more than 1/2 of 1% by volume, including any kind or type of
beer, wine or distilled liquors, including blended distilled liquors and any
brewed, fermented or distilled liquors fit for use for beverage purposes or
any mixture of the same with fruit juices or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACES — Any place to which the public has access, including any
street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk, or a hallway, lobby, roof, basement
or office of a public building, or a hallway, lobby, roof, stairway, basement
or vacant apartment of a public housing residential project. It shall also
include the front or any other outside area of any such public place or of any
store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business, or other occupied
or vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the person
charged with violating this article.
§ 58-2. Consumption prohibited in public places.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages in public places, as herein
defined, parking lots which are open to the public at large, whether publicly
or privately owned, school yards, playgrounds or other outdoor facilities
owned and operated by the City Board of Education, shopping plazas or any
thoroughfare open to general vehicular traffic in the City.
§ 58-3. Consumption prohibited in automobiles.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages while in any automobile or
motor vehicle, whether such automobile is in motion or parked, on any of
the public streets, roadways, thoroughfares or in parking lots which are
open to the public at large, whether publicly or privately owned, or in
playgrounds or outdoor facilities owned and operated by the City Board of
Education, or in shopping plazas open to the general public.
§ 58-4. Special permit.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in §§ 58-2 and 58-3, a special
permit may be issued by the Board of Commissioners for the consumption
of alcoholic beverages, which shall state the terms and conditions as
established by the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control and shall specify
the duration of the permit.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-5
1:193
§ 58-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article, or who fails to comply
therewith, shall, upon conviction, for each and every violation and
noncompliance, be subject to a fine not to exceed $200 or imprisonment of
no more than 90 days in the county jail, or both, at the discretion of the
Municipal Court, with a minimum fine of $100 for the first offense.
§ 58-5 UNION CITY CODE § 58-5
1:194
ARTICLE II
Alcoholic Beverage Control
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. X of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended through Ord. No. 2002-3]
§ 58-6. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the City of Union City in accordance with the provisions of an
act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
§ 58-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
EMPLOYEE — Any person in the service of a liquor licensee who has contact
with the service of alcoholic beverages, including bartenders, waiters and
waitresses, and other people who have direct contact with alcoholic
beverages. An employee shall also include any go-go dancers and disc
jockeys, whether they are employed for one night or on a weekly or monthly
basis by the licensed establishment. All other persons employed for
entertainment purposes or who do not have contact with alcoholic
beverages shall be considered subcontractors for the purposes of this
article.[Amended 5-21-2013]
MINOR — A person under the legal age for consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
§ 58-8. Licenses.
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the act, rules
and regulations referred to in § 58-6, and all other applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey or the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by
the Board of Commissioners, which shall also administer the provisions
of this article.
C. License required. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
within the City without having obtained a license in accordance with
the Act referred to in § 58-6 and the provisions of this article.
D. License fees.
§ 58-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-8
1:195
(1) The annual license fees for the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the City shall be as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
(2) Plenary retail consumption licenses are payable by June 30 for the
year beginning July 1 through June 30 of the year following.
E. License application procedure and identification card.
(1) Application procedure.
(a) No license shall be issued or transferred except after written
application has been presented by the proposed licensee on
forms furnished by the City and after publication of notice, and
provided further that before the application is presented to the
Board of Commissioners, every licensee, agent, go-go dancer
or other employee shall make full and complete answers, in
writing, on forms furnished by the Department of Public Safety
to all questions printed thereon as to the identity, character,
antecedents and general experience of any such licensee,
agent, go-go dancer or other employee, and provided further
that before the application is presented to the Board of
Commissioners, the licensee, agent, go-go dancer and other
employee connected with or employed by or to be connected
with or employed by the licensee shall submit to the taking by
the Department of Public Safety an impression of the thumb
and fingerprints of both hands. At the time of taking the
fingerprints the licensee, agent, go-go dancer and other
employee connected with or employed by the licensee or to be
connected with or employed by the licensee shall be
photographed by the Department of Public Safety, and if the
license is granted or transferred, the Department of Public
Safety shall then furnish the licensee, agent, go-go dancer and
other employee connected with or employed by the licensee an
identification card showing compliance with the provisions of
this section.
(b) The licensee shall provide all individuals connected to, or
employed by, the licensee with clips or anchorage devices with
which to append the identification card to his/her clothing. No
employee shall be permitted to work within the licensed
premises unless the employee is wearing his/her identification
card clearly visible and readily identifiable at all times.
Employee identification cards shall be work as of July 1, 2002,
and thereafter in compliance with the provisions of this
subsection.
(2) Expiration.
(a) The identification shall expire on June 30 of each year at which
time new photographs shall be taken and a fee as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged for the renewal of
identification by the Department of Public Safety and new
§ 58-8 UNION CITY CODE § 58-8
1:196
fingerprints, if requested by the Department of Public Safety.
No licensee shall engage any agent, go-go dancer or employee
connected with the business of the licensee unless the agent,
go-go dancer and employee has conformed to the rules and
regulations above, and if any new agents, go-go dancers or
employees are hired by the licensee, such new agents, gogo
dancers or employees shall comply with such regulations
before (s)he shall be permitted to work in the licensed
premises.
(b) Where there is a corporate applicant for the license, all officers
and directors of the corporation must comply with the
regulations of this section and should there be a replacement
or election of new officers and directors during the license
term, such replaced or newly elected officers and directors
must comply with the regulations of this section.
F. Retiring of plenary retail consumption licenses. A holder of a plenary
retail consumption license desiring to retire such license in accordance
with the provisions of this subsection shall submit an application for
that purpose to be brought before the Board of Commissioners, which
application will be processed on a first-come-first-served basis.
(1) Fair value. Fair market value or $30,000 per license is the present
fair value for payment to the licensee for the retirement of a
license. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(2) Method to obtain funding. The City, in order to obtain funding for
retiring a license by payment of fair value, commencing on the
renewal date for license fees, shall collect an annual additional fee
as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, from each holder of a plenary
retail consumption license, which sum is separate and apart from
the regular license renewal fee.
(3) Escrow account. Such annual additional fees per license shall be
held by the City in an escrow interest-bearing account until such
time as the City may retire a plenary retail consumption license on
request of the licensee by payment to the licensee of the fair value.
(4) Requirements for payment. No payment shall be made to any
applicant until the applicant shall first:
(a) Surrender his/her license before the Board of Commissioners.
(b) Execute an agreement with the City containing the following
terms, which agreement the Mayor is hereby authorized to
execute:
[1] That the applicant shall voluntarily surrender the license
to the Board of Commissioners and agree that such license
shall be retired permanently.
§ 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-8
1:197
§ 58-9. Regulation of licenses.
[2] That the license never again be reissued to anyone.
[3] That the applicant shall receive the sum of money
determined as aforesaid, in consideration of and in
payment for the retirement of his/her license.
[4] That such aforesaid sum shall be reduced by the sum of
existing violations with specific penalties in consideration
of and in payment for the purchase and retirement of his/
her license.
[5] No application shall be accepted unless all state, federal
and local fees are paid in full, including the annual
additional fee imposed by this subsection.
G. Exception to retiring of plenary retail consumption licenses. This
subsection shall not apply to club licenses and warm beer licenses.
A. Hours of sale. [Amended 10-2-2007; 9-16-2008]
(1) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered to any consumer or
served to or consumed in any licensed premises between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day, and no licensee shall permit
patrons to enter the premises after 2:00 a.m. in the morning or
permit patrons to remain on the premises after 2:00 a.m. in the
morning, except that the following establishments may remain
open during the aforesaid prohibited hours for the purpose of
carrying on their usual activities, provided that no sale or service to
any customer or consumption of alcohol by anyone shall be
permitted within the establishment between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.:
(a) Any licensee that is a restaurant as defined by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(t)
that also has an alcoholic beverage license and a restaurant
license issued by the City for the same premises; and
(b) Any hotel that has been licensed by the City and holds an
alcoholic beverage license for the same premises; and
(c) Any licensee having a social club liquor license issued by the
City for the same premises.
(2) All unfinished alcoholic beverages shall be cleared from the
customer service areas by 2:00 a.m. The last call for the sale or
service of alcoholic beverages is 1:30 a.m.
B. Sundays.
(1) Provisions of Subsection A shall not apply on Sundays. On Sunday,
no alcoholic beverage may be sold, served, delivered to a consumer
or consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of 2:00
§ 58-8 UNION CITY CODE § 58-9
1:198
a.m. and 12:00 noon. No licensee shall permit patrons to enter into
a premises after 2:00 a.m. in the morning on Sunday. However, if
Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day
fall on a Sunday, liquor license holders shall be permitted to open
at 9:00 a.m. [Amended 11-5-2008]
(2) The Board of Commissioners may by resolution alter the time that
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served or delivered to a consumer
or consumed in a licensed premises to address the consumption
and sale of alcoholic beverages when Christmas Eve and New
Year's Eve are on a Sunday. [Added 12-5-2006]
C. Sales to certain persons. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall
sell, serve or deliver, directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to
any habitual drunkard, intoxicated person or minor, nor permit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises by any of
the above-named classes or persons, or permit any such persons to
congregate in or about the licensed premises.
D. Sale of beverages and use of premises restricted by license.
(1) A plenary retail distribution license shall not the sale of alcoholic
beverages in or upon any premises in which a grocery,
delicatessen, drugstore or other mercantile business is carried on.
(2) No person holding a plenary distribution license shall carry on any
business other than the sale of alcoholic or malt beverages in or
upon any part of the premises for which the license has been
issued.
E. Use of music devices and microphones. Jukeboxes, phonographs, tapeplaying
devices, coin-operated musical devices, wired music and music
from radios shall not be permitted to be played or operated in any
licensed premises later than 1/2 hour before the closing of the
establishment. At all times during the operation of same during the
prescribed hours they shall not be played too loudly so as to create a
nuisance in the neighborhood of the licensed premises.
F. Unobstructed view of premises required during prohibited hours. All
licensees selling alcoholic beverages by virtue of a plenary retail
consumption license, except hotels and club licensees, shall be required
to draw aside the curtains or screens obscuring the view from the street
to the interior of the licensed premises at 2:00 a.m., the designated
closing hour, and keep them open at least until 12:00 noon on Sunday
and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and on Saturday, so that a free and
unobstructed view may be afforded the public from the street to the
interior of the premises during the above prohibited hours.
G. Nonprofit corporations. It shall be lawful for the Board of
Commissioners of the City, upon approval of the Director of the Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control, to issue a plenary retail consumption
license to a nonprofit corporation which conducts musical or theatrical
§ 58-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-9
1:199
performances or concerts on premises with a seating capacity of 1,000
persons or more, and to authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the licensed premises only during performances and
the hour immediately preceding and the hour immediately following
performances.
H. Plenary retail consumption licensee training and certification. [Added
10-18-2011]
(1) All holders of a plenary retail consumption license ("consumption
license") issued under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-12 shall
successfully complete the educational training course described
below, at such times, under such conditions and with identified
consequences for noncompliance, as are set forth in this
subsection.
(2) All holders of a consumption license at the time this subsection
becomes effective (the "effective date") shall successfully complete
the training course within six months of the effective date.
Successful completion means attendance during the entire training
course and receipt of a certification from the training course
provider that the person attending the course has completed it.
(3) Whenever a plenary retail consumption license is acquired as a new
license or through a person-to-person transfer of the license, or is
held by a corporation or limited liability company that has changed
33 1/3% or more of its shareholders or members, then the
individual persons described in Subsection H(4) of this subsection
shall be required to attend and successfully complete an
educational training program within six months of acquiring the
new license or receiving approval of the transfer of an existing
license or acquiring 33 1/3% or more interest in such consumption
license. The requirement to complete the educational training
program shall be a condition on a new or transferred liquor license.
Failure to comply with the condition can subject the license holder
to a disciplinary proceeding.
(4) The following individuals shall be required to attend the
educational training course designated in Subsection H(5), on
behalf of the consumption license holder:
(a) For licenses held by an individual as a sole proprietor, the
required attendee shall be the individual owner. For licenses
held by a partnership, the required attendee shall be the
partner or partners actively engaged in the operation or
control of the business.
(b) For licenses held by a corporation or limited liability company,
the required attendee shall be all owners of 25% or more of the
stock or all members of the LLC having at least a twenty-fivepercent
interest.
§ 58-9 UNION CITY CODE § 58-9
1:200
§ 58-10. Minors.
(c) Where a licensee designates a manager on its license
application, that manager shall be required to attend, in
addition to the persons identified in Subsection H(4)(a) and (b)
above.
(d) Every license must have at least one owner and every manager
attend and successfully complete the training course.
(5) Training required by this subsection shall be either the educational
training course offered by the New Jersey Restaurant Association
called "ServSafe Alcohol Training" or the New Jersey Licensed
Beverage Association course called "Techniques of Alcohol
Management" (TAMS). Any other course which the City seeks to
use for this training must be approved by the State Alcoholic
Beverage Control. [Amended 1-3-2012]
(6) All plenary retail consumption licensees shall provide proof of
compliance with this subsection upon application for the renewal of
their licenses.
I. The City Clerk, at the City's expense, will provide notice of an
application for a place-to-place or person-to-person transfer of an
alcoholic beverages license to all real property within 500 feet in all
directions of the proposed license location. The City's failure to give
notice pursuant to this section shall not invalidate the application or
proceedings held or to be held. [Added 10-18-2011]
A. Presence. No minor shall be allowed in any premises where alcoholic
beverages are sold or served for consumption on the premises unless
accompanied by his/her parent or guardian.
B. Purchase of alcoholic beverages by a minor. No minor shall purchase,
attempt to purchase, or have another purchase for him/her any
alcoholic beverage on any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
C. Purchase of alcoholic beverages for a minor. No person shall purchase
or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for a minor. It shall be
unlawful for any person to induce or attempt to induce any licensee or
any employee of a licensee to sell, serve or deliver alcoholic beverages
to a minor.
D. Misstating age. No person shall misrepresent his/her age or the age of
another person for the purpose of inducing any licensee or his/her
employee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person
who is a minor or to permit a person who is a minor to remain on any
premises in violation of Subsection A.
E. Presumption. Any parent or guardian of a minor who accompanies such
minor into a premises in which alcoholic beverages are served and who
§ 58-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-10
1:201
§ 58-11. Nude or nearly nude activity.
permits the minor to possess or consume alcoholic beverages shall be
presumed to have misrepresented the age of the minor.
F. Possession. No minor shall possess, serve, sell or consume any alcoholic
beverages in any public place within the City.
G. Entertainers. The use of entertainers under the age of 18 years is
strictly prohibited in the room of the licensed premises where the bar in
which patrons are served in person, is located.
H. Teen night.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
TEEN NIGHT — A scheduled dance or event held on the premises
of a licensed plenary retail alcoholic beverage establishment and
restricted to those patrons under the legal drinking age established
by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
TEEN NIGHT PARTICIPANTS — Those individuals who are under
the legal drinking age as established in the State of New Jersey
who attend teen night as defined above. This shall not apply,
however, to individuals employed by the licensed plenary retail
alcoholic beverage establishment.
(2) Prohibited. Teen nights, as defined in Subsection H(1) above, are
hereby prohibited within the City by the Board of Commissioners,
and that teen night participants who would attend are hereby
prohibited from participating in teen night events at licensed
plenary retail alcoholic beverage establishments.
(3) Exception. This teen night prohibition shall not apply to individuals
employed by the licensed plenary retail alcoholic beverage
establishment.
A. Findings. The Board of Commissioners finds that this section is
necessary:
(1) To more clearly define prohibited activities.
(2) To protect property values.
(3) To prevent blight and the deterioration of the City's neighborhoods.
(4) To promote a climate conducive to a return of residences and
business to the City's neighborhoods.
(5) To enhance the quality of life within the City.
(6) To preserve and stabilize the City's neighborhoods.
§ 58-10 UNION CITY CODE § 58-11
1:202
(7) To decrease the incidence of crime, disorderly conduct and juvenile
delinquency.
B. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITY —
Any person performing, showing, exhibiting, acting or representing
in such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the
pubic area, anus, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof.
(1)
Any female showing, performing, exhibiting, acting or representing
in such a manner or attire as to expose to view that portion of the
breast referred to as the areola or nipple, or simulation thereof.
(2)
Any person performing, showing, exhibiting, acting or representing
any dance, episode or musical entertainment in a lewd or indecent
manner so that the average person, applying contemporary
community standards, would find that the work, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest, or for any performer to perform,
show, exhibit, act or represent any dance, episode or musical
entertainment the purpose or effect of which is to direct the
attention of the spectator to the breast, buttocks or genital organs
of the performer, whether clothed or unclothed.
(3)
C. Nude activities prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct or perform, or allow to be conducted or performed, any nude or
nearly nude activity on or within any premises for which a retail
alcoholic consumption license has been issued.
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV,
General Penalty.
(2) In addition, in the event that a violation of this section occurs, the
City liquor administrator shall forthwith conduct a hearing
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, as set forth in § 58-13 of this article, to
determine whether the liquor license for the business
establishment at which the activity prohibited by this section
occurred shall be suspended or revoked. [Amended 4-20-2010;
10-18-2011]
(3) In the event of a second violation of this section occurring at such a
business establishment within a twelve-month period, the liquor
administrator, after a hearing pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, as set
forth in § 58-13 of this article, shall revoke such retail consumption
license.
E. Exclusion of existing go-go bars.
§ 58-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-11
1:203
§ 58-12. Plenary retail consumption licensees.
§ 58-13. Revocation of licenses.
(1) Any go-go bar which operates as a retail liquor establishment as
licensed by the City on or before May 19, 1988, is excluded from
this limitation. The exclusion right of existing go-go bars is
nontransferable and terminates upon any person-to-person
transfer and/or place-to-place transfer of the plenary retail
consumption license.
(2) The Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby authorized and
directed to compile a list of all existing bars utilizing the services of
go-go dancers as of May 19, 1988, and this list shall be attached
hereto and made a part hereof.
F. Revocation of existing go-go dancing privileges.
(1) Upon any violation of any provisions of this article, or any
provisions of any applicable statute, or any of the rules or
regulations of the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, the
privilege of operating a go-go bar under a liquor license issued by
the City, as stipulated in § 58-11E, shall be revoked.
(2) Such revocation proceedings shall be in conformity with the due
process of law requirements as described in § 58-13 of this article.
A. Prohibitions. No plenary retail consumption licensee shall:
(1) Provide live entertainment activities where the performer or
performers are attired in no more than bikini briefs or where
female performers attired in no more than bikini briefs and the
breasts covered in such a manner that they remain substantially
exposed to view.
(2) Provide live entertainment activities where the performer or
performers receive tips or gratuities from the customers by means
of the customers placing such tip or gratuity within or under, or
partially within or under, the performer's costume.
(3) Provide any entertainment where the sounds of or vibrations from
may be heard or felt outside of the building in which it is located or,
if such building also serves other uses, be heard or felt by the
occupier of such other portion of the building.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, by service of a five-day notice of
§ 58-11 UNION CITY CODE § 58-13
1:204
§ 58-14. Limitations/conditions on licenses. [Added 9-16-2008]
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
A. Any license issued under this article may, at time of renewal or transfer,
have its hours of operation and sale limited or other special conditions
attached to the license that the Board of Commissioners determines to
be necessary and proper to accomplish the objects of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control (ABC) Law and this City's ABC Ordinances and
secure compliance therewith, when violations by the licensee and other
circumstances establish the need to do so.
(1) Proceedings for limitation of hours of sale and other special
conditions as authorized under N.J.S.A. 33:1-32, are in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice
of charges proffered against the licensee and affording a
reasonable opportunity for hearing.
(2) Limitation of hours of sale or other special conditions are in
addition to any other penalty which may be imposed for a violation
of this article.
B. The limitation of hours of sale and special conditions imposed on liquor
licenses in the City will relate directly to specific complaints concerning
the operation of the particular liquor license, for example, noise,
loitering, security, and litter problems, etc.
C. Limitation of hours of sale can result in the Board of Commissioners
ordering a particular liquor licensee to close earlier than other liquor
licensees in the City, if that remedy is appropriate after a due process
hearing in order to answer the specific complaints concerning the
operation of that particular establishment. For example, the Board of
Commissioners after a due process hearing can impose a more
restrictive closing time than is otherwise set forth in this article.
D. Other special conditions are as follows:
(1) Disco or other music employing amplified instruments can be
prohibited.
(2) Live entertainment can be limited to individuals or groups who can
be restricted to accompaniment upon nonamplified instruments or
the jukebox.
(3) The jukebox employed is the type which has its volume pre-set and
cannot be increased by anyone in the licensed premises. It is preset
at the sound which shall not escape the premises as such a
volume that the health and sleep of neighboring residents is
§ 58-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-14
1:205
affected, or to an extent that it would violate the noise control or
pollution ordinance in effect in the City.
(4) Live entertainment can be prohibited.
(5) At all times, live entertainment is employed, licensee provides a
uniformed, professional security guard or guards outside its
premises in an endeavor to prevent loiterers from gathering,
alcoholic beverage consumption on the sidewalks and streets, the
smashing of empty beer bottles, glasses and other glass products,
and patrons from conducting themselves in loud or boisterous
manner.
(6) Except for ingress and egress, the doors are closed at all times,
irrespective of weather or season.
(7) The licensee shall have its employees patrol an area within 150 feet
of its building to retrieve all glasses, bottles, or other bar-related
litter, at least once a day, at closing, or more often, if necessary.
(8) Plenary retail consumption licensees, club licensees and any other
licensee permitted to serve alcoholic beverages by the glass for
consumption on the licensed premises shall post at least one sign
within the licensed premises stating in prominent type that patrons
are required to use the restrooms provided within the licensed
premises and setting forth that urination in public is prohibited,
and the penalties for violation of the article. If the principal
language of 10% or more of the patrons of the licensed premises is
other than English, the guide is posted in English and in such other
language.
(9) The Board of Commissioners may impose any other condition on
the licensee that are related to specific concerns presented by the
licensee's conduct.
(10) Educational requirements.
(a) Every owner of 25% or more of the stock and the holder of a
twenty-five-percent or more interest in any alcoholic beverage
plenary retail consumption license or plenary retail
distribution license in the City shall, as a condition of transfer
to such person or to a corporation, partnership or other
business entity in which such a person has a twenty-fivepercent
or more interest, attend and complete a Techniques of
Alcoholic Management (TAM) course, Training for Intervention
Procedures (TIP) course conducted by New Jersey TAM, Inc.,
or its approved equivalent.
(b) In addition to the persons listed in the preceding subsection,
every managing employee of any such licensee shall attend and
complete the course or its approved equivalent prior to
commencing employment or duty as such managing employee.
§ 58-14 UNION CITY CODE § 58-14
1:206
§ 58-15. Registration of persons employed in security services.
[Added 9-16-2008]
§ 58-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
article shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty.
"Managing employee," as used herein, means any person in
charge of the licensed premises in the absence of the owner,
partner or principal corporate officer and who has
responsibility for the handling of business receipts and the
supervision of other employees.
(c) The holders of a twenty-five-percent interest in all existing
plenary retail consumption and plenary retail distribution
licenses and all managing employees of such licensees shall
attend and complete the TAM, the TIP course or their approved
equivalent as a condition of renewal each year.
A. No person shall be employed by any licensee to perform any security
services at the licensed premises unless such person has registered
with the City Clerk as required by Subsection B of this section.
"Security services" as used herein means, but in no manner is limited
to:
(1) Any employee of a uniformed security service employed at the
licensed premises, whether or not required to be hired by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners, order of the Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, or a court of competent jurisdiction;
and
(2) Any person employed by the licensee to perform services involving
checking the ages of prospective patrons, the maintaining of order
or acting as what is commonly called a "bouncer."
B. Every person who contracts to perform or is employed to perform
security services shall, prior to commencing such services, register
with the City Clerk. Registration consists of:
(1) Completing a registration form showing full name, date and place
of birth and local and permanent address;
(2) Furnishing the Clerk with a passport photo 2 1/2 x 3 1/2; and
(3) Paying a one-time registration fee as provided in Chapter 155,
Fees. [Amended 5-21-2013]
C. Any violation of this section subjects the violator to a penalty of $100. A
third violation of this section also subjects the violator to forfeiture of
the right to register.
§ 58-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-16
1:207

ARTICLE III
Consumption by Minors on Private Property
[Adopted 7-5-2005]
§ 58-17. Consumption by minors prohibited; violations and
penalties.
No person under the legal age to consume alcoholic beverages shall
knowingly possess or knowingly consume alcoholic beverages on private
property. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent
offense. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the Court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privileges of that person's
driver's license. Upon conviction, the Municipal Court shall forward a report
to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the Court. If a person at
the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the
period of license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of
the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day
the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
§ 58-18. Penalty for licensed drivers.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid driver's
license issued by this state, the Court shall immediately collect the license
and forward it to the New Jersey State Division of Motor Vehicles along
with the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the Court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye
color and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the license
suspension period imposed by the Court.
§ 58-19. Written notice to be provided by Court.
The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt
of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not be a
defense to a subsequent charge or a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
§ 58-20. Nonresidents.
If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident, the
Court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident driving
privilege of the person based on the age of the person and submit to the
Division the required report. The Court shall not collect the license of a
nonresident convicted under this article. Upon receipt of a report by the
§ 58-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-20
1:209
Court, the Division shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 58-21. Responsibility of owners, lessees and managers.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-17, a person who makes real property owned,
leased or managed by him available to, or leaves that property in the
care of, another person with the purpose that alcoholic beverages will be
made available for consumption by, or will be consumed by, persons who
are under the legal age for consuming alcoholic beverages is guilty of a
disorderly persons offense.
§ 58-22. Exceptions.
No person shall be convicted for violating this article if:
A. The person consumes or possesses the alcoholic beverage in connection
with a religious observance, ceremony or rite or consumes or possesses
an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase
and consume alcoholic beverages. As used in this subsection, "relative"
means the underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity. The term "guardian"
means a person who has qualified as a guardian of the underaged
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
B. The person is actually engaged in the performance of employment by a
person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes or while
actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary
arts or hotel management program at a county vocational school or
postsecondary educational institution; however, this subsection does
not preclude the imposition of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq., or any other section of law against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at the premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. [Amended 5-21-2013]
C. This article shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 58-20 UNION CITY CODE § 58-22
1:210
ARTICLE IV
Criminal Background Checks
[Adopted 12-20-2011]
§ 58-23. Background checks required at license renewal.
All individual owners of a liquor license shall be required to submit to
a criminal history record background check in connection with all liquor
license renewal applications. The owners shall also require that all of
their employees in existence at the time of each liquor license renewal
application submit to a criminal history record background check. The
owners shall be responsible for all costs associated with these background
checks. All resolutions of approval of liquor license renewal applications
that are adopted as of the effective date of this article shall include a
condition requiring the completion of these criminal history record
background checks.
§ 58-24. New employees.
The owners of a liquor license shall, prior to hiring any new employees,
be required to obtain a criminal history record background check on such
employee. The owners shall be responsible for all costs associated with
these background checks.
§ 58-25. License transfer.
The prospective purchasers of a liquor license shall be required to submit
to a criminal history record background check in connection with a personto-
person liquor license transfer application. The prospective purchasers
shall also require that all of the employees submit to a criminal history
record background check as outlined in §§ 58-23 and 58-24 above. The
prospective purchaser shall be responsible for all costs associated with
these background checks. All resolutions of approval of person-to-person
liquor license transfer applications that are adopted as of the effective date
of this article shall include a condition requiring the completion of these
criminal history record background checks.
§ 58-26. Fingerprinting.
In order to complete these background checks, the individual shall submit
to being fingerprinted in accordance with applicable state and federal laws,
rules and regulations. The official or officer conducting the fingerprinting
is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with and receive criminal
history record information from the State Bureau of Identification in the
Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
§ 58-27. Disposition of fees.
All fees received by the City for these services shall be transmitted to the
State Bureau of Identification.
§ 58-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-28
1:211
§ 58-28. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall constitute
a violation thereof and shall subject the owner of the liquor license to
disciplinary proceedings.
§ 58-29. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law and upon receipt of approval of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, as necessary.
§ 58-28 UNION CITY CODE § 58-29
1:212
Chapter 64
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 58-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-29
1:213

ARTICLE I
Mechanical Amusement Devices
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 8-13 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as last amended by Ord. No. 2001-11]
§ 64-1. Purpose.
This article is intended to promote and protect the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare and is passed in furtherance of the specific
objective to properly establish, regulate and control mechanical amusement
devices within the City and, in so doing, to protect the established character
and the social and economic well-being of both private and public property;
and to promote, in the public interest, the proper regulation of mechanical
amusement devices. The purpose of this article is to license, regulate and
control those mechanical amusement devices which are operated for the
purpose of making a profit.
§ 64-2. Findings.
§ 64-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases when used
herein shall be deemed to have the following meanings, except as the
context may otherwise require:
AMUSEMENT PARLOR OR ARCADE — Any place wherein four or more
coin-operated mechanical amusement devices are maintained for use and
operation by the public.
A. The Board of Commissioners of the City has become aware of an
increase in the number of mechanical amusement device license
applications; and
B. The Board of Commissioners of the City has been made aware of public
concern regarding the increase in the number of mechanical
amusement devices which have been installed throughout the City; and
C. There is an apparent need for additional regulations of the business of
mechanical amusement devices so as to prevent the creation of
nuisances to patrons and the public, fire hazards, the incidence of
gambling, loitering or the creation of an unhealthy atmosphere for the
youth of the community and other undesirable effects of the
concentration and proliferation of such mechanical amusement devices
in commercial establishments which might threaten the health, safety
and welfare of this City; and
D. Since the passage of the original ordinance regulating mechanical
amusement devices, there has been a dramatic increase in the number
of mechanical amusement devices sought to be licensed.
§ 64-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-3
1:215
APPLICANT — An individual applicant, a corporate applicant, any of its
officers, directors or stockholders; or a partnership applicant, any of its
partners or agents, representatives, attorney or manager.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Safety of the City of
Union City, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who supplies any mechanical amusement
device to another for use in a premises, whether under lease, sale or any
other arrangement.
GAMING or GAMBLING — The staking or risking of something of value
upon the outcome of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not
under the actor's control or influence, upon an agreement or understanding
that (s)he will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome.
LICENSE — The license issued to a licensee pursuant to this article.
LICENSED PREMISES — The premises, or portion thereof, where a
licensed mechanical amusement device is to be operated, used or
maintained.
LICENSEE — The individual or entity obtaining a license pursuant to this
article.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — The type of machine, electronic
game or contrivance, including but not limited to bagatelle, baseball,
hockey, football, pool table, gun, shuffle alley, bowling, pinball or pin
amusement game, video game, arcade game, computer game, mechanical
grab machines, marble machines, Skee Ball, or devices similar to the
foregoing, which, upon the insertion of a coin, paper money, slug or token
in any slot or receptacle attached to such machine or device, or connected
therewith, or which by remote control, mechanical or manual means, with
or without payment of a fee, operates or which may be operated for use as
a game, contest or amusement in a public or quasi-public place, or in the
building, store or other place which is open to the public, which provides
neither prizes nor the return of any money. It shall include coin-operated
video machines or games or similar devices that use a display screen for
points, lines and dots of light that can be manipulated to simulate games or
other types of entertainment. It shall not include, nor shall this article apply
to, music-playing devices.
§ 64-4. License required.
No person shall maintain, operate or possess in any store, building or other
place which is open to the public, or in any building or other place wherein
any club or organization meetings are held within the City, any mechanical
amusement device without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 64-5. Application for license; information required.
A. All applications and all renewals for a license under this article shall be
made and delivered to the License Inspector on forms to be supplied for
that purpose and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant.
§ 64-3 UNION CITY CODE § 64-5
1:216
§ 64-6. Additional requirements for amusement arcade license.
B. The application for license shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name under which the licensed premises is being operated and the
location of the same.
(3) Number and type of alcoholic beverage licenses on the licensed
premises, where applicable.
(4) Number and type of mechanical amusement devices sought to be
licensed.
(5) Location where each mechanical amusement device is to be
located.
(6) Name and address of the person from whom each mechanical
amusement device is to be purchased, rented or otherwise
obtained.
(7) Description of each mechanical amusement device sought to be
licensed, including, for each such mechanical amusement device,
the name of the manufacturer, model number and serial number.
(8) Terms of agreement governing the acquisition and installation of
each such mechanical amusement device, including rates and
dates.
(9) A statement under oath indicating whether the distributor, the
applicant or any person currently connected with the operation of
the licensed premises has ever been convicted of any crime or
found guilty of a violation of any ordinance relating to gambling,
including but not limited to, violations of N.J.S.A. 2C:37-1 et seq., or
any City ordinance involving gambling or violation of this article, or
a comparable offense in a different jurisdiction. With regard to
those applications from corporations or partnerships, the
statement under oath shall contain information about each
stockholder holding 10% or more of the stock or a partner holding a
10% or greater share in the partnership.
(10) Any other information which the Police Chief may deem reasonably
necessary and proper for the full protection of the interest of the
patrons or the public.
A. Required. All applications for a licensed premises that is to contain four
or more mechanical amusement devices shall be required to have an
amusement arcade license.
B. Fingerprints. The license application shall be accompanied by a set of
fingerprints of any person to be employed on the premises or having an
interest therein, whether as owner, lessee, operator, manager or in any
§ 64-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-6
1:217
other capacity, however employed. In the event that the application is
made by a corporation or partnership, fingerprints shall be submitted
by each partner, officer and director thereof.
C. Investigation and inspection.
(1) The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, may initiate an
investigation of the premises and the applicant to determine the
truth of the facts set forth in the application.
(2) The Fire Official, or his/her designee, may inspect the premises to
determine whether the premises complies with the existing fire
regulations of the City.
(3) If such an investigation or inspection is conducted, a copy of any
report or findings shall be attached to the application by the
appropriate official.
D. Requirements.
(1) If an applicant requests a license for four or more mechanical
amusement devices for any one location, (s)he shall provide the
following:
(a) A minimum of one on-site, off-street parking space for each
device requested.
(b) A uniform security guard and at least two full-time supervisory
personnel who shall be on the premises at all times during the
hours of operation.
(2) The applicant shall submit plans to the Construction Official, or
other designated City official, demonstrating that the building or
place where the devices are to be located is properly insulated to
prevent noise of both the patrons and the devices from disturbing
or entering adjacent buildings and that the location wall conform to
all state noise level regulations.
(3) The applicant shall submit to the Chief of Police a plan
demonstrating how the applicant intends to provide for change,
temporary storage of any and all money and all other security (s)he
intends to operate under within his/her place of business or at the
location of the machines. The Chief of Police shall submit a written
report to the Mayor and Commissioners commenting upon the
proposed plan and indicating his/her approval or disapproval and/
or recommendations.
E. Off-street parking.
(1) Each premises licensed as an arcade shall provide private off-street
parking facilities of one car space, nine feet wide and 20 feet long,
for every five persons, or fraction thereof, who can be
accommodated in the structure at any single assemblage. For
§ 64-6 UNION CITY CODE § 64-6
1:218
§ 64-7. Disqualifications precluding licensing.
§ 64-8. Prohibition against mechanical amusement devices use for
gambling.
No license shall be granted for any mechanical amusement device which is
to be used for the purpose of gambling. For the purpose of this article, a
mechanical amusement device, the operation of which is based in any part
on random chance or the random assignment of numbers and the operation
of which does not require more than minimal skill of hand-eye coordination
shall be presumed to be intended to be utilized for gambling purposes. By
way of clarification but not limitation, mechanical amusement devices used
example, if the structure is determined to accommodate 100
persons, then there shall be 20 off-street private parking spaces.
(2) The off-street private parking spaces required in Subsection E(1)
above shall be located within a two-block radius from the site of the
arcade and shall be located in the City.
A. Any application which fails to conform to the requirements of this
article or which contains any misrepresentations shall constitute
sufficient grounds for the denial of the application.
B. Except as otherwise permitted by this article, no license required by
this article shall be issued to any applicant who shall have been
convicted of:
(1) A crime.
(2) A disorderly persons offense related to gambling, including but not
limited to violations of N.J.S.A. 2C:37-1 et seq. or a comparable
offense in a different jurisdiction.
(3) A violation of any City ordinance involving gambling, including but
not limited to a violation of this article or any provision of this Code.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
C. No license required by this article shall be issued to any applicant to
operate, maintain or use any mechanical amusement device in any
premises or location where a violation of this article has occurred and
for which violation a license has been automatically suspended or
revoked pursuant to this article.
D. With regard to an application from corporations or partnerships an
applicant wherein a stockholder holding 10% or more of the stock, or a
partner holding a ten-percent or greater share in the partnerships has
been convicted of a crime, disorderly persons offense related to
gambling, including but not limited to violations of N.J.S.A. 2C:37-1 et
seq., or any City ordinance involving gambling or violation of this article
or a comparable offense in a different jurisdiction, shall be denied
license.
§ 64-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-8
1:219
for the purpose of gambling shall be deemed to include, but not be limited
to, the following:
§ 64-9. License fee.
§ 64-10. Expiration and renewal of licenses.
§ 64-11. Display of license.
Any license granted pursuant to this article shall:
A. Mechanical amusement devices known as Joker Poker, or any similar
mechanical amusement devices displaying playing cards; keno, or any
similar mechanical amusement devices displaying a number board
where numbers are designated by random; horse racing; roulette; dice;
Lucky Lines; Cherry Master or any similar mechanical amusement
device styled after a slot machine with a rolling display or circular
wheel on which are depicted symbols; lotto or lottery-type machines.
B. Any mechanical amusement device which does not have an operable
slot or receptacle for the insertion of coin or paper money. This section
shall not be deemed to prohibit devices provided at no charge by
restaurants or retail establishments for the amusement of their patrons.
C. Any mechanical amusement device with buttons or controls labeled
"double up" or "bet" or buttons or controls performing such function
regardless of label.
D. Any mechanical amusement device which can be controlled or operated
from a remote location by other than the individual operator or player.
E. Any mechanical amusement device readily capable of being converted
by the internal technology of the mechanical amusement device to
machines such as set forth in Subsection A above, including, but not
limited to, "dual screen" machines.
A. License fees for each calendar year, or part thereof, shall be as set forth
in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. The license fee shall not be prorated.
A. All licenses issued under this article shall be for a term of one year
commencing January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year of
issuance.
B. Application for renewal of the license shall be made with the Licensing
Department no later than January 1 of each year and shall be
accompanied by the required annual fee, made payable to the Licensing
Department, City of Union City, and the information required by § 64-5.
A. Be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which the license
was granted.
§ 64-8 UNION CITY CODE § 64-11
1:220
§ 64-12. Transfer of license.
Each license shall entitle the licensee to conduct the licensed business only
at the location designated in the license and shall not be transferable from
person to person nor from place to place. It shall be maintained only at the
place and by the person designated in the license. Any licensee wishing to
transfer such license shall make application to the Licensing Department in
the same manner as application for an original license.
§ 64-13. Access to machines.
All mechanical amusement devices licensed by the City must be available
at all times during licensure for internal inspection by the licensing clerk
or the police. No mechanical amusement device shall be fastened, locked
or secured in such a fashion that the licensee or person in charge of
the licensed premises cannot immediately provide access to the internal
components of such machine upon request.
§ 64-14. Location and number of devices.
B. State the name and address of the licensee.
C. State the manufacturer, model number and serial number for each
mechanical amusement game for which the license was issued.
A. Location. No mechanical amusement device shall be located in a socalled
"back room" nor in any part of the licensed premises which is not
open to the public.
B. Number. No more than three mechanical amusement devices shall be
permitted under this article for any location and/or wherein such
devices are to be operated, used or maintained, unless approved as an
amusement parlor or arcade.
C. Physical limitations. The number of mechanical amusement devices
that may be located in any one location shall be governed by the
physical space available in any business location for the use of such
devices. The following rules shall govern the location of all mechanical
amusement devices within any licensed premises:
(1) Not more than two mechanical amusement devices shall be
licensed or operated within the first 200 square feet of public floor
space of any one place of business. A license may be issued for
additional devices for every additional 50 square feet or four times
the area of the device, whichever is greater, of public floor space.
Music machines, such as jukeboxes, shall not be counted in the
determination of the original two machines or devices.
(2) Each mechanical amusement device shall be located at least 10
feet from the entranceway to the premises in which located and
placed so that it does not obstruct or interfere with the free
§ 64-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-14
1:221
§ 64-15. Compliance with codes required; schedule of locations.
passage to and from the premises of patrons or users of the
premises.
(3) Each mechanical amusement device shall have an unobstructed
perimeter zone or distance of three feet around the sides of the
three linear borders of the device for the users of such devices. The
area which is required hereunder for each machine shall not be
encroached upon by the area for any other machine. It is the intent
of this subsection to prevent overcrowding and assure safe passage
of the general public, and each mechanical amusement device shall
have its own unobstructed perimeter zone.
(4) A license for four or more devices in any one location shall not be
granted if the location is within 1,000 feet of a public school giving
instructions at least five days per week, holidays excepted, for eight
or more months per year.
(5) An application for four or more devices shall not be granted if the
location of the machines is within 1,500 feet of any of the following:
(a) A church or any house of worship of any religious faith.
(b) A nursing home.
(c) A rest home.
(d) A public library.
(e) A residential area or another location with four or more
devices.
D. Operation within proscribed distances. No mechanical amusement
device may be operated within the proscribed distance of a school or
house of worship. This subsection shall not be construed to require the
removal of any mechanical amusement devices which were in place
before April 12, 1984.
A. Any premises which is declared to be unsafe or a fire hazard and which
fails to meet the requirements for issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
as set forth in a written report by the Fire Prevention Bureau, shall be
deemed to be ineligible for a license.
B. On or after the effective date of this article, the appropriate officials of
the City shall file with the License Inspector a schedule listing the name
and address of each amusement parlor or arcade located within the City
and listing the number of persons which can presently congregate in
the structure on any single occasion in compliance with fire safety and
health standards codes.
§ 64-14 UNION CITY CODE § 64-16
1:222
§ 64-16. Hours of operation for arcades.
The hours of operation for any arcade licensed under this article shall be
between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., except Friday and Saturday evenings of
each week. On Friday and Saturday evenings, the licensed premises may
remain open until 12:00 midnight. Children under the age of 16 years shall
be forbidden by the licensee, his/her agents, servants or employees to play
any mechanical amusement devices or other arcade games between 9:00
a.m. and 3:30 p.m. when public or parochial schools are in session.
§ 64-17. Operational regulations.
A. No intoxicated or disorderly person shall be admitted to the licensed
premises or permitted to remain therein. No licensee, agent or
employee shall permit dispensation, consumption or bringing on to the
licensed premises of any alcoholic beverage, as defined in N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq., except on those premises so licensed under the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
B. No person shall loiter or congregate within the licensed premises or on
public or private property outside of and immediately adjacent to the
licensed premises. Such loitering or congregation shall be considered
as conducting business in a disorderly manner.
C. No public entrance or exit shall be locked during legal hours of
operation.
D. No person shall be permitted on the premises licensed as an arcade
other than during the hours of operation set forth herein, except those
directly operating or employed on the licensed premises.
E. No activity which is or may be detrimental to the public health, safety,
welfare or morals shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
F. No person shall cause noise or loudness of such nature so as to disturb
the peace and quiet in, upon and around the licensed premises.
G. No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in a premises
licensed as an arcade.
H. A mechanical amusement device may only be used or operated during
the hours of operation of the premises in which located and where the
operator or an employee of the operator is present in the premises.
I. No licensee, or his/her agents, servants or employees, shall offer,
permit, suffer or allow any prize, something of value or return of money
on any mechanical amusement device on the licensed premises. This
section shall not be deemed to prohibit any form of promise involving
extension of a privilege of playing on a mechanical amusement device
without charge as an award for the attainment of a certain score on that
device.
§ 64-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-18
1:223
§ 64-18. Liability insurance.
No premises licensed as an arcade under the terms of this article shall be in
operation unless there is in force a public liability insurance policy to cover
any injuries suffered as a result of the operation of the licensed premises.
Liability insurance shall be in the amount of not less than $100,000 for any
one occurrence and not less than $50,000 for injury to any one person. If
any such policy is canceled during the license year, immediate notification
of same must be given to the City by the licensee.
§ 64-19. Suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license.
A license may be suspended, revoked or not renewed by the Board of
Commissioners for violation of any of the terms and provisions of this article
or for any other just and good cause, provided that the licensee is served
with notice of charges and given an opportunity to be heard. Good cause
shall include:
§ 64-20. Removal of disqualification.
A. Gambling on the premises.
B. False or incorrect material on the application or information furnished
by the applicant.
C. Failure to maintain good and safe conduct on the premises.
D. Violation of the laws of the State of New Jersey, federal law or of this
article or any other ordinances of the City pertaining to the operation of
the licensed premises.
E. The presence of the machines resulting in gambling, obscene and loud
language, disturbing the public or to the other patrons of the premises,
creation of a nuisance, excess noise, litter, traffic or rowdyism by the
patron.
F. A disorderly persons offense against the licensee related to gambling,
including, but not limited to, violations of N.J.S.A. 2C:37-1 et seq.
G. Any cause which would have been cause for a rejection of the
application in the first instance.
A. Any person whose license has been revoked pursuant to this article,
after the lapse of two years from the date of conviction, may apply to
the Mayor and Commissioners for an order removing the
disqualification from obtaining or holding a license under this article.
B. Whenever any such application described in Subsection A of this
section is made, and it appears to the satisfaction of the Mayor and
Commissioners that at least two years have lapsed from the date of the
last conviction, the applicant has conducted him/herself in a law
abiding manner during that period, the granting of a license for the
operation of a mechanical amusement device will not be contrary to the
§ 64-18 UNION CITY CODE § 64-20
1:224
§ 64-21. Seizure of devices.
§ 64-22. Violations and penalties.
public interest, the Mayor and Commissioners may enter an order
removing the applicant's disqualification from obtaining or holding a
license under this article because of the conviction. On and after the
date of the entry of such order, the person therein named shall be
qualified to obtain and hold a license under this article, notwithstanding
the conviction therein referred to, provided (s)he is, in all other
respects, qualified under this article.
A. If the police, or any law enforcement officer with the authority to act
within this jurisdiction, shall have probable cause to believe that a
mechanical amusement device is prohibited pursuant to this article,
such device may be seized, removed and impounded from the premises
by the police or such other law enforcement officer, and the police or
other authorized law enforcement officer shall have the right to access
the internal components of such mechanical amusement device.
B. In order to gain access to the internal components of any mechanical
amusement device seized under this article, the proprietor or
distributor shall provide immediate access, or the police or law
enforcement officer may gain entry by alternate means.
C. Written notice of any seizure pursuant to this article shall be given to
the distributor or owner of such device, as designated on the device or
on the license application on file with the License Inspector for the
device in question. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and regular mail to the owner or distributor at the
address designated on the machine or on file with the License Inspector
within two business days of seizure. Such notice shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
D. Any such seized mechanical amusement device shall not be released
until proper ownership documents are presented and/or licensing fees,
if such device is eligible for licensing, are paid, together with a removal/
storage charge of $250 per device seized. If possible, those removing
the device shall provide the person in charge at the place of removal
with a report, to be filed with the Police Department, noting any obvious
damage to the property. Thereafter, any person aggrieved thereby may
petition for a hearing in writing before the Director.
E. If no person files a claim for return of a seized mechanical amusement
device seized under this article within six months from the date of
seizure, such device may be disposed of pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-157.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a minimum fine of $500 per violation,
with the maximum penalty not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for 90
§ 64-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-22
1:225
days or community service of 90 days. Any additional fine imposed by
the court for a repeat violation of this article shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum penalty set forth above.
B. Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 64-22 UNION CITY CODE § 64-22
1:226
Chapter 70
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Noise disturbances by animals — See Ch. 261.
Animals in parks — See Ch. 290.
§ 64-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-22
1:227

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation of Dogs
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. XII of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 70-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, terms shall have the same meanings as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 4:112-15.1, except as follows:
ANIMAL DROPPINGS AND FECAL MATTER — Any and all feces,
excrement, ordure, dung or other similar solid waste matter, discharged or
eliminated by dogs or other animals.
ANIMALS WITHIN CITY LIMITS — All animals within the City limits,
including bitches or spayed bitches.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of an animal, owner shall
include every person having a right of property in such animal and every
persons who has such animal in his/her keeping.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All property other than the property defined in
public streets, sidewalks and areas adjacent thereto, as defined below, and
which is owned, managed or controlled by persons other than the owner of
the animal and the property of persons who have invited the owner of any
animal to bring the animal into his/her or their property.
PUBLIC STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND AREAS ADJACENT THERETO — Any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, safety island, ways,
alleys, roads, squares, lanes, walks, lawns, parking lots, loading zones,
driveways or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public
property whatsoever, or any areas adjacent thereto. These restrictions shall
not apply to that portion of the street lying between the curblines.
VICIOUS DOG — Any animal which has on more than one occasion bitten a
person without provocation, or has been declared by a Municipal Judge to
be a vicious animal.
§ 70-2. Licensing provisions.
A. When required. Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of
licensing age:
(1) Any dog owned or kept within the City by a resident of the City on
January 1 of any calendar year.
(2) Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar
year and kept within the City for more than 10 days after
acquisition.
(3) Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar
year.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:229
§ 70-3. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
(4) Any unlicensed dog brought into the City by any person and kept
within the City for more than 10 days.
(5) Any dog licensed by another state brought into the City by any
person and kept within the City for more than 90 days.
B. Application for license. Each application for a license under this article
shall give the following information:
(1) A general description of the dog sought to be licensed, including
breed, sex, age, color and markings, and whether the dog is of a
long- , medium- or short-haired variety.
(2) Name, street and post office address and phone number of the
owner of, and the person who shall keep or harbor, the dog.
C. Application for license; when made. Applications for licenses for dogs
which are required to be licensed by the provisions of Subsection A(1)
shall be made before February 1 of each calendar year. In all cases, the
application for a license shall be made within 10 days of the day upon
which the dog in question first becomes subject to the provisions of this
section.
D. License record. The information on all applications under this article
and the registration number issued to each licensed dog shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Health Officer. In addition,
(s)he shall forward similar information to the State Department of
Health and Senior Services each month on forms furnished by the
Department.
E. Fees. The person applying for a license shall pay fees as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees, for each dog and for the registration tag for each
dog. The same fees shall be charged for the annual renewal of each
license and registration tag.
F. Expiration date. Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on
January 31 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which it
was issued.
G. Rabies inoculation. Each application for a dog license shall be
accompanied by a certificate of inoculation against rabies pursuant to
the provisions contained in § 70-8; otherwise no license and license and
registration tag for the dog in question shall be issued.
A. License required. Any person who keeps, operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Health
Officer for a license entitling him/her to keep or operate the
establishment, and shall not be required to secure individual licenses
for dogs owned by the licensee and kept at the establishment. Licenses
shall not be transferable to another owner or different premises.
§ 70-2 UNION CITY CODE § 70-3
1:230
§ 70-4. Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs.12
§ 70-5. Impounding and destruction of certain dogs.
Licensing of these establishments, and regulation thereof, shall be in
accordance with law and with the rules, regulations and directions of
the State Department of Health and Senior Services.
B. Approval of Health Officer. No license shall be issued until the proposed
licensee submits a written statement from the Health Office of the
Department of Health that the establishment or proposed
establishment complies with local and state rules governing the
location of and sanitation at the establishment.
C. License term. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained
and all licenses shall expire on January 1 of each year.
D. License fees. The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses
shall be as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
E. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off the premises, except on leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
A. Fee. The annual license fee for a potentially dangerous dog license, and
each renewal thereof, shall be as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.13
B. Impounding and destroying.
(1) If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all
appeals pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the
dog shall be liable to the City for the costs and expenses of
impounding and destroying the dog.
(2) The owner shall incur the expense of impounding the dog,
regardless of whether the dog is ultimately found to be vicious or
potentially dangerous.
C. Violation and penalty. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is
found by a preponderance of the evidence to have violated this section,
or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or to have failed to
comply with a panel's order, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 per day and not more than $1,000 per day of the violation; and
each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. [Amended 5-21-2013]
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: Original subsections B, C and D, pertaining to license and registration and
hearing of determination for vicious or potentially dangerous dogs, which immediately
followed this subsection, were repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5
1:231
§ 70-6. Regulations.
A. Causes for impounding. The Animal Control Officer shall take into
custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, any of the following dogs:
(1) Any unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of
this article.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the Animal Control Officer or his/her
agent has reason to believe is a stray dog.
(3) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner of or the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
(5) Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog as provided
in § 70-4, provided that these dogs may also be seized by any police
officer, and provided further that if the dogs cannot be seized with
safety, they may be killed.
B. Access to premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go on any
premises to seize for impounding any dog which (s)he may lawfully
seize and impound when the officer is in immediate pursuit of the dog,
except on the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present
and forbids same.
C. Notice of seizure.
(1) If any dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar
or harness showing the name and address of the owner, or the
person keeping or harboring the dog is known, the Animal Control
Officer shall immediately serve on the person whose address is
given on the collar, or on the person owning, keeping or harboring
the dog, a notice, in writing, stating that the dog has been seized
and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed
within seven days after service of the notice.
(2) A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it
to the person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter
addressed to that person at his/her usual or last known place of
abode, or to the address given on the collar.
A. Wearing of registration tag. All dogs which are required by the
provisions of this article to be licensed shall wear a collar or harness
with the registration tag for the dog securely fastened thereto.
§ 70-5 UNION CITY CODE § 70-6
1:232
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his/her duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of any dog without the consent of the owner, or shall any person
attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this article.
D. Disturbing the peace. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain
any dog which habitually barks or cries between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
E. Running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit it to run at large upon the public streets or in any
public park, public building or other place within the City.
F. Leashing of dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the
public places of the City unless such dog is accompanied by a person
over the age of 12 years and is securely confined and controlled by an
adequate leash not more than eight feet long.
G. Nuisance and property damage.
(1) No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or
permit it to soil, defile or commit any nuisance or deposit any
droppings or fecal matter on any public street, sidewalk or areas
adjacent thereto, or on any private property without the owner's
permission, under penalty of a fine not to exceed the sum of $250,
or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both, within the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, unless such person shall
make a reasonable effort to clean and remove such droppings or
fecal matter in good faith and within a reasonable time, as
hereinafter set forth, so as to prevent such soiling action, which
soiling action is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
detrimental to the public health.
(2) Such soiling action shall be deemed prevented if such persons shall
promptly clean up all such droppings and fecal matter by causing
same to be gathered in a suitable bag, wrapper or other container
and disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner. Such action shall be
taken promptly, within a reasonable time after such deposit, but, in
any event, within one hour thereof, so as to minimize the
detrimental effects of such droppings and fecal matter so deposited
if in violation of the provisions of this subsection.
(3) No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or
suffer it to do any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property.
§ 70-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7
1:233
§ 70-7. Dog bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, the individual, or his/her parent or guardian if (s)he is a minor,
shall immediately notify the police. When the owner or keeper of any dog
shall be notified by the police that the dog has bitten any individual or
individuals, the owner or keeper of the dog must comply with the following
procedures:
§ 70-8. Rabies control.
A. Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
B. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for
a period of 10 days. At the end of 10 days have the dog reexamined by a
veterinarian and a written report of the dog's state of health sent to the
Department of Health.
A. Mandatory inoculation. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D
hereof, no person shall own, harbor or keep any dog within the
municipal limits of the City which is not inoculated against rabies.
B. Periods of inoculation. A dog shall be inoculated against rabies once
each year and within nine months prior to the date set for procurement
of the dog license required in § 70-2A, provided that if the Flury chick
embryo vaccine is used, the inoculation against rabies may be
performed every three years. The inoculation shall be made by a duly
licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey or by such other person
permitted by law to make same and approved by the Department of
Health of the City. The vaccine must be of a type approved by the United
States Bureau of Animal Industry or by the United States Public Health
Service.
C. Rabies tag and certificate. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a
dog within the municipal limits of the City shall possess a certificate
indicating both that such dog has been inoculated against rabies and
setting forth the date of such inoculation. The certificate of inoculation
shall be exhibited to the Health Officer when application for a dog
license is made. The certificate shall also be produced by any person
owning, keeping or harboring a dog within the municipal limits of the
City upon the request of any Department of Health official or member of
the Police Department.
D. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Dogs which have not attained the age of seven months.
(2) Dogs which do not possess a permanent set of teeth.
(3) Any dog which the Department of Health, for a specified period of
time, declares exempt upon presentation of a certificate from a
veterinarian stating that because of an infirmity or other physical
§ 70-7 UNION CITY CODE § 70-8
1:234
§ 70-9. Enforcement.
There shall be an Animal Control Officer employed in the Department of
Health whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article and
who shall be subject to any rules and regulations as to his/her employment
as may be directed by the Health Officer.
§ 70-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with § 70-2 of this
article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50
for each offense, except that for the first offense, the penalty shall be not
less than $1 nor more than $50. For any other violation of this article, the
general penalty clause in Chapter 1, Article IV, shall apply.
condition, the inoculation of such dog shall be deemed inadvisable
for a specified period of time.
(4) Dogs in veterinarian hospitals or pet shows, dogs in transient or
dogs brought into the City temporarily for the sole purpose of
showing in dog shows or exhibitions.
(5) Any dog inoculated at the Health Department animal rabies clinic.
§ 70-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-10
1:235

ARTICLE II
Keeping of Birds
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 6-10 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 70-11. Restrictions.
No pigeons, chickens or other poultry shall be kept within 25 feet of any
structure owned by another and used for human habitation, occupation or
assembly. In no case shall any person or persons be permitted to keep more
than 50 pigeons, chickens, ducks or other poultry.
§ 70-12. Permit required.
No person shall keep pigeons, chickens or other poultry in the City without
having first obtained from the Health Officer a permit for that purpose. The
permit may be issued by the Health Officer upon the payment of a fee as set
forth in Chapter 155, Fees, and the permit shall expire on December 31 in
each and every year.
§ 70-13. Maintenance regulations.
The following regulations and conditions shall be complied with in the
keeping and housing of pigeons, chickens and other poultry in the City:
§ 70-14. Revocation of permits.
A. The house or coop shall be:
(1) Dry, well ventilated, with windows to admit sunlight.
(2) Well whitewashed or painted within.
(3) Cleaned at least once a week and to be disinfected, if necessary.
B. Perches shall be removable and kept clean.
C. Chicken nests shall be removable, cleaned, aired and sunned at
frequent intervals.
D. Drinking cups shall be clean and supplied at all times with clean water.
E. Yards shall be kept clean and free from odors.
A. If the conditions and regulations are not complied with, the permit shall
be revoked. These provisions shall not apply to such pigeons, chickens
or other poultry confined in coops in regularly licensed markets or
stores for the sale, slaughter and plucking of poultry.
B. Whenever, in the opinion of the Board of Health, the environment has
changed since granting the permit to keep and maintain pigeons,
chicken or other poultry to such an extent that maintenance may
constitute a nuisance, the permit may be revoked by the Health Officer.
§ 70-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-14
1:237
§ 70-15. Power of Health Officer.
The Health Officer is hereby empowered to suspend or revoke the license
held by any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article.
§ 70-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
C. No license, however, shall be suspended and revoked until after
hearing. A notice, in writing, stating time and place of such hearing
shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the holding
of such hearing.
§ 70-14 UNION CITY CODE § 70-16
1:238
ARTICLE III
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 4-19-2005]
§ 70-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the City
of Union City, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 70-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of the State of New Jersey subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 70-19. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the City of Union City, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 70-20. Enforcement.
§ 70-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
A. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Police Department of the City of
Union City.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 70-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-21
1:239
Chapter 75
ARTIFACT SALES
§ 75-1. Prohibited acts.
No person may sell, transfer, exchange, purchase, receive or offer to sell,
transfer, exchange, transport, purchase, receive, appropriate or remove any
relic(s), object(s), fossil(s) or artifact(s) of an historical nature originating or
found in a public building or on public property without the express written
permission of the City or the public entity in charge of the public property
or building.
§ 75-2. Term defined.
For purposes of this chapter, "artifacts" are as defined in N.J.S.A. 13:1L-10
(L. 2004, c. 170).
§ 75-3. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any criminal penalty, any person who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article
IV, General Penalty.
Chapter 81
BICYCLES
§ 81-1. Foot-propelled bicycles, tricycles and similar vehicles.
Each person shall operate or propel a bicycle, tricycle or similar vehicle only
in the manner of and subject to these regulations:
A. Every person operating such vehicle shall:
(1) Obey all direction arrows on one-way streets.
(2) Ride only on the right side of the street.
(3) Not hold on nor hitch such bicycle, tricycle or similar vehicle to any
other vehicle.
(4) Not ride at night without a light on the front and reflector or lamp
on the rear.
(5) Not ride abreast of another bicycle, tricycle or similar vehicle.
(6) Not ride out of alleys and driveways or from behind parked cars
without stopping and looking to see that sidewalks or streets are
clear of traffic.
§ 70-21 UNION CITY CODE § 81-1
1:240
Chapter 87
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 107.
Vacant lots — See Ch. 244.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
Solid waste — See Ch. 359.
(7) Obey all traffic signals and the orders of traffic officers and school
patrols.
(8) Not engage in any trick riding or weaving in or upon any street or
public highway.
(9) Become familiar with and obey all traffic rules and regulations.
(10) Be watchful and alert at all times and be safety minded.
(11) Turn only at street intersections.
(12) Signal on all turns.
(13) Pass to the left when overtaking any vehicle that is slow moving.
(14) Pass to the right when meeting oncoming vehicles.
(15) Stop at all stop signs.
(16) Not coast with both feet off the pedals.
(17) Not ride on icy pavements.
(18) Not carry large or bulky packages.
(19) Not ride on sidewalks, except in prescribed areas.
B. Every such vehicle shall:
(1) When not in use, be held up by a stand and not impede pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
(2) Carry an alarm bell which, when rung, is audible for a distance of
100 feet.
(3) Vehicles shall not carry more than one person, except where they
are constructed for more.
(4) Have attached to it a light or such other illuminating power as to be
plainly visible 100 yards ahead. Such illumination shall be kept
lighted when the vehicle is in use between the hours of sunset and
sunrise.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-1
1:241

ARTICLE I
Removal of Obnoxious Growth and Trash
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-4 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances,
as amended through Ord. No. 1999-8]
§ 87-1. Duties of owners and tenants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
in the City to:
§ 87-2. Notice to owners or tenants.
After an investigation of any complaint of a resident, officer or employee of
the City relative to a violation of this article, or upon his/her own motion,
the Building Inspector shall notify the owner, tenant or person in possession
of the lands complained of, in writing, either personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to remove such brush, weeds, dead or dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash or other debris within
10 days after receipt of the notice. The Building Inspector shall reinspect
the lands in question after the ten-day period expires to see whether the
condition complained of has been abated or remedied.
§ 87-3. Removal by City; costs to become lien.
A. Keep all brush, hedges or other plant life growing within 10 feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut to a
height of not more than three feet, where it shall be necessary and
expedient for the preservation of public safety.
B. Keep the lands free of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, where the
same are inimical to the preservation of public health, safety or general
welfare of the City, or which may constitute a fire hazard.
A. If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question
shall fail to abate the condition complained of within 10 days after
receipt of notice, the Building Inspector shall file a complaint in
Municipal Court against such owner, tenant or person in possession of
the lands in question for violation of this article.
B. In addition, the Building Inspection may cause the condition
complained of to be abated and shall certify the cost to the Board of
Commissioners, who shall examine the certificate and, if it is correct,
cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the lands. The
amount so charged shall become a lien upon the lands and shall be
added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon the lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner
as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any
violation of this article.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:243
§ 87-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to a
fine of $75.
§ 87-4 UNION CITY CODE § 87-4
1:244
ARTICLE II
Weed Control Code
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 6-7 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 87-5. Establishment of Code.
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance, providing for
removal or abatement thereof and recovery of expenses incurred by the
Division of Health in removing or abating such nuisance and prescribing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1
et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this article and made a part of it
without the inclusion of the text.
§ 87-6. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 87-7. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have been
placed on file in the offices of the Chief Health Officer and the City Clerk for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 87-8. Enforcement.
The Health Officer and any other official authorized by the Board of
Commissioners shall have the responsibility for the enforcement hereof.
§ 87-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
§ 87-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-9
1:245

ARTICLE III
Preservation of Trees
[Adopted 2-2-2016]
§ 87-10. Purpose and intent.
§ 87-11. Definitions.
The terms below as used in this article shall have the meanings established
by the International Society of Arboriculture, as supplemented below:
CALIPER: ANSI Z60 FOR NURSERY STOCK — "Caliper" is a type of
diameter measurement used in the nursery industry. The height
measurement shall be taken from ground level for field-grown stock and
from the soil line for container-grown stock, which should be at or near
the top of the root flare. Caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken
six inches above the top of root flare up to and including four-inch caliper
size. If the caliper at six inches above the ground exceeds four inches, the
caliper should be measured at 12 inches above the top of root flare. Seldom
are tree trunks perfectly round. The most accurate measurement will result
from the use of a diameter tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual
or electronic slot or pincer type caliper tools should be the average of the
smallest and largest measurements.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree measured
4 1/2 feet above the uphill/highest side.
A. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excess destruction, removal and
cutting of trees upon lots and tracts of land within Union City will cause
increased drainage control costs, increased soil erosion and
sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil, degradation of water
resources, decreased groundwater recharge, increased buildup of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, the establishment of a heat island effect
and increased dust and pollution. The singular or cumulative effect of
any of the foregoing could adversely impact the character of Union City,
decrease property values, render the land unfit and unsuitable for its
most appropriate use, and negatively affect the health, safety and
general welfare of Union City's residents. Thus, the City governing body
desires to regulate and control indiscriminate and excessive cutting of
trees within the City and to require appropriate tree replacement.
B. It is recognized that there is a strong interrelationship between the
integrity of the City's water resources, development on steep slopes,
tree removal, soil disturbance, stormwater management and the
general use of the land resources. Fewer trees throughout the City also
correlates with increased air pollution. Therefore, the governing body
finds that the appropriate management of these resources is an
important health, safety and general welfare concern. It is the intention
of the City of Union City to control the cutting, removal and destruction
of trees within the City, thereby preserving the maximum number of
trees for the purposes stated herein.
§ 87-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-11
1:247
DRIP LINE — The line formed by water dripping from the outermost
branches of a tree.
EMERGENCY — Any event or condition which has damaged or destroyed a
tree, such that the continued presence of such damaged or destroyed tree
imminently threatens harm to life or property in proximity thereto.
OWNER — Any person having title or lawful possession of any lot, plot or
parcel of land within the City.
PRIVATE TREE — Any tree located on private land within the City.
PROTECTIVE BARRIER — A barrier constructed to protect the root system
or trunk of a tree from damage.
PUBLIC AREA — Trees within City right-of-way.
PUBLIC TREE — Any tree located on lands owned, or leased by the City of
Union City or any of the public entities or subdivisions created by the City of
Union City including, but not limited to, the Parking Authority and Housing
Authority.
ROOT SYSTEM — Tree roots within the drip line perimeter.
SHADE TREE COMMITTEE — The advisory body established pursuant to
City of Union City municipal ordinance § 4-93.
TREE —
TREE ESCROW FUND — A fund established by the governing body for the
administration and promotion of tree and shrubbery resource sustainability
projects and practices which may be consistent with the Community
Stewardship Incentive Program as outlined within the New Jersey Shade
Tree and Community Forestry Assistance Act, N.J.S.A. § 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — The permit issued by the Shade Tree
Committee or its designee to remove or destroy a tree or trees.
TREE SPECIALIST —
Any living deciduous tree having a DBH greater than two inches
diameter. A deciduous tree is a tree which shades foliage at the end of
the growing season, or some other specific stage of the growing season.
A.
Any living coniferous tree having a DBH greater than four inches
diameter. A coniferous tree is a cone-bearing tree (for example, an
evergreen is a coniferous tree).
B.
Any living dogwood (cornus florida) or American Holly (ilex opaca)
having a DBH of one inch or greater diameter.
C.
The Mayor shall appoint a Tree Specialist. This individual shall be
responsible for the inspection of sites for which application(s) are
filed under this article. This individual will be responsible for the
administration and protection requirements of this article and
enforcement of the article as directed by the Shade Tree Commission.
A.
§ 87-11 UNION CITY CODE § 87-11
1:248
§ 87-12. Acts prohibited unless permit is obtained; exceptions.
A Tree Specialist is either of the following:
A forester who shall have a bachelor's degree in forestry or
arboriculture from a college or university, shall be certified as a
certified tree expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have
a minimum of three years' experience in planting, care and
maintenance of trees. The forester shall have the responsibility of
reviewing an approved forest management plan and inspecting the
forested site for plan compliance if requested by the Tax Assessor.
A conservation officer who shall be certified as a certified tree
expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have a minimum of
three years' experience in planting, care and maintenance of
trees.
(a)
(1)
The Tree Specialist shall be paid from the Tree Escrow Fund, which
is established herein, and shall be paid in accordance with a fee
schedule established by contract with the municipality.
(2)
B.
A. No person shall remove, destroy, or cause or allow any living tree to be
removed or destroyed without first obtaining a permit.
B. No person shall with intent to cause injury to any living tree:
(1) Girdle any living tree;
(2) Place salt, brine oil, chemicals or other substances injurious to
plant growth within the drip line, or in any other place or manner,
with intent to injure any living tree growing thereon or nearby.
C. No person shall alter the existing grade surrounding any tree by more
than six inches without constructing an appropriate masonry well or
wall to provide retention of the original grade around the tree. Such
masonry structure shall encircle the tree at a distance of at least three
feet. Specifications for the construction of the masonry well or wall
shall be established by the City Construction Department, and a permit
and certificate of approval shall be obtained relative thereto.
D. Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Any tree of less than six inches DBH.
(2) Any tree or trees planted and grown for commercial purposes on
property used as a commercial nursery, tree farm, garden center,
Christmas tree plantation or tree orchard.
(3) Any tree growing in a utility right-of-way or fire trail subject to the
approval of the Department of Public Works.
§ 87-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-12
1:249
§ 87-13. Application for permit; application fees; exceptions.
§ 87-14. Procedures and standards for review of application.
(4) Any private trees located in the rear yard or backyard of any
private land located in the City.
A. Prior to removal or destruction of any living tree preserved by this
article, any person desiring such removal or destruction must obtain a
permit for said action by filing an application with the Department of
Public Works on a form prescribed by the Department of Public Works.
However, if a tree must be removed or destroyed due to an emergency
as defined herein, then the Department of Public Works shall be notified
of the removal in writing within five working days of removal.
B. The application for a permit shall identify the lot or tract of land upon
which the living tree(s) are located; and shall disclose:
(1) The name and address of the owner and/or the tenant or duly
authorized agent of the owner;
(2) Indication of whether or not the applicant is a public utility;
(3) The lot and block of the property;
(4) The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, including the
location of all existing and proposed easements;
(5) The actual location, species and diameter of the trees to be
removed or destroyed;
(6) The location of any existing buildings or construction; and
(7) The reason for the requested removal.
C. The Department of Public Works shall charge any person a fee of $10
upon the filing of a completed application. However, no fee shall be
charged to obtain a permit for the removal or destruction of a diseased
tree, or a tree that must be removed due to an emergency, as defined
herein. If a tree must be removed or destroyed due to an emergency as
defined herein, then the Department of Public Works shall be notified of
the removal in writing within five business days of removal.
A. Upon the filing of a complete application with the Department of Public
Works, the Tree Supervisor/Tree Specialist shall within 30 days:
(1) Examine the premises and physical condition of the land in the
vicinity of the premises;
(2) Inspect the tree(s) referred to in the application, and the physical
conditions of the lands in the vicinity thereof;
(3) Take pictures of the tree(s) that are sought to be removed.
§ 87-12 UNION CITY CODE § 87-14
1:250
§ 87-15. Fees.
B. After completing the inspection, the Tree Supervisor/Tree Specialist
shall determine whether or not the permit should be granted in
accordance with the following standards.
(1) A living tree may be removed from the following areas, or under the
following circumstances:
(a) The tree is in an area to be occupied by a building, driveway,
street, utility easement, or other improvement to a property
(e.g., swimming pool, deck or patio) or the tree is within a
distance of 10 feet of such area;
(b) The tree is so diseased or invested as to be a danger to other
trees in the community as determined by the Tree Supervisor/
Tree Specialist;
(c) The presence of the tree is the cause of hardship or danger to
the property owner or the general public, as determined by the
Tree Supervisor/Tree Specialist.
C. The Tree Supervisor/Tree Specialist shall approve or deny the tree
removal permit within 10 business days after completion of the
inspection. The application shall be returned to the Department of
Public Works, which shall issue or deny the permit based upon the
determination of the Tree Supervisor/Tree Specialist. The Department
of Public Works shall notify the applicant in writing of the factual basis
and criteria for any denial within one week of receipt of the Tree
Supervisor/Tree Specialist's determination.
D. Any applicant for a permit may appeal an adverse permit
determination. The appeal shall be made by filing written notice with
the City Clerk within 10 days after receipt of notification by the
Department of Public Works. The Commissioners, upon notice to the
applicant, shall hear the appeal. The Commissioners may affirm,
reverse or modify the permit determination. The decision of the
Commissioners shall constitute the final administrative determination
of the application.
E. Applications for removal of trees on county roads or streets are subject
to the provisions of this article, except that the county must be notified
of any proposed removal of a tree on a county road, and the county may
require that it approve any such tree removal and/or accomplish such
removal.
A. Application.
(1) The applicant, at time of filing the application with the Department
of Public Works, shall pay the application fee of $10 for each new or
existing lot. No application shall be considered without the
§ 87-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-15
1:251
§ 87-16. Replacement of trees; penalty for failing to replace.
§ 87-17. Removal of dangerous private trees; costs charged.
payment of the required fees. No fee shall be charged to obtain a
permit for a tree removed due to an emergency as defined herein.
(2) The replacement fee will be in accordance with § 87-16 below.
B. Tree Escrow Fund.
(1) A Tree Escrow Fund shall be established and maintained by the
City to receive and disburse replacement tree contributions.
Appropriations from the tree fund shall be authorized by the Board
of Commissioners.
(2) The primary purpose of said fund is to provide for the planting and
maintenance of trees and shrubs on public property. The fund will
also cover administrative costs to implement the provisions of this
article, including but not limited to site inspections, processing of
permits and supervision of tree replacements. Administrative costs
imposed in accordance with this article shall not exceed 30% of the
fund, as determined on an annual basis.
A. Any person who has received a permit to remove a tree pursuant to this
article, or caused the removal or destruction of a tree preserved by this
article, from a parcel of land in the City shall replant a tree on that same
parcel. Such tree shall have two inches to 2.5 inches caliper and shall
be a minimum of 12 feet tall. Replanting shall be carried out in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Parks and Forestry, Forestry Services practices
regarding Urban Forestry.
B. If any person does not replace a removed or destroyed tree as
mandated by this subsection within 60 days of receipt of the tree
removal permit noted in Subsection A above, such person shall pay a
fee of $1,000 to the City of Union City to be deposited in a Tree Escrow
Fund.
C. If a tree is replanted in accordance with the mandates of this article,
and the tree dies within one growing season (typically one year of
planting), no additional permit fee shall be charged. Notwithstanding
same, any tree that dies within one growing season must be replaced
within 60 days.
A. If a tree, or any part of a tree, along any street becomes dangerous or
hazardous to public safety, the owner of the property upon which the
tree stands shall remove the tree, or part of the tree, at the owner's
expense, upon receipt of written notification from the City.
B. If the owner fails to remove the tree or portion thereof within 10 days of
receipt of written notice to do so, the work shall be performed by the
§ 87-15 UNION CITY CODE § 87-17
1:252
§ 87-18. Public trees; penalties for damage or destruction.
It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts against any public
tree without prior written permission from the public entity responsible for
the public tree:
§ 87-19. Enforcement; violations and penalties; civil remedies.
City under the supervision of the Department of Public Works, who shall
certify the cost to the Board of Commissioners.
C. Upon receipt of the certified costs, the Board of Commissioners shall
examine them and, if found to be correct, shall cause the costs to be
charged against the lands. If the Board of Commissioners finds the
costs to be excessive, it shall cause reasonable costs to be charged
against the lands. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the
lands and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon the lands. Same shall bear interest as other
taxes and be collected and enforced by the Tax Collector in the same
manner as taxes.
A. Cut, prune, break, injure, alter or remove any public tree; or cut, unduly
disturb, or interfere in any way with any root of a public tree.
B. Spray any public tree with a chemical.
C. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device to a public tree or to any
guard about the public tree.
D. Remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect any public tree.
E. Close or obstruct any open spaces found about the base of a public tree
which permits the base or roots of a public tree access to air, water and/
or fertilizer.
F. String any wires or lines through a public park.
G. Any public utility required to prune any public trees so that it can obtain
required line clearances for overhead utility wires may file annually for
a permit to perform pruning. In addition, the public utility must notify
the City when pruning activities will take place by way of a writing
describing the proposed pruning activities and the location of same
served upon the Tree Specialist at least 30 days prior to the proposed
pruning activity. The proposed pruning activity shall only take place
upon approval by the Tree Specialist. The fee for the annual permit
shall be $100.
A. The requirements of this article shall be enforced by the Tree
Supervisor/Tree Specialist of the Department of Public Works or his
designee, the Construction Official or his designee, the Health Officer
or his designee, or members of the Union City Police Department, who
shall seek penalties as provided by this article.
§ 87-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-19
1:253
§ 87-20. Reports.
The Tree Supervisor/Tree Specialist shall report to the Board of
Commissioners on an annual basis the number of permits granted and
refused in each calendar year pursuant to this article. Such report shall be
supplied by March 31 annually for the preceding year.
B. Any enforcing agent may issue a stop-work order for any tree work or
other activity (except those on an emergency basis) which he believes is
undertaken in violation of any provision of this article. The order shall
be issued verbally and followed up in writing as soon as practicable to
any person engaged in such tree work or such activity in violation of
this article. If no such person is present upon the property, then the
stop-work order shall be made to the owner of the property. No tree
work or other activity may be resumed until a permit is obtained.
C. Any person violating the provisions of § 87-10 shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty as stated in § 1-30 of this Code, in addition to the
amount required in § 87-16.
D. It shall not be a defense for any person charged with violating this
article to state that he or she believed that a permit had been obtained.
In the case of unauthorized removal or destruction of a tree, such
person shall replace each tree destroyed or removed in violation of this
article with another tree of like or superior species, as determined by
the Tree Specialist, with a DBH of at least 4.5 inches and which shall be
a minimum of 12 feet tall.
E. Each tree or part thereof destroyed or removed in violation of this
article shall be considered a separate offense.
F. Any person who damages any public tree(s) shall be responsible for the
cost of repair or replacement of the public tree(s). In addition to the
penalties set forth herein, any person who damages any public tree
shall pay the City the cost of repair or replacement within 30 days of
presentment of an itemized bill for the costs. Failure to pay the repair or
replacement cost within 30 days of presentment shall subject the
person to the penalties described above. In addition, the City may
pursue any available civil remedy to collect the bill for damages to any
public tree.
§ 87-19 UNION CITY CODE § 87-20
1:254
Chapter 92
BUILDING SAFETY AND SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155. Security in rental property — See Ch. 329,
Art. III.
§ 87-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-20
1:255

ARTICLE I
Security Gates
[Adopted by Ord. No. 4963 (§ 13-17 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SECURITY GATE — Any sliding or rolling horizontal or vertical gate in front
of any structure to prevent unauthorized entrance.
§ 92-2. Approval of design.
No security gate shall be installed without prior approval as to design by
the Construction Code Official.
§ 92-3. Permit required; fee.
A permit shall be issued by the Construction Code Official upon approval
of the design prior to installation of any security gate. A fee as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees, § 155-12, for the permit shall be paid upon the issuance
of the permit for administration costs.
§ 92-4. Metal construction.
Security gates shall be constructed of metal and so finished so as not to rust
or stain either the building or the sidewalks.
§ 92-5. Open grill requirement. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Security gates shall be of an open grill design, except that a solid panel
shall be allowed from the bottom of the security gate up to a maximum of
36 inches from the sidewalk.
§ 92-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-6
1:257

ARTICLE II
Security at Health Care Facilities
[Adopted 8-1-2006]
§ 92-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION or CCTV — A video security system that
may include video cameras, monitors, switches, camera enclosures,
controls, and other related devices. "Closed circuit television" may be an
independent system or may be integrated with other electronic security
systems.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public or
private, which is engaged principally in providing services for health
maintenance organizations, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain,
injury, deformity or physical condition, including but not limited to a general
hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic
center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, skilled
nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care facility, tuberculosis
hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic,
dispensary, home health care agency, and residential health care facility at
which any senior citizen resides for any period of time.
SENIOR CITIZEN — An individual age 62 years or older.
§ 92-8. Required safety measures.
All health care facilities and all multiple dwellings within the City of Union
City in which 50 or more senior citizens reside shall have a door attendant/
twenty-four-hour security personnel present in the lobby of such building
and closed circuit television/video surveillance which records all exits and
entrances of the building at which the security personnel are not physically
located. All exits and entrances shall be locked and secured so that persons
from the outside cannot automatically gain entry to the facility.
§ 92-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-8
1:259

ARTICLE III
Security Cameras at Senior Citizen Facilities
[Adopted 3-20-2012]
§ 92-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SENIOR CITIZEN — An individual 62 years or older.
SENIOR CITIZEN FACILITY — A facility for residents age 62 and over
consisting of 20 or more dwelling units.
§ 92-10. Security cameras required; deadline. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Security cameras shall be installed around the perimeter and within the
lobbies and all other common areas of all existing and newly constructed
senior citizen facilities in accordance with a plan that shall be submitted
to and approved by the City Construction Official. The security cameras
around the perimeter shall be installed so as to maintain continuous
surveillance of the public streets and areas adjacent to the facility and shall
conform to Chapter 160, Fiber-Optic Systems, governing communications
system installation. The security cameras within the lobbies and other
common areas of the facilities shall be installed so as to maintain continuous
surveillance of said areas and all entrances and exits thereto. All security
cameras shall be installed so as to blend in with the installation location
and to minimize any negative visual or aesthetic impact. The installation of
security cameras in all existing senior citizen facilities shall be completed
by December 31, 2012. Security cameras shall not be required in hallways
of senior citizen facilities. Security cameras shall not be required in any
stairwells.
§ 92-11. Maintenance of recordings. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Recordings from the surveillance cameras required by this article shall be
maintained for at least 60 days and shall be made immediately available
to the City Police Department in the event the recordings are deemed
necessary by the City Police Department for an investigation.
§ 92-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-11
1:261

ARTICLE IV
Security Cameras at Commercial Establishments
[Added 5-21-2013]
§ 92-12. Definition.
For purposes of this article, the following term shall have the meaning
indicated:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A location within the City of Union City
for which the proposed use of a building or portion thereof is for any use
other than solely a residential use.
§ 92-13. Security camera requirement.
The owner of a commercial establishment within the City of Union City
which applies for a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of continued
occupancy on or after June 1, 2013, or otherwise opens for business after
June 1, 2013, shall install at least one security camera on the outside
of the facade of the commercial establishment and at least one security
camera on the interior of the commercial establishment. The owner shall
submit a sketch depicting the placement of the security cameras to the City
Construction Official at the time an application is made for a certificate
of occupancy or certificate of continued occupancy. The sketch depicting
the placement of the security cameras shall be reviewed by the Union City
Police Department and Construction Official. No certificate of occupancy or
certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued without the placement of
the security cameras being approved by the Construction Official and the
Union City Police Department. The security camera on the facade of the
commercial establishment shall be installed so as to maintain continuous
surveillance of the entrance to the commercial establishment and the area
of public sidewalk directly adjacent to such establishment. The security
camera on the interior of the commercial establishment shall be installed
so as to maintain continuous surveillance of all areas accessible to the
public therein. In the event that one exterior and one interior security
camera is insufficient to maintain the continuous surveillance required
above, the owner of the commercial establishment shall install as many
security cameras as may be deemed necessary by the Construction Official
and the Union City Police Department in order to achieve such continuous
surveillance.
§ 92-14. Maintenance of recordings.
Recordings from the surveillance cameras required by this article shall be
maintained for at least 60 days and shall be made immediately available to
the Union City Police Department in the event the recordings are deemed
necessary for an investigation.
§ 92-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-14
1:263
Chapter 97
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Closing of streets — See Ch. 366, Art. III.
§ 97-1. Permit required.
No person shall move any structure through any streets of the City without
a permit issued as hereinafter provided.
§ 97-2. Application for permit.
Any person desiring to move any structure shall make application to the
License Inspector for a permit. The application shall designate the streets
through which the moving will be done, the dimensions of the structure,
the estimated length of time required for such moving and such other facts
as may be required. The fee for the permit shall be deposited with the
Inspector. The permit may be applied for by the owner of the structure to
be moved or by the mover or contractor.
§ 97-3. Bond required.
The applicant shall file with the License Inspector a bond in the amount of
$50,000 with sureties, conditioned for the payment of any damage or injury
to the trees, streets or other City property along the designated route, and
for the replacement of any trees or other City property destroyed by the
moving; and further conditioned for the payment of any additional fee due
the City for exceeding the time limit fixed for the moving.
§ 97-4. Removal of wires and cables.
The person receiving a permit shall arrange for the removal of any wires
or cables, at his/her own expense, which may interfere with the moving. If
any wires or cables which may interfere with the moving pertain to the fire
alarm system or police telephone system, or any other municipal system of
the City, the person receiving the permit shall arrange for the removal of
wires, at his/her own expense, so as not to interfere in any manner with the
continuous operation of such systems in the City.
§ 97-5. Traffic control.
All the moving operations, as they relate to the problem of traffic, shall be
done under the supervision of the Chief of Police, at such times as may be
fixed by the Chief.
§ 92-14 UNION CITY CODE § 97-6
1:264
§ 97-6. Barricades and detour signs.
It shall be the duty and obligation of the contractor engaged in the moving
operations to furnish and place barricades and detour signs which may be
necessary for the proper diversion of motor vehicle traffic.
Chapter 102
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 102-1. General numbering plan.
The numbering for address and official tax record purposes of all houses,
property and lots located on all streets in the City running from south
to north, shall be arranged so that, for example, the property located on
the east side of Bergenline Avenue at its intersection with the north side
of Second Street, shall be known as House No. 200, and each building
entrance shall have a separate number so that in the event there is more
than one building on one lot, each of the buildings shall have a separate
number and should a building be erected on more than one lot and have
only one entrance, then each 25 feet of the lot shall have a separate number,
and other streets running in the same direction shall conform to this method
of numbering and as specifically set forth in subsection 18-3.2.
§ 102-2. Hundred divisions.
The southeasterly corner of each block shall bear the hundred number
designation of the street forming the southerly boundary of the block and
progress northerly by even sequence one hundred numbers to the block on
the east side of the street and by odd sequence on the west side of the
street. The respective blocks located on streets which do not intersect a
boundary street shall bear the hundred number of the corresponding block
nearest the same location which does intersect the boundary street.
§ 102-3. Exception.
Numbers of buildings and parcels of land and property located on streets
running from east to west shall not be affected by this section.
§ 102-4. Plan.
The numbering of houses and property shall conform strictly to a plan
entitled "City of Union City, Hudson County, Renumbering of Houses and
Property, February, 1940, Peter LaMort, City Engineer," approved by Henry
Specker, Director of Public Works and by the Board of Commissioners of the
City of Union City, and which plan is on file in the office of the director of
revenue and finance in the office of the director of public works and in the
office of the City Clerk and which plan designates the old numbers of the old
houses and property, and the new numbers of houses and property, required
by this section.
§ 97-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-5
1:265
§ 102-5. Vacant property.
On vacant property where no address is shown on the plan, the new address
of the vacant property must conform with this section and the general plan
of renumbering the address being reserved but specifically omitted from the
plan.
§ 102-6. Dispute.
In case of dispute or doubt as to the proper number to be assigned to a
lot, part of lot or building, the director of public works shall determine the
number of such lot, part of lot or building.
§ 102-7. Display of numbers.
All buildings fronting on a street shall have conspicuously displayed the
number as provided by this section and the plan herein referred to.
§ 102-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject upon conviction to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty.
Chapter 107
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 171.
Nuisances — See Ch. 266.
Lead-based paint — See Ch. 273.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
Rental property — See Ch. 329.
§ 107-1. Findings of fact.
There exists in the City buildings which are unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use due to dilapidation defects, which increase the hazards
of fire, accidents or other calamities; lack of ventilation, light or sanitation
facilities; or other conditions rendering such building or buildings, or parts
thereof unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety
or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City.
§ 107-2. Definitions.
The following terms whenever used or referred to in this chapter shall have
the following respective meanings for the purpose of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
§ 102-5 UNION CITY CODE § 107-2
1:266
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof whether used for
human habitation or otherwise and including any outhouses, sheds and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually adjoined therewith.
DEMOLITION — The complete destruction of any building or structure
or part thereof, including all foundation walls, and the removal from the
premises of all parts and materials of such building or structure not falling
within the definition of "clean fill" as defined in the Basic Property
Maintenance Code.[Amended 5-21-2013]
OWNER — The holder or holders of title in fee simple.
PARTY IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations or corporations who
have interest of record in a building and any person who is in actual
possession thereof.
§ 107-3. Enforcing officer. [Amended 5-21-2013]
The Construction Official of the City is hereby designated as the officer to
exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, and (s)he shall serve in such
capacity without any additional salary.
§ 107-4. Conditions determining unfit buildings.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Construction Official may determine
that a building is unfit for human habitation if (s)he finds that conditions
exist in such building which are dangerous to or injurious to the health
or safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring
buildings or other residents of the City. Such conditions may include the
following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
§ 107-5. Requirements for demolition.
The demolition of any building or structure or part thereof, including all
foundation walls, shall require, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Defects therein which increase the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities.
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
C. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
A. Demonstration of proper licensing to Building Department
Construction Code Official and obtaining proper permit for demolition.
B. Compliance with the requirements set forth in the Uniform
Construction Code and requirements of the Union City Building
Department. [Amended 5-21-201314]
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Subsections C and D, concerning
specific requirements, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 107-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-5
1:267
§ 107-6. Adoption of standards by reference; copies on file.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the Basic Property
Maintenance Code of the City, the Uniform Construction Code and all
other building codes adopted by the State of New Jersey and the City,
are established as standards to be used as a guide in determining the
fitness of a building for human habitation, occupancy or use. A copy of the
Basic Property Maintenance Code and the Uniform Construction Code are
annexed to this chapter, and three copies of same have been placed on
file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 107-7. Issuance of complaint; hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official by a public
authority, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of
the City charging that any building is unfit for human habitation, as herein
defined, or whenever it shall appear to the Construction Official, on his/
her own motion, that any building is unfit for human habitation, as herein
defined, (s)he shall, if his/her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charge, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties
in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in that respect,
and containing a notice that:
C. All footings, foundation walls, beams and underground or basement
structures shall be removed. [Amended 5-21-2013]
D. Clean fill as defined by state statute shall be utilized to bring the lot to
grade to maintain it in conformity to established street grades at curb
level.
E. Vacant lots shall be maintained free from accumulation of rubbish and
all other unsafe or hazardous conditions which endanger the life health
or safety of the public.
F. Any sidewalks or curbing damaged by such demolition work shall be
repaired or replaced in conformity with existing sidewalks and curbing.
G. A fence shall be erected around any lot vacant for over 30 days.
A. A hearing shall be held before the Construction Code Official, or his/her
designated agent, at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor
more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint. [Amended
5-21-2013]
B. The owner and parties interest shall be given the right to file an answer
to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give
testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaints.
§ 107-5 UNION CITY CODE § 107-7
1:268
§ 107-8. Order to abate; failure to comply. [Amended 5-21-2013]
If, after such notice and hearing, the Construction Code Official determines
that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as
herein defined, (s)he shall state, in writing, his/her findings of fact upon the
owner thereof and parties interest in an order requiring:
C. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Construction Code Official.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
A. That the repair, alteration or improvement of the building shall be made
by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in
the order to vacate or to have such building vacated and closed within
the time set forth in the order.
B. That the owner remove or demolish the building within a reasonable
time as specified in the order of removal if the building is in such a
condition as to make it dangerous to the health and safety of persons on
or near the premises and the owner fails to repair, alter or improve the
building within the time specified in the order.
C. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, improve
or to vacate and close the building, the Construction Official may cause
such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and
closed. A placard with the following words may be caused to be posted
on the main entrance of any building so closed by the Construction
Official: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
D. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Construction Official may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for and receipt of a bid therefor.
E. That the amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert
witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the
course of any proceeding taken under this chapter, determined in favor
of the City and the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from
any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the
building is removed or demolished by the Construction Official, (s)he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits, or if the sum
totals of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
§ 107-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-8
1:269
§ 107-9. Service of complaints and orders. [Amended 5-21-2013]
A complaint or order issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons as set forth in the Uniform
Construction Code.
§ 107-10. Powers of Construction Official.
The Construction Official is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following, in
addition to others herein granted:
§ 107-11. Construction of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the City, or any officer or department, to enforce any provisions of its
charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof. The powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the City by any other law or
ordinance. Whenever a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of a zoning, building, fire, health or other law or ordinance,
or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the provision or requirement which
is more restrictive or which establishes the highest standard shall apply.
with the Municipal Tax Assessor, or other custodian of the records of tax
liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credit exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Construction
Official and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by
the Court and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment
of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order
or judgment of such Court, provided that nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement,
by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest
may, within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate,
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.
A. To investigate the building conditions in the City in order to determine
which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
C. To delegate any of his/her functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as (s)he may designate.
§ 107-8 UNION CITY CODE § 107-11
1:270
Chapter 108
BUILDINGS, VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 87.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 107.
Vacant lots — See Ch. 244.
Nuisances — See Ch. 266.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
§ 107-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-11
1:271

ARTICLE I
Baiting for Mice and Rats
[Adopted 8-5-2014]
§ 108-1. Baiting for rats and mice in vacant buildings.
A. All vacant buildings shall have the entire building baited for all types of
rodents, every month.
B. A copy of the contract for each year that provides monthly baiting for
rodents shall be provided to the City of Union City Health Department
within 30 days after this article becomes effective.
C. This article shall take effect as of October 1, 2014, and after notice of
this article has been mailed to all property owners affected by this
article.
D. The proof of the one-year contract for monthly baiting for rodents shall
be submitted to the Health Department on or before November 1 of
each year.
E. Failure to provide proof of contract for monthly baiting for rodents shall
allow the City to perform this task and place a lien on the property for
the cost of the baiting for the rodents.
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-1
1:273
Chapter 113
CARNIVALS, STREET FAIRS AND FESTIVALS
§ 113-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
BAZAAR — Any fair or festival having booths, counters or stands wherein
fortune wheels, gambling machines or any games of chance are displayed,
operated or offered to be gambled or played upon, or wherein any
merchandise is offered for sale.
BLOCK DANCE — Any affair having an assemblage of persons to participate
in a dance upon a public street.
CARNIVAL — Any festival, revel or celebration.
CIRCUS — Any show or display in which feats of tumbling, horsemanship,
strength or a menagerie are to be exhibited.
§ 113-2. Permit required.
Except by permit from the Chief of Police, no person shall be permitted to:
Chapter 122
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 40.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 171.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 175.
Historic areas — See Ch. 214.
Land development — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 370.
Tax abatement for improvements — See Ch.
381, Art. I.
§ 122-1. Enforcing agency.
A. Conduct or operate a carnival, bazaar, dance or circus upon or within
any portion of the public streets, highways or sidewalks of the City; or
B. Fence in, rope or mark off, or in any manner close a public street,
highway or sidewalk or any portion thereof, for the purpose of
conducting or operating thereon a carnival, bazaar, block dance or
circus.
A. Established; composition. There is hereby established in the City a
State Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
§ 108-1 UNION CITY CODE § 122-1
1:274
§ 122-2. Plan review.
§ 122-3. Fee schedule report.
The Construction Official, with the advice of the subcode officials, shall
prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
Construction Code Agency of the City of Union City, consisting of
a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter
adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction
Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Official positions; qualifications. Each official position created in
Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a person qualified for such
position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:23,
provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site
inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same
person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
C. Office location. The public shall have the right to do business with the
enforcing agency at one office location except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.15
A. Residential construction, four families or less. For residential
construction of single-family housing or multifamily dwellings for four
or fewer families, applicants must submit for plan review two sets of
building plans rendered by either an architect or professional engineer
with all necessary specifications, which plans shall be reviewed by the
Building Department at the cost to be included in permit fees.
B. All other construction. For residential construction of multifamily
dwellings for five or more families and for all commercial and industrial
construction, applicants must submit for plan review two sets of
building plans rendered by either an architect or a professional
engineer with all necessary specifications. One set of plans may be sent
by the Building Department of the City to a professional plan review
firm of its choice. All expenses incurred in plan review will be passed on
to and paid for by the applicant before the application shall be
approved, including a fee for handling as set forth in Chapter 155,
Fees.16
15.Editor's Note: Original Section 2, Construction Board of Appeals, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 5-21-2013.
16.Editor's Note: Original Section 5, State surcharge fee, and Section 6, Fire limits, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:275
Agency and any other expenses of the City fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.).
§ 122-4. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violations of §§ 122-1 and 122-2 of this chapter shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty, as
may be modified by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 122-5. Adoption of standards.
§ 122-6. Waiver of fees. [Added 12-20-2011]
A. The following updated construction codes are hereby adopted in their
entirety, to the extent that they are not inconsistent with or superseded
by mandatory state codes or standards:
(1) 1996 BOCA Building Code.
(2) 1993 National Mechanical Code.
(3) 1996 National Electrical Code.
(4) 1996 National Standard Plumbing Code.
(5) 1996 BOCA Fire Code.
(6) Currently adopted Uniform Construction Code. [Added
5-21-2013]
B. Three copies of each of the codes specified above have been placed on
file in the office of the City Clerk for the use and examination by the
public.
A. Findings.
(1) N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126d allows a municipality to waive enforcing
agency fees for qualified New Jersey nonprofit corporations
engaged in constructing or rehabilitating housing units for low- and
moderate-income households; and
(2) N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e also allows a municipality to waive enforcing
agency fees associated with the construction of improvements that
will promote accessibility to structures by disabled persons,
including but not limited to, accessibility to a disabled person's
living unit; and
(3) N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 permits the governing body of a municipality to
make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to, among other
things, manage, regulate and control the finances of the
municipality and to regulate and control the construction, erection,
§ 122-3 UNION CITY CODE § 122-6
1:276
Chapter 126
CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF
§ 126-1. Registration required.
alteration and repair of buildings and structures of every kind
within the municipality; and
(4) N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 permits a municipality to make, amend, repeal and
enforce such other ordinances as it may deem necessary and
proper for good government, among other things; and
(5) The City of Union City (the "City") seeks to assist qualified New
Jersey nonprofit corporations in their construction efforts and
relieve a portion of the financial burden associated therewith; and
(6) The City seeks to encourage the construction of improvements to
make structures more accessible for disabled persons and relieve a
portion of the financial burden associated therewith.
B. Waiver of building construction permitting fees for qualified New Jersey
nonprofit corporations. The City shall waive all building construction
permitting fees for New Jersey nonprofit corporations, established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq.
C. Waiver of building construction permitting fees for promoting
accessibility for disabled persons. No person shall be charged a
building construction permitting fee for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement designed and undertaken
solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons to an existing public
or private structure or any facilities contained therein.
D. Waiver of building construction permitting fees for disabled person
living unit construction. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a
disabled person, shall not be required to pay any municipal fee or
charge in order to secure a construction permit for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement which promotes
accessibility to his own living unit.
E. For purposes of this section, a "disabled person" means a person who
has the total and permanent inability to engage in any substantial
gainful activity by reason of any medically determined physical or
mental impairment, including blindness, as set forth in N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126e.
A. Every person engaged in the business of constructing, erecting,
altering, restoring, reroofing, re-siding, moving or demolishing the
whole or any part of commercial buildings or structures, or engaged in
the business of erecting or altering signs, for any of which a permit is
§ 122-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-1
1:277
§ 126-2. Application for registration. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Applications for the registration of contractors shall be submitted to the
Building Inspector on forms supplied by him/her and shall include, in
addition to any information (s)he may deem necessary, a statement giving
the name of the contractor, and in the case of a firm, corporation or
partnership, the name and address of the principal officers or members of
such firm, corporation or partnership. The application shall also contain the
number of years such person has been in business or in existence at the
current location or any prior locations, including the addresses of such prior
locations, if any.
§ 126-3. Fees.
No person shall be registered under this chapter or shall be registered after
revocation of registration under § 126-5 until there is paid to the Building
Inspector to the account of the City a fee in the amount set forth in Chapter
155, Fees. Thereafter, an annual fee, as set forth in Chapter 155, shall be
due and payable on April 1.17
§ 126-4. Notice of violation; violations and penalties; revocation of
registration.
required by the applicable ordinances of the City, shall be required to
register with the Building Department. [Amended 5-21-2013]
B. Every person engaged in the business of radio or television repair
within the City shall be required to register with the Building
Department.
C. The owner or occupant of a building or structure applying for a permit
required herein shall not be required to register, provided that (s)he
intends to do and supervise his own work.
A. If any person registered under the provisions of this chapter fails to
comply with any work for which a permit is required under applicable
ordinances and regulations of the City relevant to the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, restoration, re-siding, moving or demolition
of any building, structure, swimming pool, sign or billboard, or part
thereof, or in the repair or installation of radio or television equipment,
the Building Inspector shall cause a notice of violation to be served
upon such person, or the principal member or officer of any firm or
corporation, in accordance with the established procedures set forth in
the National Board of Fire Underwriters National Building Code, 1967
Edition.
B. Any person registered under the provisions of this chapter who violates
the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a fine not to exceed the
17.Editor's Note: Original Section 4, Classes of registration, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 126-1 UNION CITY CODE § 126-4
1:278
§ 126-5. Reregistration after revocation.
Any person whose registration has been revoked under the provisions of
§ 126-4 may be reregistered and have his/her name reentered upon the
registration list upon filing with the Building Department a certification by
the Building Inspector to the effect that all violations for which a conviction
was secured have been corrected or are nonexistent and upon payment of
the fee prescribed in Chapter 155, Fees.
Chapter 131
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 131-1. Applicability.
This chapter applies to criminal history background checks for all current
and future appointees to positions within the City of Union City on any
subsidiary boards, commissions, agencies, committees, or departments, as
well as all employees of the Union City Recreational Department.
§ 131-2. Definitions.
These definitions are relative to criminal history background checks for all
current and future appointees to positions within the City of Union City on
any subsidiary boards, commissions, agencies, committees, or departments
as well as all employees of the Union City Recreational Department. As used
in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPOINTEE — All City of Union City current and future appointees to
positions within the City of Union City on any subsidiary boards,
commissions, agencies, committees and/or departments.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division, and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Union City Police Department.
sum of $300 or imprisonment for 30 days, or both, for each violation.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
C. Upon conviction for such violation, or upon failure to correct such
violation within the period of time stated in the notice of violation, the
registration of such person shall be revoked by the Building Inspector
and his/her name shall be deleted from the registration list and shall not
be reentered or his/her registration reinstated during the time the
violation exists or remains. Upon revocation, the Building Inspector
shall forthwith cause the notice of revocation to be published in a
newspaper, as required by law.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:279
DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION — The Union City Department of
Recreation and all employees therein.
§ 131-3. Request for criminal background check; costs.
§ 131-4. Conditions under which disqualification from service is
permitted.
A. The City requires that all City appointees and Department of Recreation
employees covered by this chapter, consent to have the Department
through the State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police
conduct a criminal history record background check on themselves by
February 1 of the year of their appointment or reappointment.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department whether the
person's criminal history record background check reveals a conviction
of a disqualifying crime or offense as specified in § 131-4 of this chapter.
C. The City shall conduct a criminal history record background check only
upon receipt of the written consent to the check from the prospective or
current appointee.
D. The City shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal
history background checks for its appointees and employees. The
organization or the organization's prospective employee shall bear the
costs associated with conducting criminal history background checks.
E. Any appointee or employee in the Department of Recreation failing to
submit to a criminal background check on themselves by August 1 of
the year of their appointment or reappointment shall result in their
disqualification from their appointive office, employment and/or
position.
A. A person shall be disqualified from serving as an appointee or
Department of Recreation employee if that person's criminal history
record background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the
following crimes and offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:51-2:
(1) An offense involving dishonesty or of a crime of the third degree or
above or under the laws of another state or of the United States of
an offense or a crime which, if committed in this state, would be
such an offense or crime;
(2) An offense involving or touching such office, position or
employment; or
(3) Such other offenses as the Constitution may provide.
B. Should a criminal background check be initiated or the results provided
after appointment or Department of Recreation employment has been
made, the results shall be used to assess the appointee's or Department
of Recreation employee's suitability for continued service in the
§ 131-2 UNION CITY CODE § 131-4
1:280
§ 131-5. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
§ 131-6. Limitations on access to criminal history record
information.
appointive position, office or continued Department of Recreation
employment. If service pursuant to the appointment or Department
of Recreation employment has begun prior to receipt of the results
of the criminal background check, continued service pursuant to the
appointment or continued Department of Recreation employment is
conditioned upon an acceptable criminal background check.
C. In the event the appointee fails to voluntarily resign from the appointive
office or Department of Recreation employment, the City shall proceed
according to the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:51-2 et seq.
A. Appointees or Department of Recreation employees shall submit their
name, address, fingerprints and written consent to the organization for
the criminal history record background check to be performed. The
appointee or Department of Recreation employee shall submit this
documentation to the Union City Chief of Police who shall coordinate
the background check in accordance with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Attorney General.
B. The Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting criminal
history record background checks pursuant to this chapter.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to
authorized personnel of the City, on a need-to-know basis, as authorized
by federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code, local ordinance or resolution regarding obtaining
and dissemination of criminal history record information obtained
under this chapter.
B. Such personnel shall limit their use of the criminal history record
background check solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and the criminal history background check furnished shall not
be disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive
the records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
C. Pursuant to state law, including the Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq., any criminal history record background check shall not
§ 131-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-6
1:281
§ 131-7. Challenge to accuracy of report.
§ 131-8. Evaluation of results of background check.
Detention and/or arrest without conviction and factors to consider in
evaluating results of criminal background checks shall be as follows:
be a public record nor disseminated or released to the public in any
way.
A. If this criminal history record may disqualify an appointee or
Department of Recreation employee for any purpose, the person
making the determination shall provide the appointee or Department of
Recreation employee with an opportunity to review and challenge the
accuracy of the information contained in the criminal history record
background check. The appointee or Department of Recreation
employee shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to correct and/
or complete this record. A person shall not be presumed guilty of any
charges or arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on
the record.
B. Individuals shall be made aware of the criminal background check
procedures during the appointive or employment process. Appointment
to, or Department of Recreation employment or continued service
pursuant to the appointment, or continued Department of Recreation
employment, is contingent upon an acceptable criminal background
check, and any written acceptance of appointment, or Department of
Recreation employment, must contain notice of this contingency.
Criminal background checks, when possible, shall be completed within
30 days of the consent of the appointee or Department of Recreation
employee.
A. Detention and/or arrest without conviction shall not be grounds for
appointive or Department of Recreation employment decisions and
cannot play a part in the decisionmaking process. Only criminal
convictions or pleas of guilty or nolo contendre will be considered in
determining an appointee's or Department of Recreation employee's
suitability for appointment or Department of Recreation employment or
continued appointment or continued Department of Recreation
employment. In assessing a record of criminal convictions, an
appointment or Department of Recreation employment decision will be
made by assessing:
(1) The nature and severity of the offense(s) as well as a variety of
surrounding facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
(a) The age of the individual at the time of the offense(s);
(b) The number of offenses for which the individual was convicted;
(c) The time which has elapsed since the last offense; and
§ 131-6 UNION CITY CODE § 131-8
1:282
Chapter 137
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcohol by minors on private
property — See Ch. 58, Art. III.
Minors on premises where alcohol sold — See
Ch. 58, Art. I.
Tattooing minors — See Ch. 376.
§ 137-1. Findings and purpose.
(d) Whether the circumstances arose out of an employment and or
appointment situation.
(2) The duties, responsibilities and circumstances of the position or
office for which appointment or Department of Recreation
employment is made, including but not limited to:
(a) The nature and scope of the position's exposure to the public
and other interpersonal contact;
(b) The nature and scope of the position's autonomy and
discretionary authority;
(c) The extent to which the position holds a measure of fiscal
responsibility to the institution;
(d) The opportunity presented for the commission of additional
offenses; and
(e) The extent to which acceptable job performance requires the
trust and confidence of the City, its employees, and/or the
public.
B. The critical questions that must be answered in order to substantiate a
decision not to appoint or withdrawal of appointment or Department of
Recreation employment under this chapter are:
(1) Whether the nature of the criminal conviction prevents the
individual from performing the job applied for in an acceptable
businesslike manner; and
(2) Whether the offense is job-related, i.e., can the individual perform
the duties of the position in an acceptable manner despite the
conviction(s).
A. The Board of Commissioners is authorized to enact an ordinance
establishing curfews for juveniles pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52(b).
§ 131-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-1
1:283
§ 137-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with
the appropriate context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include
the plural. The word "shall" is considered to be mandatory and not merely
directory or discretionary in nature.
CITY — The City of Union City.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state, including those circumstances which call for immediate
action in response to a threat to public health and safety. This term shall
be understood to include but not be limited to a fire, a natural disaster,
an automobile accident or other situation requiring immediate action to
prevent serious bodily harm, injury or loss of life. "Serious bodily injury"
shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that
B. The Board of Commissioners of the City of Union City hereby finds
based upon information provided by the Chief of Police that there has
been a continued breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally
provided by certain parents for juveniles under 18 years of age
resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable
behavior during the late evening hours, including vandalism, noisy and
rowdy behavior, breaking and entering, public drinking and littering,
and harassment of residents both as perpetrators and victims.
C. The Board of Commissioners further finds that the offensive activities
by and towards the juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws
and ordinances because the activities are easily concealed whenever
police officers are present, and the establishment of reasonable curfew
regulations will enable the community to better control the free and
unobstructed access to the streets and public places by the majority of
residents and will enable the police to act reasonably and fairly to
prevent the violation of laws and ordinances by juveniles.
D. The Board of Commissioners further finds and has determined that a
curfew meets a compelling local need and that curfew ordinances in
other communities have been a significant factor in minimizing juvenile
delinquency. A curfew in Union City is particularly appropriate in view
of the high density of population in a relatively small geographic area in
Union City and the mixed use of residential and commercial areas
throughout the City. The regulation of juveniles is an attempt to
minimize danger to the juveniles and the community during the
dangerous hours for nocturnal crime and mischief, which could be
accentuated because of the juvenile's immaturity.
E. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is an accepted
norm by a substantial majority of the community and many parents
have expressed a desire to have a curfew in order to augment their
efforts to supervise and guide their children.
§ 137-1 UNION CITY CODE § 137-2
1:284
causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
JUVENILE or MINOR — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
KNOWINGLY — Includes knowledge or information which a parent or legal
guardian should reasonably be expected to have concerning the
whereabouts of a minor in the legal custody of a parent or guardian. It is
intended to include and require neglectful or careless parents to maintain
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall be no defense to this chapter that a parent was
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such a minor or
juvenile.
LEGAL GUARDIAN — A person over the age of 18, other than a parent, to
whom legal custody of the juvenile has been given by court order or other
method required by law.
OFFICIAL EXTRACURRICULAR SCHOOL ACTIVITY OR OTHER OFFICIAL
CULTURAL, EDUCATIONAL, RECREATIONAL, SPORTING OR SOCIAL
EVENT SPONSORED BY A SCHOOL, BY THE CITY, OR BY A RELIGIOUS,
CIVIC, VOLUNTARY OR OTHER COMMUNITY-BASED ASSOCIATION —
Any extracurricular; cultural, educational, recreational, civic, political,
religious or social activity organized, coordinated and/or publicized by any
public or private school, any agency or department of Union City, or any
public or private organization, business or entity formulated for any
cultural, educational, recreational, civic, political, religious or social
purpose, whether not-for-profit or for-profit.
PARENT — The natural or legally adoptive parent of a juvenile or minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
REMAIN — To linger or stay or to fail to leave a public place or
establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner,
operator or other person in control of the establishment or premises.
§ 137-3. Curfew for juveniles. [Amended 2-15-2005]
It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be on or remain
in or upon the public streets and public places within the City of Union City:
A. During the period ending at 5:00 a.m. and beginning:
(1) At 11:59 p.m. Friday and Saturday nights from September 15
through June 15.
(2) At 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday nights from September 15
through June 15.
(3) At 11:59 p.m. all nights from June 15 through September 15.
§ 137-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-3
1:285
§ 137-4. Exceptions.
In the following exceptional cases a minor who remains in or upon a public
street or public place during the hours specified in § 137-3 above, minors,
their parents and their fellow-citizens shall not, however, be considered in
violation of this chapter:
(4) During the hours when the juvenile is required to be in attendance
at either a public or nonpublic school subject to the exceptions
enumerated in § 137-4.
A. When accompanied by a parent or legal guardian of such minor.
B. When accompanied by an adult authorized in writing by a parent or
legal guardian of such minor to take said parent's place in
accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose
within a specified area.
C. When the juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile
permanently resides.
D. When going to, without making any detour or stop and within one hour
prior to the commencement of an official extracurricular school activity
or other official cultural, educational, recreational, sporting or social
event sponsored by a school, by the City, or by a religious, civic,
voluntary or other community-based association, and supervised by
adults of which prior notice by the organization or entity sponsoring the
event, indicating the place and probable time of termination, has been
given in writing, to and duly filed for immediate reference by the Chief
of Police or officer assigned by the Chief on duty at the police station.
E. When returning home, without making any detour or stop, after the
termination of any activity whether sponsored by a school, by the City,
or by a religious, civic, voluntary or other community-based association
and including all private activities within 1/2 hour after the termination
of such activity so long as the juvenile has in his or her possession
written permission from his or her parent or legal guardian.
F. When authorized, by special permit from the Chief of Police or the
officer designated by the Chief for that purpose, carried on the person
of the juvenile thus authorized, which may be issued only when
necessary nighttime activities of a juvenile are required but are not
otherwise addressed by any provision of this chapter. When the Chief of
Police or his designee shall determine that the necessary nighttime
activities of a juvenile warrant, a special permit for the event may be
granted upon written application of the juvenile's parent or legal
guardian and signed by the juvenile specifying the following and filed
with the Department: 1) the name, address, and telephone number of a
parent or legal guardian of the juvenile; 2) the height, weight, sex, color
of eyes and hair and other physical characteristics of the juvenile; 3) the
necessity which requires the juvenile to remain upon the public streets
§ 137-3 UNION CITY CODE § 137-4
1:286
§ 137-5. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian having legal custody of a
juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile
to be or remain upon any public place under circumstances not constituting
an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of this chapter. The term
"knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's
or places during the curfew hours otherwise applicable; and 4) the
street or route and destination as well as the beginning and ending
of the period of time involved by date and hour. In an emergency, as
defined by this chapter, this application may be made by telephone
or in person, with a corresponding written record being made
contemporaneously to the Chief of Police or his designee at the police
station.
G. When authorized, by regulation issued by the Chief of Police, to respond
to cases of reasonable necessity adapted to necessary nighttime
activities of more juveniles than can readily be dealt with on an
individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the Chief
of Police permitting use of the public place should be issued sufficiently
in advance to permit appropriate publicity through news media and
through other agencies such as the schools, and shall define the
activity, the scope of the use of the public streets or places permitted,
the period of time involved not to extend more than one hour beyond
the time for termination of the activity, and the reason for finding that
the regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.
H. When the juvenile carries a certified card of employment dated or
reissued not more than 45 days previously, signed by the juvenile's
employer and the Chief of Police identifying the juvenile, the address of
his home and of his place of employment, and his hours of employment.
I. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without
making any detour or stop for the purpose of responding to a medical
problem or emergency.
J. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel not originating in the
City.
K. Involved in an emergency as defined in § 137-2 of this chapter.
L. Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with law.
M. When engaging in an activity protected by the First Amendment so long
as the Chief or his designee receive prior written notice in advance of
such activity and the juvenile has the written permission of his or her
parent or legal guardian in his or her possession at the time the activity
is engaged in.
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-5
1:287
legal custody. This section is intended to hold neglectful or careless parents
up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through
an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
juvenile.
§ 137-6. Enforcement procedure.
If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is upon a public street
or public place in violation of this chapter without any of the exceptions
applying, the officer shall notify the juvenile that he or she is in violation
of this chapter and shall require the juvenile to provide his or her name,
address and telephone number and how to contact his or her parent or
legal guardian. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of
convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer shall, in the
first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
A. The Chief of Police may require that the responding police officer or a
designee within the Police Department deliver to a parent or guardian
thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances to his or her home
whose identity and address may readily be ascertained or are known.
B. In any event the police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a written
report with the Chief of Police or shall participate to the extent of the
information for which he is responsible in the preparation of a report on
the curfew violation. It is not the intention of this section to require
reports that will prevent police officers from performing their primary
police duties. The reports shall be as simple as is reasonably possible
and may be completed by Police Department personnel other than
sworn police officers.
C. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the juvenile and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If
the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then
the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the
extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance
by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be entrusted to an
adult, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent or
guardian assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending
the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
D. In the case of a first violation by a juvenile, the Chief of Police shall, by
certified mail, send to a parent or guardian written notice of the
violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full
enforcement of this chapter against the parent or guardian and
juvenile, including enforcement of applicable penalties. No penalties
shall be sought against parent or guardian and the juvenile in the case
of a first violation although the parent or guardian shall be contacted to
retrieve the juvenile. A copy of the notice of first violation shall be
maintained by the Police Department. An additional copy of the notice
§ 137-5 UNION CITY CODE § 137-6
1:288
§ 137-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 145
DRUG-FREE ZONES
of first violation shall be kept on file by the Municipal Court
Administrator of Union City for the purpose of providing evidence of
failure by the minor, as well as the parent or guardian, to observe the
provisions of this chapter in the event of any subsequent citation for an
alleged violation of this chapter. No written warning shall be issued for
any subsequent violation of this chapter.
A. Community service. Any person, juvenile or adult convicted of a
violation of this chapter shall be required to perform community service
as directed by the court. As provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52, whenever
both a juvenile and the juvenile's parent or guardian violate the chapter,
they shall be required to perform community service together.
B. Fines. Any juvenile convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of $50 for a first offense, $100 for a second offense and
not less than $150 nor more than $1,000 for any third subsequent
offense. Any parent or guardian convicted of a violation, after the
warning notice pursuant to § 137-6 of a first violation by a juvenile, shall
be fined $50 and for a second offense by a parent or guardian the fine
shall be $100. For any subsequent offense by a parent, the fine shall not
be less than $150 and not more than $1,000.
C. A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted.
§ 137-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-7
1:289

ARTICLE I
Drug Free School Zones
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-17 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances (Ord. No. 3741)]
§ 145-1. Adoption of map.
§ 145-2. Notice of change in school boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the City Engineer and the Corporation Counsel
of any changes, or contemplated changes, in the location and boundaries of
any property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 145-3. Availability of copies of map.
The City Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the original
of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 145-1 and to provide at a
reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which
may, from time to time, request such a copy, along with a certification that
such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept
on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of this
article shall be provided, without cost, to the County Clerk and to the office
of the Hudson County Prosecutor.
§ 145-4. Use of map as evidence in prosecutions.
The map approved and adopted pursuant to § 145-1 was prepared and is
intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal
laws of this state, and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the following:
A. In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7,
the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about July 5, 1988, by
Mayo Lynch and Associates, City engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas
within the City, of property which is used for school purposes and which
is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school
board, and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
B. The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to this
section shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to
the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school
board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this
article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drug-free
school zones.
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-4
1:291
§ 145-5. Additional provisions.
§ 145-6. Compliance with law.
All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map have
been complied with.
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the City.
B. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board.
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
D. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
A. School ownership. All of the property depicted on the map approved
and adopted herein as school property was owned by a school or school
board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, the
effective date of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
B. Use of other evidence to establish violations. Pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or
relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of
the offense defined in that statute, including use of a map or diagram
other than the one approved and adopted pursuant to § 145-1.
C. Errors and omissions in map. The failure of the map approved herein to
depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in fact,
used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence
of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
§ 145-4 UNION CITY CODE § 145-6
1:292
Chapter 155
FEES
§ 155-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Codification of Fees and Costs of the
City of Union City."
§ 155-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted in order to advise the citizens of the City and any
and all persons doing business with the City of the various fees charged for
services rendered by the departments of City government and to provide
ready access to any and all such information.
§ 155-3. Licenses and permits.
The following fees shall be charged by the City for services rendered or
licenses or permits issued. All license and permit fees shall be annual,
unless otherwise noted.
License or Permit Fee
Late fees for business registration or license
renewal applications made after January 31
[Added 2-9-2006]
$25 (per month)
Alarm systems; monitoring service (§ 52-4E)
Initial registration $35
Dial alarms (annual; renewal) $35
Auctioneers [Amended 4-1-2003] $300
Automobile leasing [Amended 4-1-2003] $300
Automobile repair [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Automobile sales agency, franchised [Amended
4-1-2003]
$700
Billiard and pool rooms, per table [Amended
4-1-2003]
$100
Bingo $10
Body shops $100
Bowling alleys, per alley [Amended 4-1-2003] $30
Boxing, wrestling exhibitions $100
Car wash [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Carnival permits $10
Constables [Added 12-21-2004] $50
Contractors (§ 126-3) $100
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-3
1:293
License or Permit Fee
Dance halls and discos [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Day-care facilities:
Initial inspection $100
Reinspection (sanitary violation) [Added
4-6-2004]
$100
Licensing fee, per room used for day-care
purposes [Amended 4-6-2004]
$100
Distributor's license, vending machines (soda,
candy and gum) [Added 4-6-2004]
$200
Dealers in secondhand articles [Amended
4-1-2003]
$100
Dry cleaners $200
Electrical musical device, coin-operated, per device
[Amended 4-1-2003]
$75
Embroidery factory [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Employment agencies $200
Exterminators [Amended 4-1-2003] $100
Film processors [Amended 4-1-2003] $75
Filming (§ 166-2B and C):
Application fee $100
Each three day period after the initial five days $50
Flagperson and watchperson permit, both
(§ 225-42C) [Added 6-4-2008]
$25 each
Furnished apartments, per apartment [Amended
4-1-2003]
$50
Fuel oil distributor $200
Gas station, per pump [Amended 4-1-2003] $50
Junkyards, including auto [Amended 4-1-2003] $350
Laundromats (§ 230-3) [Amended 4-1-2003] $300
Liquor permit $25
Limousine service, per car [Amended 4-1-2003] $50
Locksmith [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Lumberyards [Amended 4-1-2003] $300
Mechanical amusement devices, per device
(§ 64-9A): [Amended 4-1-2003]
One to three $100
Each, over three $75
Distributor's license, annually $750
§ 155-3 UNION CITY CODE § 155-3
1:294
License or Permit Fee
Motels and hotels: [Amended 4-1-2003]
20 bedrooms or fewer $300
More than 20 bedrooms $500
Motor vehicles, abandoned or impounded, garage
charge, per day (§ 412-6)
$15
Newspaper racks, each $25
Outdoor dining permit (§ 185-15B) [Added
5-21-2013]
$275
Parades (§ 278-4) [Amended 2-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014]
$5
Parking lots [Amended 4-1-2003] $350
Peddlers, hawkers, vendors and solicitors:
Transient license fee (§ 301-8) $50
Solicitors (§ 301-11B) $65
Not-for-profit, charitable or philanthropic
(§ 301-18B)
$15
Photographers, street or door-to-door $15
Pool and billiard tables, per table $75
Printing shops [Amended 4-1-2003] $75
Retail stores [Amended 4-1-2003] $60
School, self-defense [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Scrap metal dealers [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Surgical supply [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Tailor shops [Amended 4-1-2003] $50
Taxicab licenses:
Driver's application fee (§ 386-9B) $25
With application, money order $25
Driver's license, each, per year (§ 386-8D) $25
Taxicab license, each, per taxicab $75
Taxi driver (§ 386-8C) [Added 4-1-2003] $30
Taxi owner, per cab (§ 386-3B) [Added
4-1-2003]
$100
Telephone, public (renewal, annual), per phone
(§ 391-5)
$10
Theaters, live or movie [Amended 4-1-2003] $750
Tow truck operators (Ch. 397):
Application fee $25
§ 155-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-3
1:295
License or Permit Fee
With application, money order $25
Annual renewal $25
Towing and storage services
Application fee [Amended 4-1-2003] $100
License fee [Amended 4-1-2003] $1,000
Traveling shows or circuses, when not in licensed
theaters
$250
Television repair [Amended 4-1-2003] $150
Used car dealers [Amended 4-1-2003] $700
Video games, per device $75
Video machine distributor $500
§ 155-4. Fiber-optic systems.
Description
Fee
(to be paid to City
Engineer)
Administration fee, initial application and each
proposed amendment thereto (§ 160-6)
$50
Annual use fee:
Service to licensee only:
With no customers within the City $2 per linear foot of
route traversed by
the communication
line within the public
right-of-way
Maximum $1,000
Service to customers within the City other than
the licensee
Maximum of the fees
computed in
accordance with
above fees or 6% of
gross revenues
derived within the
public right-of-way
Increase to length of route An additional use fee
computed in
accordance with the
annual use fee above
§ 155-3 UNION CITY CODE § 155-5
1:296
§ 155-5. Alcoholic beverages.
Type of License Fee
Alcoholic beverages (valid from July 1 to June 30)
[§ 58-8D]:
Club license [Amended 2-21-2012] $188
Plenary retail consumption license [Amended
11-16-2004]
$2,400
Plenary retail distribution license [Amended
11-16-2004; 2-21-2012]
$2,500
Limited retail distribution license [Amended
2-21-2012]
$63
License application package $5
With application, money order $49
Surcharge fee for retiring plenary retail liquor
licenses [Added 5-21-2013]
$200
One-time security guard registration fee (§ 58-15)
[Added 5-21-2013]
$10
§ 155-6. Miscellaneous fees.
Type Fee
Late fees for business registration or license
renewal applications made after January 31, per
month
$25
Rent Stabilization Board fees:
Annual registration $25
Appeal of determination by Rent Regulation
Officer, per unit [§ 334-5A(7)(a)]
$10
Filing fees (§ 334-11G): [Added 5-21-2013]
The prerenovation application shall be
accompanied with a fee per dwelling unit.
$50; $100 for a final
application
Community Development Agency inspection
fees
$50, preinspection,
per dwelling unit;
$50, post inspection,
per dwelling unit
Capital improvement:
Under 25 $100
Over 25 $150
Hardship:
Under 25 $100
Over 25 $150
§ 155-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-6
1:297
Type Fee
Certificate of compliance, per unit $5
Rental unit restoration allowance (§ 334-12F):
Inspection $155
Inspection, without qualification $40
Request by landlord for legal rent calculation,
per apartment
$10
Sewerage surcharge $25
Tax surcharge $25
Returned check $20
Searches:
Search for document, without copy $2
No fee if not found or
requested by law
enforcement agency.
Search for municipal liens $10
Continuation, per year, not to exceed $2
No fee if not found or
requested by law
enforcement agency.
Telephone removal/storage charge (§ 391-17A)
[Added 5-21-2013]
$300
§ 155-7. Animals. [Amended 7-29-2003; 5-21-2013; 12-16-2014]
License or Permit Fee
Bird permits (§ 70-12)
Dog licenses:
Neutered and spayed (§ 70-2E) $12
Unneutered and unspayed
(§ 70-2E)
$15
Vicious dogs, license and renewal
(§ 70-4A)
$200
Kennel and pet shop licenses (§ 70-3C)
Ten or fewer dogs $25
More than 10 dogs $50
Pet shop $75
Late fees for license or permit
renewal application made after
January 31, per month
$10
§ 155-6 UNION CITY CODE § 155-8
1:298
§ 155-8. Food handling. [Amended 7-29-2003]
Type Fee
Late fees for business registration or license
renewal applications made after January 31, per
month [Added 2-9-2006]
$25
Ice cream truck $250
Mobile restaurants, including hot dog vendors $300
Restaurants, lunch wagons and luncheonettes with
seating capacity of:
Up to 40 $100
40 to 60 $150
Over 60 $250
Retail food establishments, including mini market,
coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, grill,
tearoom, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar,
cocktail lounge, nightclub, roadside stand,
industrial feeding establishment, private, public or
nonprofit organization or institution routinely
serving food, commissary, box-lunch establishment,
retail bakery, meat market, delicatessen, grocery
store, public food market, or similar place in which
food or drink is prepared for retail sale or for service
on the premises or elsewhere, and any other retail
eating or drinking establishment or operation where
food is served, handled or provided for the public,
with or without charge
$100
Reinspection of restaurant $50
§ 155-9. Additional business license fees. [Amended 7-29-2003]
Type of Establishment Fee
Late fees for business registration or license
renewal applications made after January 31, per
month [Added 2-9-2006]
$25
Bakery stores $100
Bakery wagon $50
Barbershops $50
Beauty shops $50
Unisex shops $50
Body piercing establishments (§ 376-3) $600
Cafeteria $100
Candy, gum machine $30
§ 155-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-9
1:299
Type of Establishment Fee
Candy shops $50
Caterer $150
Plus, per truck $75
Confectionery/candy $50
Delicatessens $100
Dry-cleaning establishments, coin-operated $25
Fat and bone dealers $75
Fish markets $100
Food warehouses and similar storage facilities $100
Grocery stores $100
Health centers $50
Ice cream stores $75
Ice cream vendors $300
Ice cream manufacturers $150
Luncheonettes $75
Nails, wax and facials $50
Produce stores $100
Poultry dealer, live $300
Skin care $50
Supermarket $600
Tattoo parlors (§ 376-3) $600
Vending machines:
Food/drink, per machine $50
Soda $75
Candy $30
Concession:
Luncheonette $30
Grocery $30
Ice cream $30
Mini mart $30
Delicatessen $30
Fish market $30
Italian ice $30
Bad checks $20
§ 155-9 UNION CITY CODE § 155-10
1:300
§ 155-10. Vital statistics. [Amended 7-29-2003; 11-5-2003;
3-20-2007]
Description Fee
Copies of birth, death or marriage certificates $7
Copies of birth, death or marriage certificate
amendments
$5
Certification copies $5
Marriage license $28
Transcripts $5
Marriage application (copy) $28
Performance of marriage ceremony $75
Performance of civil union ceremony $75
§ 155-11. Police Department. [Amended 4-21-2009; 12-21-2010]
Type Fee
Accident report, per page $0.50
Fingerprints, other than for handgun permit:
Residents $10
Nonresidents $20
Firearms:
Carry permit:
Money order to N.J. State Treasurer $20
Money order to Division of State Police SBI $49
Fingerprint fee $20
Handgun permit and firearms identification card:
Money order to Division of State Police SBI $49
Annual fee $5
Police detail $60 per hour
Copies of police reports Same fee as
established by
Section 6 of P.L.
2001,
c. 404 (N.J.S.A.
47:1A-5)
Copies of police reports requested other than in
person
Additional fee of $5
to cover
administrative costs
§ 155-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-12
1:301
§ 155-12. Uniform Construction Code fees. [Amended 5-20-2003;
10-18-2005; 5-21-2013; 4-5-2016]
A. Building subcode fees.
Permit or Service Fees
Minimum fee for building permits $100
Change of contractor fee per subcode $25
New construction and additions:
All buildings per cubic feet of construction $0.050
Minimum fee for new construction $150
Plan review fee 20% of permit fee
Parking spaces for new construction, exterior
and enclosed
$200 per space
Renovations, alternations repair and minor
work:
Minimum fee (without plans) $100
Minimum fee (with plans) $110
Per $1,000:
Up to $50,000 of job cost $35
$50,001 through $1,000,000 of job cost $25
Over $100,000 and above job cost $20
Mechanical systems/equipment (ducts, etc., for
HVAC equipment, not including mechanical
unit)
Shall be calculated
at 10% of building
permit fee
Retaining walls:
Up to 550 square feet $125
Over 550 square feet $250
Demolition:
All structures, per lot $300
Note: Sewer capping permit must
accompany a demolition permit if structure
is serviced by a sewer.
Signs/awnings:
Minimum fee per side $100
Billboards/wall-mounted signs (per side) $250
Fence installation:
Fee based on cost of work
Swimming pools:
Residential aboveground $65
§ 155-12 UNION CITY CODE § 155-12
1:302
Permit or Service Fees
Residential in-ground $150
Commercial aboveground $250
Commercial/multifamily in-ground $500
Tents $250
Zoning determination:
Existing structures/driveways/businesses $20
New construction:
From 1 to 5 units $50
Over 5 to 10 units $100
Over 10 to 15 units $150
Over 15 to 20 units $200
Over 20 to 25 units $250
Over 25 to 50 units $350
Over 50 to 75 units $500
Over 75 to 100 units $750
Over 100 units $1,000
Plus $10 for each additional unit over 100
units
Modifications to existing or previously
approved variances for parking spaces (per
space)
$20
B. Electrical subcode fees.
Permit or Service Fees
Minimum fee for electrical permits $100
Switches, fixtures, receptacles:
1 to 50 $85
Each additional 25 $40
Electrical devices, generators, transformers:
1 KW to 9 KW, each $45
10 KW to 44 KW, each $95
45 KW to 112.5 KW, each $215
From 112.5 KW to 500 KW, each $450
Over 500 KW, each $700
Motors:
Kitchen/bathroom exhausts/hoods
(residential type)
$50
§ 155-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-12
1:303
Permit or Service Fees
1/2 HP to 1 HP, each $25
1 HP to 9 HP, each $40
10 HP to 49 HP, each $85
50 HP to 99 HP, each $200
100 HP and over, each $750
Capacitors:
One unit $35
Any additional units, each $20
NOTE: No charge if motors are equipped at
time of installation.
Service panels, service entrance, subpanels:
Up to 100 amps, each $75
101 amps to 200 amps, each $125
201 amps to 300 amps, each $180
301 amps to 400 amps, each $250
401 amps to 500 amps, each $300
501 amps to 600 amps, each $350
601 amps to 700 amps, each $400
701 amps to 800 amps, each $450
801 amps to 900 amps, each $500
901 amps to 1,000 amps, each $570
Over 1,000 amps, each $675
Add $50 for every 100 amps over 1,000 amps
Additional electric meters, each $75
Line item fees, as per technical section:
Commercial air conditioning units (per ton) $100
Burglar alarm, intercom systems $100
Dishwasher by KW As listed above
Dryer by HP As listed above
Garbage disposal by HP As listed above
Heat pumps by HP As listing above
Motor control center, subpanels, amp As listed above
All other by HP As listed above
Pool bonding $100 per year
Pool/spa motor By size, as listed
above
§ 155-12 UNION CITY CODE § 155-12
1:304
Permit or Service Fees
Pool lights Include in fixture
total
Cellular antennas and equipment cabinets, each $150
C. Plumbing subcode fees.
Type Fees
Minimum fee for plumbing permits $100
Each fixture, device not listed below $35
Air conditioners, HVAC (individual units), each $100
All floor drains, each $35
Backwater valves, each $35
Basins, each $35
Bathtubs, each $35
Boiler conversion burner $60
Boilers, each:
Up to 200,000 BTU $100
Over 200,000 BTU Add $10 for every
additional 10,000
BTU over 200,000
Catch basin, each $85
Dishwasher, each $35
Drinking fountain, each $35
Furnaces, HVAC, PAC and similar types of
devices, each
$100
Garbage disposal, each $35
Gas appliance, each $35
Gas lines, each $40
Gas riser, each $35
Grease trap, each
Up to 50 pounds $85
50 to 100 pounds and up $125
Heating backflow device, each $35
House drain, each $35
Indirect connection, each $35
Interceptor, each $90
Lead bend, each $35
Manholes, each $125
§ 155-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-12
1:305
Type Fees
Oil separators, each $90
Pumps, each $80
Re-piping apartment, each $40
Re-piping (per unit) $50
Roof drain/scupper, each $25
Septic/stormwater detention tanks or similar,
each
$100
Sewer backflow device, each $80
Sewer ejector, each $90
Sewer utility, each:
Four-inch $100
Five-inch $150
Six-inch $300
Over six-inch $400, plus $50 per
two-inch increase in
size over six-inch
Showers, each $35
Sinks, each $35
Soil stack, each $35
Sump pump, each $90
Tankless heater, each $35
Urinals, each $35
Vent stack, each $35
Wash trays, each $35
Washing machines, each $35
Waste stack, each $35
Water closet, each $35
Water heater, each $40
Water riser, each $35
Water separator, each $35
Water utility connection, each: $100
Up to 2 inches $175
Over 2 inches $175
Yard drains $35
D. Uniform Fire Safety Act.
§ 155-12 UNION CITY CODE § 155-12
1:306
Permit/Installation/System Fees
Minimum fee for fire safety permits $100
Storage tank installation (in gallons):
275, each $125
550, each $150
551 to 1,000, each $175
1,001 to 2,000, each $225
2,001 to 5,000, each $275
5,001 to 10,000, each $375
10,001 to 20,000, each $500
Tanks over 20,000, each $800
Tank removal/abandonment (in gallons):
Up and including 550, each $200
Over 550 to 2,000, each $400
Over 2,000, each Increase fee by $25
for every 100 gallons
or portion thereof
Above subject to sidewalk opening fee where
applicable
Sprinkler system or special suppression system
heads:
1 to 20 $100
21 and over $150
For each additional 10 heads or portion
thereof, increase fee by
$50
Standpipe fees
Each standpipe installed $400
Smoke detector fees (§ 171-4B):
Detectors:
1 to 25 $100
26 to 50 $150
For each additional 10 or portion thereof
over 50, increase fee by
$50
Pull stations:
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $150
For each additional 5 or portion thereof over
10, increase fee by
$10
§ 155-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-12
1:307
Permit/Installation/System Fees
Emergency lights/exit signs (fixtures):
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $150
For each additional 5 or portion thereof over
10, increase fee by
$150
Related fire protection equipment:
Smoke barriers/magnetic release doors, each $300
Central control stations/FACP panels, each $280
Manual fire alarm, each $80
Elevator recall system, each $250
Automatic fire alarm station, each $375
Cooking suppression system (dry/wet
chemical), each
$200
Gasoline pumps, per nozzle $100
Refrigeration system, each $200
Pressure vessels, each $250
Smoke control system, each $100
High-pressure boilers, each $250
Hooded ventilation, each $65
E. Street and sidewalks.
Permit Fees
Street opening permit:
Each opening $250
Trench cuts $250 for first/each
opening plus $20 per
foot
Sidewalk opening permit:
Each opening $75
Curb cut, per foot $10
Driveway, dimensions as per zoning
requirements, each
$250 per space plus
cost of work and $15
per foot of curb cut
Installation of fire hydrants $250
Blasting permit $500
F. Certificate of occupancy/continued occupancy (§ 311-5B).
§ 155-12 UNION CITY CODE § 155-12
1:308
Type of Certificate Fees
Residential structure, per tenant space $200
Interior/exterior parking accessory to existing
structure, per space
$150
Retail/mercantile, per space $200
Business or professional offices, per tenant
space
$200
Wholesale business $350
Storage distribution $350
Shopping centers, shell only $500
Movie theaters $500 plus $150 per
screen
Laundromats $500
Mechanic shops:
Up to 4 bays $500
Additional bays, each $150
Auto body shops $500 plus $350 per
spray booth
New car dealers $750
Used car dealers $500
Parking lots, per space $150
Hospitals, nursing homes, emergency medical
centers
$500 plus $200 per
bed or exam room
Pain management centers $500 plus $200 per
exam/procedure
room
Imaging centers $500 plus $200 per
exam/procedure
room
Day-care centers $750
Temporary employment agencies $750
Bars, nightclubs and similar assembly spaces $800
Certificates of continued occupancy shall be
50% of above stated fees
NOTE: All temporary certificates of occupancy
shall be charged at the same amount as listed
above.
G. Letters/dumpster permits.
§ 155-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-12
1:309
§ 155-13. Fire Code fees.
Type of Letter/Permit Fees
Certificate of occupancy letter $50
Zoning rebuild letter $75
All other letters $50
Code variation request (per subcode/per
variation)
$100
Day-care letter $100
Dumpster permit $75
A. Tanks.
Gallons Fee
275 $10
550 $15
1,000 $20
1,500 $30
2,000 $35
2,500 $45
3,000 $50
3,500 $60
4,000 $65
4,500 $80
5,000 $85
5,500 $90
6,000 $95
6,500 $110
7,000 $115
7,500 $120
8,000 $125
8,500 $140
9,000 $145
9,500 $150
10,000 $155
B. Sprinkler system or special suppression systems fees.
§ 155-12 UNION CITY CODE § 155-13
1:310
Heads Fee
1 to 20 $55
21 to 100 $100
101 to 200 $200
201 to 400 $500
401 to 1,000 $700
Over 1,000 $875
C. Standpipe fees.
Description Fee
Each standpipe installed $200
D. Smoke detector fees, (§ 171-4B). [Amended 1-6-2004]
Smoke Detector Certificate Fee
Request received more than 10 business days
prior to the change of occupant
$35
Request received four to 10 business days prior
to the change of occupant
$70
Request received fewer than four business days
prior to the change of occupant
$125
E. Non-life-hazard uses (§ 171-2).
Assembly Fee
A-1 Eating establishment under 50 $50
A-2 Take-out food service, no seating $50
A-3 Church or synagogue Exempt
A-4 Recreation centers, including, but not
limited to, multipurpose rooms, less than
100
$50
A-5 Court rooms, libraries, fraternal
organizations, condominium centers, less
than 100
$50
A-6 Senior citizen centers, less than 200 $50
Business/Professional
B-1 Professional use, 1 and 2 stories, less than
5,000 square feet per floor
$50
B-2 1 and 2 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$65
B-3 1 and 2 stories, more than 10,000 square
feet per floor
$75
§ 155-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-13
1:311
Assembly Fee
B-4 3 to 5 stories, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$100
B-5 3 to 5 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$150
B-6 3 to 6 stories, over 10,000 square feet per
floor
$200
Retail (Mercantile)
M-1 1 and 2 stories, less than 5,000 square
feet per floor
$125
M-2 1 and 2 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$150
M-3 1 and 2 stories, more than 10,000 square
feet per floor
$175
M-4 3 to 5 stories, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$200
M-5 3 to 5 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$225
M-6 3 to 6 stories, over 10,000 square feet per
floor
$250
M with the exception of hardware stores of 3,000 square feet, retail
stores over 12,000 square feet are life-hazard uses.
Manufacturing (Factory)
F-1 1 and 2 stories less that 5,000 square feet
per floor
$75
F-2 1 and 2 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$100
F-3 1 and 2 stories, more than 10,000 square
feet per floor
$150
F-4 3 to 5 stories, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$175
F-5 3 to 5 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$200
F-6 3 to 6 stories, over 10,000 square feet per
floor
$250
F exception life-hazard uses
Storage S-1 (Moderate Hazard S-1, Hazard
S-2)
S-1 1 and 2 stories less that 5,000 square feet
per floor
$50
§ 155-13 UNION CITY CODE § 155-13
1:312
Assembly Fee
S-2 1 and 2 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$100
S-3 1 and 2 stories, more than 10,000 square
feet
$150
S-4 3 to 5 stories, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$175
S-5 3 to 5 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$200
S-6 3 to 6 stories, over 10,000 square feet per
floor
$250
S exception life-hazard uses
Residential Local Enforcing Agency (LEA).
Listed with multifamily Bureau of Multiple
Dwellings (BHI)
Fee is for each building
R-1 1 to 6 units $25
R-2 7 to 12 units $50
R-3 13 to 20 units $75
R-4 21 to 50 units $100
R-5 For each additional unit $2
Common Areas (each building)
R-1 1 and 2 stories less that 5,000 square feet
per floor
$50
R-2 1 and 2 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$75
R-3 1 and 2 stories, more than 10,000 square
feet
$100
R-4 3 to 5 stories, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$125
R-5 3 to 5 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$150
R-6 3 to 6 stories, over 10,000 square feet per
floor
$200
Common Areas (LEA not listed with BHI),
each building
R-1 1 and 2 stories less that 5,000 square feet
per floor
$50
R-2 1 and 2 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$75
§ 155-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-13
1:313
§ 155-14. Land development. [Amended 4-19-2005; 4-1-2006;
5-21-2013]
Assembly Fee
R-3 1 and 2 stories, more than 10,000 square
feet
$100
R-4 3 to 5 stories, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$125
R-5 3 to 5 stories, more than 5,000 and less
than 10,000 square feet per floor
$150
R-6 3 to 6 stories, over 10,000 square feet per
floor
$200
(1) One- and two-family dwellings. One- and two-family dwellings, R-A
uses, shall be inspected and charged a fee pursuant to Chapter
171, Article I, Fire Prevention Measures, only upon sale or change
of tenant.
(2) Exceptions. Uses not classified above that are subject to the
Uniform Fire Code shall be classified as business uses.
(3) Life-hazard uses. Uses required to register with the state as lifehazard
uses shall not be required to register under this section.
(4) Vacant buildings. In the discretion of the Fire Official, vacant
buildings will be charged and inspected according to the previous
use of the building.
(5) Residential use exception. All residential uses except R-A uses shall
be inspected in the common areas only.
F. Permits and certificate of Fire Code status (§ 171-3).
(1) Permit application.
Type Fee
Type 1 $35
Type 2 $138
Type 3 $276
Type 4 $414
(2) Certificate of Fire Code status: $35.18
A. Schedule of fees and escrow deposits (§ 223-33C).
(1) Site plan or subdivision.
18.Editor's Note: Former § 3-8, Streets and Sidewalks, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted from this schedule 5-21-2013; see now § 155-12E.
§ 155-13 UNION CITY CODE § 155-14
1:314
(a) Application fees.
[1] Minor site plan: $500.
[2] Preliminary residential site plan: $500, plus $50 per
dwelling unit.
[3] Preliminary site plan under 5,000 square feet: $500.
[4] Preliminary site plan between 5,000 and 9,999 square
feet: $1,000, plus $50 for every 1,000 square feet.
[5] Preliminary site plan between 10,000 and 25,000 square
feet: $1,500, plus $50 for every 1,000 square feet.
[6] Preliminary site plan over 25,000 square feet: $2,000, plus
$50 for every 1,000 square feet.
[7] Final site plan: 50% of preliminary site plan fee.
[8] Amendment or extension of preliminary or final site plan:
$500.
[9] Minor subdivision: $500, plus $100 per lot.
[10] Preliminary major subdivision: $500, plus $100 per lot.
[11] Final major subdivision: $500, plus $50 per lot.
[12] Amendment or extension of preliminary or final
subdivision: $500.
(b) Escrow deposits.
[1] Minor site plan: $1,000.
[2] Preliminary residential site plan: $1,000, plus $100 per
dwelling unit.
[3] Preliminary site plan under 5,000 square feet: $1,000.
[4] Preliminary site plan between 5,000 and 9,999 square
feet: $4,000.
[5] Preliminary site plan between 10,000 and 25,000 square
feet: $4,000.
[6] Preliminary site plan over 25,000 square feet: $5,000.
[7] Final site plan: 50% of preliminary site plan fee.
[8] Amendment or extension of preliminary or final site plan:
$1,000.
[9] Minor subdivision: $1,000.
§ 155-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-14
1:315
[10] Preliminary major subdivision: $2,500.
[11] Final major subdivision: $1,000.
[12] Amendment or extension of preliminary or final
subdivision: $1,000.
(2) Appeals, interpretations and variances.
(a) Application fees.
[1] Hear and decide appeals, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a:
$300, except that the fee for a request pertaining to not
more than two existing nonconforming dwelling units shall
be $100.
[2] Hear and decide interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $300.
[3] Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c: $300 for the
first variance; $150 for each additional variance.
[4] Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $500 for the
first variance; $250 for each additional variance.
(b) Escrow deposits.
[1] Hear and decide appeals, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a:
$500, except that no escrow deposit shall be required for a
request pertaining to not more than two existing
nonconforming dwelling units.
[2] Hear and decide interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $500.
[3] Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c: $1,000 if not
part of site plan; $3,000 if part of site plan.
[4] Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $1,000 if not
part of site plan; $3,000 if part of site plan.
(3) Other fees.
(a) Application fees.
[1] Special meeting: $1,000.
[2] Informal or concept reviews: $250.
(b) Escrow deposits.
[1] Special meeting: $1,000.
[2] Informal or concept reviews: $500.
§ 155-14 UNION CITY CODE § 155-14
1:316
§ 155-15. Public records. [Amended 12-21-2004; 12-21-2010]
Record or Service Fees
Mailing charge Per meter reading
Rent Stabilization Ordinance (Ch. 334) $4
Reports, noncriminal $5
Street map $1
Zoning Ordinance, with Map and Schedule of
District Regulations19
$5
Other documents:
Per letter size page or smaller $0.05
Per legal size page or larger $0.07
Access to electronic records and nonprinted
materials
No charge*
Special services charge:
For extraordinary time to respond to an open
public record request [§ 317-5B(2)]
$32 per hour or the
actual direct cost of
labor (if less)
For production or conversion of digital or
computerized records or films [§ 317-5C(2)]
The lesser of the cost
of technology and
labor actually
incurred at $32 per
hour
* NOTE: The public agency may charge for the actual costs of any needed
supplies such as computer discs. This provision is not intended nor shall
be construed as limiting and or prohibiting the City's ability to charge a
special service fee under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5c or d (§ 4-120).
§ 155-16. Sewerage fees.
Description Fee
Connection to private wastewater disposal system
[§ 342-25G(1)]
$8
(4) Inspection fees. Inspection fees for drainage, paving, landscaping,
curbing and other improvements which relate to matters involving
public facilities: The greater of $100 or 10% of the cost of the
improvements.
B. Miscellaneous fees.
(1) List of property owners: $10.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 223, Land Development.
§ 155-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-17
1:317
§ 155-17. Tax Collector fees.
Type Fee
Redemption statements, per statement, with
certificate issued
$10
Computer printout, per each parcel requested $5
Certificate of discharge $10
Duplicate bill $5
§ 155-18. Emergency medical services. [Added 5-21-2013; amended
7-1-2013; 3-3-2015]
Pursuant to § 12-4:
Chapter 160
FIBER-OPTIC SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155. Street excavations — See Ch. 366, Art. IV.
§ 160-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A fiber-optic cable system for the
transmission and distribution of communication signals, including any
conduit, fiber-optic cable, splicing boxes, surface markers or other facilities
located within the public right-of-way.
CUSTOMER — Any person who purchases any services provided by a
communications system.
GROSS REVENUES — All receipts collected by a licensee for all
communications and communications-related operations and services
within the City. Gross revenue includes, but is not limited to, revenue from
the sale or lease of customer's premises, equipment, installation charges,
access charges paid to the licensee by other communications systems or
A. The fee for ambulance services (basic life support) shall be a base fee of
$800, plus $20 per mile per trip.
B. The fee for refusal of medical attention, when an ambulance is called
and then the person refuses medical attention, shall be $250 per call.
This fee shall be billed to the insurance company of the caller.
C. A. The fee for the use of oxygen, when required, is $80.
§ 155-17 UNION CITY CODE § 160-1
1:318
carriers, sales and occupation surcharges to customers, and the lease or
resale of lines or circuit paths to third parties.
LICENSEE — The person who is issued a license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY — Any public street, highway, avenue, alley, bridge
or sidewalk within the City.
§ 160-2. License required.
No person may construct a fiber-optic system in any public right-of-way,
in any easement granted to a third party within any public right-of-way,
or within any existing conduit or structure within any public right-of-way
without first obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter.
§ 160-3. Application for license; amendment to license.
A. Application. An application for a license shall be filed with the City
Engineer and shall include an engineering site plan showing:
(1) The proposed location of the system;
(2) Any manholes or overhead poles;
(3) The size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other
enclosures;
(4) The relationship of the system to all existing streets, sidewalks,
poles, utilities and other improvements within the public right-ofway;
and
(5) Any additional information which the City Engineer may require.
B. Issuance. The City Engineer shall issue all licenses required by this
chapter. The City Engineer shall review each application and shall grant
a license if the application complies with the requirements of this
chapter and any other applicable legal requirements. In granting a
license, the City Engineer may change the proposed location of the
system when necessary to avoid interference with other cables, wired
conduits, pipes, sewers or other facilities placed within the public rightof-
way.
C. Amendment to license. If a licensee proposes to expand, reduce,
relocate or modify any portion of its system within the public right-ofway,
the licensee shall file an application for an amendment of its
license with the City Engineer. An application for an amendment shall
include relevant new information of the type required for the initial
application and shall be reviewed by the City Engineer in the same
manner as the original application. If the amendment requires only one
or more connections to the main system and if the new connections will
run entirely through existing underground utility conduit or ducts so as
not to require any excavation in the public right-of-way, or by means of
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-3
1:319
§ 160-4. Grounds for termination of license.
§ 160-5. Relocation or removal when required by public needs.
Upon 90 days' notice from the City, the licensee shall protect, support or
temporarily or permanently disconnect/relocate within the same or other
public right-of-way, or remove any of its system when required to do so by
the City because of street or other public excavation, construction, repair,
grading, traffic conditions, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes or
overhead wires or cable between existing utility poles, the licensee
shall not be required to pay an additional administrative fee for the
amendment.
A. No license or amendment shall be granted for any system until the
required fees have been paid and a completed application approved by
the City Engineer.
B. The system shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the
terms of the license granted by the City Engineer.
C. After installation, the licensee shall file with the City Engineer an asbuilt
survey specifying the actual location of the system, including any
manholes or overhead poles, and the licensee shall provide such signs
or other economically feasible means of locating the system as may be
reasonably required by the City Engineer, including a requirement that
the licensee contract with a one-call locating service or similar locating
service for location of the system by the service.
D. If it becomes necessary to dig into or in any manner break any public
right-of-way to install, construct, reconstruct, repair, operate,
disconnect or remove a system, the licensee shall first obtain a permit
from the City to do so.
E. All technical standards governing installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection and removal of a
licensed system shall conform with applicable federal, state and City
regulations.
F. The licensee shall be responsible for repairing or reimbursing other
licensed or franchised utilities or communications systems for any
damage to their property caused by negligence of the licensee or its
agents, employees or contractors in connection with the installation,
construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or
removal of the licensee's communications system.
G. No license required under this chapter shall be granted to install a
system in any space for public use.
H. Failure by the licensee to comply with any of the requirements of the
license or this chapter shall constitute grounds for termination of the
license by the City.
§ 160-3 UNION CITY CODE § 160-5
1:320
City-owned power or signal lines; vacation or relocation of public right-ofway;
installation or construction of any other structure by the City or any
other public agency or any improvement which promotes the public health,
safety or welfare.
§ 160-6. License fees.
§ 160-7. Hold harmless; insurance; bond.
A. Fees. As consideration for use of municipal rights-of-way, the licensee
shall pay the City the fees set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. Increase of length of route. At the time of filing of each proposed
amendment to the license increasing the length of route traversed by
the communication line within the public right-of-way, the licensee shall
pay to the City Engineer an additional use fee computed in accordance
with Chapter 155, Fees.
C. Report. Each annual use fee payment shall be accompanied by a report
on a form approved by the Business Administrator and the Corporation
Counsel. Each such report shall contain a notarized verification by the
Chief Financial Officer of the licensee and, upon request by the City,
such report shall be verified by a certified public accountant at the
expense of the licensee.
D. Audit; error in payment. Acceptance of any use fee shall not constitute
an acknowledgment that the amount paid is correct nor shall
acceptance constitute a release of any claim for additional sums due.
Use fees shall be subject to audit by the Business Administrator and
assessment or refund if the payment is found to be an error. If an audit
results in an additional assessment, the additional payment shall be due
immediately, together with interest at the rate of 8% per year
calculated from the due date for the use fee in question.
E. License year. The annual use fee shall be based on a license year ending
on June 30, and the use fee for each license year shall be due on June 30
of each year. Interest at the rate of 8% per year on any overdue use fee
shall be calculated from the due date for the use fee.
F. Liability. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the liability of the licensee
for applicable federal, state and local taxes, permits, registrations and
approvals.
G. Change of fees. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent
the City from changing any of the fees required by this section.
A. Liability claims. The licensee shall defend and indemnify the City from
liability for damages to property or injury or death to any person,
including payments made under workers' compensation laws, arising
from installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation,
disconnection or removal of the licensee's communications system.
Upon receipt of written notice of litigation against the City, the licensee
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-7
1:321
§ 160-8. Failure to secure license; removal of system; transfer and
assignment of license.
shall defend the same at its own expense. A judgment against the City
on account of a claim shall be conclusive as against the licensee and
shall entitle the City to recover the full amount thereof with interest
and costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the City. A right of action
shall accrue to the City as soon as judgment is rendered. The City shall
cooperate with the licensee's defense of any such claim or action.
B. Liability insurance. The licensee shall purchase and maintain general
liability insurance in an amount and coverage determined by the risk
manager in conformity with written standards. The licensee shall
maintain insurance coverage as long as the licensed communications
remains within the public right-of-way. The City shall be named as an
additional insured on the policy, which shall provide on its face that it
may not be canceled, except after at least 30 days' written notice to the
City. Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee
shall file with the City Engineer a certificate of insurance which clearly
discloses on its face coverage in conformity with all of the foregoing
requirements, and if requested by the Business Administrator, the
licensee shall additionally submit a certified copy of the policy.
C. Surety bond. Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the
licensee shall file with the City Engineer a surety bond of an approved
surety in an amount and form approved by the City Engineer. The bond
shall protect the City from damages and costs incurred by the City from
any failure by the licensee to restore all public right-of-way and other
public property affected by the installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation or removal of the licensed
communications system to its proper condition in accordance with City
standards. The bond shall be maintained by the licensee for as long as
the system remains in place within public right-of-way and, thereafter,
until the licensee has satisfied in full its obligations to the City, which
arise out of or pertain to the licensed communications system.
A. Failure to secure license. Any person who fails to secure the license
required under this chapter, or any licensee who fails to comply with
the requirements of the license or this chapter or with the other
applicable legal requirements, after notification of such violation by the
City Engineer, shall immediately abate the violation or cause the
licensee's communications system either to be removed or to be
disconnected and rendered inoperative.
B. Removal of system. The City may remove or disconnect and render
inoperative any communications system used or maintained contrary to
this chapter.
C. Transfers and assignments. The licensee shall not transfer or assign all
or any portion of its interest in any license granted pursuant to this
chapter without prior written authorization of the City Engineer, which
§ 160-7 UNION CITY CODE § 160-8
1:322
§ 160-9. Notice of certain actions required; appeal; decision.
Chapter 166
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 166-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film or
videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on television, in theaters or for institutional
uses. The provisions of this definition shall not be deemed to include the
filming of news stories with the City.
MOTION PICTURE — Includes, but is not limited to, any film which is
financed and/or distributed by a motion-picture studio, independent film
maker, cable or network television for the purpose of documentaries,
commercial advertising, movies, music videos or television series.
authorization shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, delayed
or denied. For purposes of this subsection, a merger or corporate
reorganization shall not be deemed a transfer or assignment.
A. Notice. The City Engineer shall promptly send, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice advising each prospective licensee of
any of the following:
(1) Action by the City Engineer in granting or denying application for a
license.
(2) Notification of failure to secure or comply with a license pursuant
to the Code of the City of Union City.
B. Hearing on appeal. Within three business days after receipt of any such
notice from the City Engineer, an applicant shall have the right to a
hearing before the Business Administrator by filing a written appeal
with the Business Administrator specifying the reasons for the appeal.
At least 10 days before the date of the hearing, the Business
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the hearing date. At the
hearing, the applicant may be represented by legal counsel, may call
witnesses and present evidence and may cross examine adverse
witnesses. The Business Administrator's decision shall be final.
§ 160-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:323
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the City which is
within the jurisdiction and control of the City.
§ 166-2. Permit required; fee.
§ 166-3. Issuance of permit; insurance and bonds.
A. Permit required. No person or organization shall film or permit filming
on public property within the City without first having obtained a
permit from the office of the City Clerk, which permit shall set forth the
approved location of such filming and the approved duration of such
filming by specific reference to day or dates, not to exceed five days.
Such permit must be readily available for inspection by City officials at
all times at the site of filming.
B. Application for permit; fee. All permits shall be applied for and obtained
from the office of the City Clerk during normal business hours.
Applications for such permits shall be in a form approved by the City
and be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount set forth in Chapter
155, Fees.
C. Duration of permit; additional fees. A permit shall be sufficient to
authorize outdoor or indoor filming for a period not to exceed five days.
Any period beyond five days shall required an additional fee as set forth
in Chapter 155 for every three-day period thereafter.
D. Reissuance of permit. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement
weather or other good cause, filming does not in fact take place on the
dates specified, the City Clerk, after authorization from the Director of
Public Safety or his/her designee, at the request of the applicant, may
issue a new permit for filming on other dates subject to full compliance
with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
E. Development of application and rules. The Chairperson of the Union
City Film Advisory Commission shall develop an application and
accompanying rules pursuant to and consistent with this chapter which
shall be submitted to the Corporation Counsel and the Police Chief and
then to the Director of Public Safety for final approval prior to their
issuance.
A. Time needed for issuance. No permit will be issued by the City Clerk
unless applied for at least five days in advance of the day of shooting
and approved by the Director of Public Safety or his/her designee, who
shall include the individual designated as the person overseeing filming
in the City. The five-day period may be waived the Director of Public
Safety or his/her designee if it is determined that sufficient cause is
warranted and there will not be any undue interference with any
property owners or tenants, be they residential, commercial or
otherwise.
§ 166-1 UNION CITY CODE § 166-3
1:324
§ 166-4. Obstruction of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
§ 166-5. Hours.
Filming shall not commence before 7:00 a.m. or continue after 10:00 p.m.
without the expressed approval of the Director of Public Safety after
receiving assurances from the Chief of Police that there will be no adverse
impact to any resident or business as a result of this filming.
§ 166-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter, or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 per day
B. Proof of insurance. Each permit application shall include proof of
insurance which shall provide coverage for auto liability, general
liability in the amount of $1,000,000 and for property damage in the
amount of $500,000.
C. Indemnification. The application shall also include an agreement that
the applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City from any
and all liability, expense, claims or damages resulting from the use of
public land.
D. Cash and maintenance bonds. In order to better insure that the public
property is left in at least the same condition as it was found, the
applicant shall post a cash bond of $500 or a maintenance bond of
$1,000 in favor of the City, thereby protecting and insuring that the
location utilized will be left after filming in a satisfactory condition, free
of debris, rubbish and equipment or materials, and that due observance
of all City ordinances, rules and regulations will be followed. Within
seven days of the completion of the filming, the City will return the
bond if there has been no damage to public property or public expense
caused by the filming. If the cost of rectifying the condition of the public
property exceeds the bond, the applicant/permit holder shall be
responsible for all additional amount, and this shall be agreed to by the
applicant as part of the application.
A. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for reviewing and providing a
recommendation for each application, including making a
determination that there will be a requirement to have a police
presence at the filming because of its impact on vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and movement. In this regard it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to hire an off-duty Union City police
officer to ensure that the City does not bear the expense of additional
personnel costs.
B. The applicant, once the permit is issued, shall take all reasonable steps
to minimize interference with the free passage of pedestrians and
traffic over public lands and shall comply with all lawful directives
issued by the Union City Police Department.
§ 166-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-6
1:325
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 171
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire protection — See Ch. 4, § 4-87.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 107.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
§ 166-6 UNION CITY CODE § 166-6
1:326
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Measures
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2001-11 (§ 13-15 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinance)]
§ 171-1. Life-hazard uses.
The Fire Prevention Bureau established by § 4-87 shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs.
The annual registration fee for life-hazard uses shall be the current fees
established by the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 171-2. Non-life-hazard uses.
In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the nonlife-
hazard uses listed in Chapter 155, Fees, shall register with the Fire
Prevention Bureau. These uses shall be inspected once each year and pay
annual fees as set forth in Chapter 155. All fees shall be paid by July 1 of the
fiscal year, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 171-3. Fees.
§ 171-4. Certificate of compliance for smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors. [Amended 1-6-2004]
§ 171-5. Elevator fire service keys. [Added 10-19-2004]
A. Permit application fees. The application fees for the permits listed in
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(a) shall be as provided by state regulations as may be
revised and as listed in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. Certificate of Fire Code status fee. The cost for the issuance of a
certificate of Fire Code status shall be as set forth in Chapter 155.
A. Required. Before any Use Group R-3 or R-4 structure is sold, leased or
otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy for residential
purposes, the owners shall obtain a certificate of smoke detector and
carbon monoxide alarm compliance (CSDCMAC) from the City
evidencing compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19.
B. Application fee. The application fee for a certificate of smoke detector
compliance, as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(d), shall be as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees.
C. All property owners must comply with the prevailing state law with
regard to obtaining smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms or
any fire prevention requirements. [Added 5-21-2013]
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-5
1:327
A. The owner of a building in Union City with an elevator shall install a
lockbox at a location which is readily accessible to the Construction
Official, firefighters and the Fire Official.
B. The elevator's fire service keys shall be placed in the lockbox and
remain there at all times.
C. The owner shall provide the Construction Official, firefighters and the
Fire Official with a set of the elevator's standardized fire service keys.
D. New elevators and elevators under going reconstruction shall be
equipped to operate with standardized fire service keys.
§ 171-5 UNION CITY CODE § 171-5
1:328
ARTICLE II
Sprinklers in One- and Two-Family Dwellings
[Adopted 3-21-2006]
§ 171-6. Fire sprinkler systems required.
Except as provided below, an approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall
be installed in all new buildings and structures regardless of the materials
used in construction and/or use group classification.
A. Exception: all buildings and/or structures used exclusively for the
transmission and/or distribution of electrical power.
B. Exception: detached accessory buildings and/or structures with an
intended use that is incidental to that of the primary building and/or
structure on the same lot of record as a detached single-family home.
Detached accessory buildings and/or structures shall include detached
garages, storage sheds, and animal habitats. This exception shall not
apply if the horizontal separation between the accessory building and/
or structure is less than 10 feet from any other building and/or
structure.
C. Exception: detached accessory buildings and/or structures with an
intended use that is incidental to that of the primary building and/or
structure on the same lot of record where the primary building and/or
structure. This exception shall not apply if the horizontal separation
between the accessory building and/or structure is less than 25 feet
from any other building and/or structure or the accessory building and/
or structure is used for the storage of the following hazardous
materials:
(1) Flammable and/or combustible liquids.
(2) Flammable gas if the quantity exceeds 10 gallons (37.9 liters) and/
or 333 cubic feet of gas (9,429.5 liters).
(3) Corrosives.
(4) Toxic agents.
(5) Oxidizers classified as Class 2, 3, or 4. Class 1 oxidizers shall not
exceed 100 gallons (378.5 liters) and/or 1,000 pounds (373.2
kilograms).
(6) Unstable/reactives.
(7) Water reactives, if the quantity exceeds 100 gallons (378.5 liters)
and/or 1,000 pounds (373.2 kilograms).
(8) Pyrophoric materials (all classifications).
(9) Organic peroxides (all classifications).
§ 171-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-6
1:329
(10) Explosives (all classifications).
D. Exception: picnic shelters, gazebos, pergolas, and detached public
restroom facilities with a minimum horizontal separation of 25 feet
from all other buildings and/or structures. This exception shall not
apply if the picnic shelter, gazebo, pergola, or detached public restroom
facility is equipped with a permanent heat-producing appliance that
utilizes natural gas and/or propane as a fuel supply or if the detached
public restroom facility exceeds a total 400 square feet in size.
§ 171-6 UNION CITY CODE § 171-6
1:330
Chapter 175
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Land development — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 370.
§ 175-1. Administration.
Construction Official. The Construction Official shall be appointed to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 175-2. Duties and responsibilities of Construction Official.
The duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Permit review. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to require that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the
area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this chapter,
"adversely affects" shall mean damage to adjacent properties
because of increase in flood levels attributed to physical changes to
the channel and the area of special flood hazard.
(a) If it is determined that there is no adverse effect and the
development is not a building, then the permit shall be granted
without further consideration.
(b) If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then
technical justification, i.e., a registered professional engineer,
for the proposed development shall be required.
(c) If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions
of this chapter shall apply.
B. Use of other base flood data. The Construction Official shall obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to assure that:
§ 171-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-2
1:331
§ 175-3. Alteration of watercourses.
The Construction Official shall:
§ 175-4. Interpretation of FHBM boundaries.
The Construction Official also shall make interpretations where needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards,
for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions.
Chapter 180
FLORISTS
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above the base flood level.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood level.
(3) If it is determined by the Construction Code Official that there is an
adverse effect, then technical justification (i.e., registered
professional engineer) for the proposed development may be
required.
C. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level,
of the lowest habitable floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level.
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
B. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
§ 175-2 UNION CITY CODE § 180-1
1:332
§ 180-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL FLORIST — Any person engaged in the business of selling at retail
any flowers, funeral sprays, wreaths, designs, corsages, potted plants or
cuttings or bedding plants, all of which are of natural growth.
§ 180-2. Restrictions.
No licensee shall sell any product requiring licenses, except from a
regularly established retail flower store, shop or greenhouse which shall be
properly equipped with adequate refrigeration to properly take care of cut
flowers and plants, and which shall display cut flowers for sale to the public
in the regular course of business as a retail florist, 52 weeks in the year, at
the location at which the licensee shall operate or conduct his/her business.
Chapter 185
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:333

ARTICLE I
Retail Food Establishment Code
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 6-5 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 185-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is
annexed to this article and made a part of it without the inclusion of the
text.
§ 185-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965)."
§ 185-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the offices of the Department of Health and the
City Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 185-4. Enforcement.
The Health Officer and any other official authorized by the Board of
Commissioners shall have the responsibility for the enforcement hereof.
§ 185-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:335

ARTICLE II
Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 6-6 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 185-6. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations hereof is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is
annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the inclusion of the
text.
§ 185-7. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961)."
§ 185-8. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the offices of the Health Officer
and the City Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 185-9. Enforcement.
The Health Officer and any other official authorized by the Board of
Commissioners shall have the responsibility for the enforcement hereof.
§ 185-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-10
1:337

ARTICLE III
Food Vendors at Street Fairs, Festivals or Special Events
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 6-13 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances (Ord. No. 3667)]
§ 185-11. Findings.
§ 185-12. License required.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any food during any street fair, festival
or special event unless (s)he shall have obtained a license to do so from the
Board of Health.
§ 185-13. Fees.
A temporary license issued for the duration of any such fair, festival or
special event shall be issued upon the payment of the fees as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 185-14. Exceptions.
This article shall not affect or license the sale of lemonade, soda, iced tea
or similar nonalcoholic beverages by persons under the age of 18 years who
are selling such liquids on a temporary basis.
§ 185-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
A. Food vendors, pursuant to City ordinance, must be licensed by the
Department of Public Health for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Union City.
B. Certain street fairs, festivals or special events of not more than one
week in duration occur from time to time within the City, where, among
other things, food is sold to the public.
C. It is in the best interests of the City to regulate and control the
standards by which such food is vended to the public.
§ 185-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-15
1:339

ARTICLE IV
Outdoor Dining
[Adopted 7-6-2004]
§ 185-16. Purpose.
Permission may be granted temporarily to any person, firm, corporation or
organization with frontage on Park Avenue from Jefferson Street to 46th
Street and currently licensed to operate an indoor food business to maintain
an outdoor dining area.
§ 185-17. General requirements.
A. The outdoor dining area must be located directly in front of the eating
establishment, cordoned off from the remaining sidewalk area devoted
to pedestrian traffic, and well-illuminated. The term "directly in front
of" confines the dining area to the area represented by an exterior of
each side of the store occupied by the eating establishment projected
directly to the curbline immediately in front thereof.
B. A minimum of eight feet of paved surface must be available for
pedestrian traffic adjacent to the outdoor dining area.
C. The entrance doors of the eating establishment and those of adjacent
premises must not be obstructed in any manner.
D. A rough sketch shall be submitted to the Construction Official
illustrating the items in A through C as specified above with respect to
the subject property.
E. The preparation of food or drink must be performed within the interior
of the eating establishment.
F. No food or drink may be stored within the outdoor dining area.
G. Tables within the outdoor dining area shall be no larger than two feet in
diameter with no more than two chairs per table. The minimum
allowable space for each table and chair placement shall be six feet and
shall be placed adjacent to the exterior front wall of the establishment.
Only a single row of tables and chairs is permitted. Neither tables nor
chairs shall be attached or chained to any tree, post, sign, curb,
sidewalk or property within or near the eating establishment.
H. No outdoor dining area shall be open for business prior to 9:00 a.m. nor
remain open for business at 9:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday.
I. The outdoor dining area and adjacent sidewalks and streets must be
kept free and clear of debris and litter. Areas must be cleaned as
needed and at the time that business is closed.
J. An eating establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages may not,
pursuant to this article, serve alcoholic beverages in the outdoor area.
§ 185-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-17
1:341
§ 185-18. Application information.
§ 185-19. Enforcement.
In addition, no eating establishment may permit alcoholic beverages
to be brought onto the premises by any patron to be consumed in the
outdoor dining area.
K. It is unlawful for any eating establishment to conduct outdoor dining
without first obtaining a permit from the City.
L. Upon the expiration of a permit for outdoor dining, all tables, chairs and
other equipment used for outdoor dining shall be completely removed
from the sidewalk.
A. An eating establishment is required to submit a completed application
for an outdoor dining permit at least 10 days prior to the time that the
applicant desires to serve food outdoors. Outdoor dining is not
permitted without the written approval of the Construction Official. If
the application is complete, the Construction Official will act upon the
same within 10 days after the application becomes complete. If the
application is not complete, the Construction Official will notify the
applicant within 10 business days by specifying the open items which
render the application incomplete. The Construction Official shall issue
a permit that fully complies with the provisions of this article. The
Construction Official shall deny a permit wherever the application is
incomplete or fails to comply with this article.
B. The foregoing permit application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
C. An eating establishment shall be required to sign the City of Union
City's hold harmless and indemnity agreement. It must also furnish a
suitable certificate of insurance issued through an acceptable insurer
specifying the City of Union City as an additional insured and providing
general liability, bodily injury and property damage coverage with
minimum limits of liability not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. It is
understood and agreed that the required amount of $1,000,000
insurance coverage per occurrence will be for short-term purposes only
running from May 24, 2004, to October 31, 2004. An executed hold
harmless and indemnity agreement and certificate of insurance shall be
submitted no later than 10 days after the issuance to the applicant of an
outdoor dining permit.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to override, weaken or in
any way diminish existing ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations,
including but not limited to those of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission, Zoning and/or Planning Boards, nor is it intended herein
to alter or diminish their jurisdiction.
§ 185-17 UNION CITY CODE § 185-19
1:342
§ 185-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
A. The Construction Official and the Police Department shall have the
power and authority to enforce this article.
B. The City of Union City, through the office of the Construction Official,
reserves the right to revoke the privilege of outdoor dining for any
licensed eating establishment which, upon the expiration of 10 days
after receipt of notice from the Construction Official of a violation of
state law or any of the requirements set forth in this article, fails to cure
the violation.
C. The City of Union City expressly reserves the right to require the
removal of an outdoor dining area on an individual basis or as a
permitted use along the entire section of Park Avenue, if for any reason,
the best interests of the neighborhood or community are determined to
be at risk.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to override, weaken or in
any way diminish existing ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations,
including but not limited to those of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission, Zoning and/or Planning Boards, nor is it intended herein
to alter or diminish their jurisdiction.
§ 185-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-20
1:343
Chapter 196
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 196-1. Purpose.
This chapter is for the purpose of regulating all games of chance held,
operated or conducted within the City, pursuant to the Acts of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey known as the "Bingo Licensing Law"
(N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.) and the "Raffles Licensing Law," (N.J.S.A. 5:8-58
et seq.) and in accordance with the rules and regulations issued or to be
promulgated by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission in the
Department of State of the State of New Jersey. All applications, licenses
and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to the provision of
the Acts and the rules and regulations, and any laws, rules and regulations
hereafter enacted and shall be further subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 196-2. Hours.
No licensee authorized by law shall hold, operate or conduct any game of
chance under any license except between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 11:00
p.m., except as permitted under § 196-5 of this chapter.
§ 196-3. Organizations eligible for license.
No license to conduct a game of chance, as authorized by law, shall be
issued to any organization not having a bona fide situs established in good
faith within the State of New Jersey and actively engaged in serving one or
more of the authorized purposes, as defined by the rules and regulations of
the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 196-4. Games prohibited during elections.
No game of chance shall be conducted under any license at any time during
which a general, municipal, primary, special or Board of Education election
is being held while the polls are open for voting at such election.
§ 196-5. Games on Sunday permitted.
Organizations and associations duly licensed to hold and operate legalized
games of chance are authorized to hold, conduct and operate legalized
games of chance in the City on Sundays between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and
midnight.
Chapter 203
GRAFFITI
§ 203-1. Findings.
§ 185-20 UNION CITY CODE § 203-1
1:344
§ 203-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt tip marker, china marker or similar device
that is not water-soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/2
inch or greater.
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
PERSON — Any person, partnership or corporation selling or offering for
sale any of the items prohibited by this chapter.
§ 203-3. Sales restricted.
§ 203-4. Fraudulent proof of age.
No minor shall, at the time of purchase of items specified in § 203-3B above,
knowingly furnish fraudulent evidence of majority, including, but not limited
to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under
the Federal Selective Service Act, an identification card issued to a member
of the armed forces, or any document issued by a federal, state, county or
municipal government.
Chapter 208
A. There is widespread use of spray paint and indelible markers in the
permanent defacement of public and private property.
B. The marring of public and private property has contributed to the blight
and degradation of neighborhoods and public places.
C. The easy application of and ready accessibility to spray paint and
indelible markers facilitates its misuse and hinders enforcement
agencies from preventing persons from defacing public and private
property or apprehending those committing the offensive conduct.
D. A substantial portion of the defacement of public and private property
has been caused by minors using spray paint containers and indelible
markers, obtained both legally and illegally.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale, transfer or
offer to transfer any spray paint container or indelible marker unless
such spray paint container or indelible marker is held for sale or
transfer in an enclosed device which is constructed to prevent removal
of the merchandise, except by authorized attendants, or is stored, out of
sight, in such a way as to prevent free and uninhibited access to the
merchandise by the general public.
B. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint container or
indelible marker to a minor, unless the minor is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian at the time of purchase or transfer.
§ 203-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-4
1:345
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 239. Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
§ 208-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample of
device, or any printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter or literature which:
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Any person engaging in the business for
hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, other
than newspapers distributed to subscribers, and any person receiving
compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law;
and shall mean also any periodical or current magazine regularly published
with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise or thing.
Directs attention to any business establishment or other activity for the
purpose of directly or indirectly promoting sales.
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting or event of any kind for
which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or
profit; but the terms of this section shall not apply where an admission
fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying
the expenses incident to such meeting or event when it takes place in
connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted
under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety
and good order, provided that nothing contained in this chapter shall
be deemed to authorize the taking place of any meeting or event of any
kind without a license where such license is or may be required by any
law of this state or under any ordinance of this City.
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominately and essentially an advertisement and is distributed for
advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person
so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 203-4 UNION CITY CODE § 208-1
1:346
copies of any matter or literature, not included in the definitions of a sign,
commercial handbill or newspaper.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any structure designed or used, either wholly or
in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or uninhabited,
and shall include any grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox appurtenant to the structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — All public ways, public parks, grounds and buildings.
§ 208-2. Posting prohibitions.
No person shall post or affix, or cause the same to be done by any person,
any notice, advertisement or device calculated to attract the attention of
the public to or upon any part of any public way or public place, or any
lamppost, electric light or telephone pole, hydrant, shade tree or tree box,
or upon any public structure, or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or police
telegraph system, except as may be authorized or required by the laws of
the United States, the State of New Jersey or the ordinances of the City.
§ 208-3. Throwing handbills prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place, provided that it shall
not be unlawful for any person to distribute without charge to the receiver a
noncommercial handbill in a public place to a person willing to accept such
noncommercial handbill.
§ 208-4. Distribution to vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. The provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or
distributing of any noncommercial handbill to the occupant of any vehicle
who is willing to accept the same.
§ 208-5. Distribution on posted property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by the owner or
its authorized agent not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in
a conspicuous position near the entrance a sign bearing the words: "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar
notice indicating that the owner of the premises does not desire to have
the privacy of the occupants disturbed or to have handbills left upon the
premises.
§ 208-6. Distribution on private premises.
No person shall distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any private premises except by transmitting the handbill directly
to the person then present, or in the case of private premises which are
§ 208-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-6
1:347
not posted as provided in the chapter, unless requested by the owner or
its authorized agent not to do so may place any handbill in or upon the
private premises, provided that the handbill is so placed as to prevent it
from being blown about. Mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by
federal postal laws or regulations.
§ 208-7. Posting upon private premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post any commercial or
noncommercial handbill on any private premises without the consent of the
owner or its authorized agent.
Chapter 214
HISTORIC AREAS, PRESERVATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission — See Ch. 4, § 4-92.
§ 214-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — The construction of new improvement as part of an existing
improvement when such new improvement changes the exterior
appearance of any landmark.
ALTERATION — Any work done on any improvement which:
DEMOLITION — The razing of any improvement or the obliteration of any
natural feature of a landmark.
HISTORIC DISTRICT —
A. Is not an addition to the improvement.
B. Changes the appearance of the exterior surface of any improvement.
A definable group of Tax Map lots, the improvements on which when
viewed collectively:
(1) Have a unique character resulting from their architectural style;
Represent a significant period in the architectural and social
history of the City; and
(2)
Because of their unique character can readily be viewed as an area
or neighborhood distinct from surrounding portions of the City.
(3)
A.
§ 208-6 UNION CITY CODE § 214-1
1:348
HISTORIC LANDMARK or LANDMARK —
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or part thereof constructed or installed
upon real property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the
location of such construction or installation for a period of not less than 60
contiguous days.
REPAIR — Any work done on any improvement which:
Except as otherwise stated, all reference to "landmarks" in this chapter
shall be deemed to include Historic Districts as well.
B.
Any real property such as a building, structure, ruins, foundation,
route, trail, place, including but not limited to a cave, cemetery, burial
ground, camp or village area, or a natural configuration, geological
formation or feature which:
Is of particular historic, cultural, scenic or aesthetic significance
of the City and in which the broad cultural, political, economic
or social history of the nation, state or community is reflected or
exemplified; or
(1)
Is identified with historic personages or with important events in
the main current of national, state or local history; or
(2)
Shows evidence of habitation, activity or the culture of prehistoric
man; or
(3)
Embodies a distinguishing characteristic or an architectural type
valuable as representative of a period, style or method of
construction; or
(4)
Represents a work of a builder, designer, artist, or architect whose
individual genius influenced his age; or
(5)
(6) Is imbued with traditional or legendary lore.
A.
All landmarks shall specifically be identified within the community
facilities plan element of the Master Plan as recognized by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28(b)(6).
B.
The designation of a landmark shall be deemed to include the Tax Map
lot on which it is located.
C.
A. Is not an addition to the improvement.
B. Does not change the appearance of the exterior surface of any
improvement.
REPLACEMENT — Repairs when a building permit is required for
same.
STRUCTURE — Any improvement, including but not limited to all
buildings.
§ 214-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-2
1:349
§ 214-2. Landmarks Commission.
A. Creation. There is hereby created in and for the City a commission to be
known as the "Landmarks Commission of the City of Union City."
B. Membership; appointment; terms.
(1) The Committee shall be comprised of not fewer than seven nor
more than nine members, all of whom shall be citizens and
residents of the City of Union City serving without pay. The
membership shall consist of the Construction Official or his
designee, a member of the Board of Education and such other
citizens as are appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 3-21-2006]
(2) Members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners and
serve for three-year terms, except that City officials shall serve
during their incumbency in City office.
(3) Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner in which the previous
incumbent was appointed, and such vacancy appointment shall be
only for the balance of the incumbent's unexpired term.
C. Organization and rules for procedure.
(1) The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and
a Vice Chairperson.
(2) The Commission shall create rules and procedures for the
transaction of its business subject to the following regulations:
(a) A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four of
the Commission's members including the Chairperson, or in
his/her absence, the Vice Chairperson, but not less than a
majority of the full authorized membership may grant or deny a
certificate of appropriateness.
(b) The Commission shall appoint a secretary who need not be a
member of the Commission. The secretary shall keep minutes
and records of all meetings and proceedings, including voting
records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations and
decisions. All such material shall be public record.
(c) All meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act,
N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.
(3) The Commission members shall serve without compensation but
shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of
official business.
(4) Within the limits of funds appropriated for the performance of its
work, grants and gifts, the Commission may obtain the services of
qualified persons to direct, advise and assist the Commission and
§ 214-2 UNION CITY CODE § 214-2
1:350
§ 214-3. Interpretation.
may obtain the equipment, supplies and other material necessary
to its effective operation.
D. Powers and duties. The Commission shall:
(1) Within six months of its organization prepare and adopt, pursuant
to § 214-4A below, a landmark designation list and official map
which shall then be referred to the Board of Commissioners for
adoption by ordinance.
(2) Hear and decide applications for certificates of appropriateness,
pursuant to § 214-5.
(3) Amend, from time to time, as circumstances warrant, the landmark
designation list and landmark map in the manner set forth in
§ 214-4A herein.
(4) Report at least annually to the Planning Board and the Board of
Commissioners on the state of historic preservation in the City and
to recommend measures to improve same.
(5) Collect and disseminate material on the importance of historic
preservation and techniques for achieving same.
(6) Advise all City agencies regarding goals and techniques of historic
preservation.
(7) Adopt and promulgate such regulations and procedures not
inconsistent with this chapter as are necessary and proper for the
effective and efficient performance of the duties herein assigned.
(8) Preparation of a survey of historical artifacts in all public buildings.
[Added 3-21-2006]
(9) Recommend rules and regulations to the Board of Commissioners
to protect historical artifacts from being destroyed, removed or
taken from any public building approved for construction,
reconstruction or demolition. [Added 3-21-2006]
A. In adopting this chapter it is the intention of the Board of
Commissioners to create an agency which can administer a system of
preservation regulations, based on a rational plan and objective
criteria, which will complement existing land use and construction code
legislation. The controls herein established, while compatible with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28(b)(6) and Section 317 of the BOCA Code, should be
viewed as having an independent basis under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
B. This chapter should not be viewed as requiring or prohibiting the use of
any particular architectural style. Rather, the purpose is to preserve the
past by making it compatible with and relevant to the present. To that
end, new construction in or near a landmark should not necessarily
§ 214-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-3
1:351
§ 214-4. Designation of landmarks and Historic Districts.
duplicate the style of the landmark; it should simply be compatible with
and not detract from the landmark.
A. Survey. The Commission shall make a comprehensive survey of the City
for the purpose of identifying Historic Districts and landmarks which
are worthy of protection and preservation.
B. Designation of landmarks; notice to owners. Based on the survey or
upon the recommendation of concerned citizens, the Commission shall
document the importance and historical significance to the City, state or
nation of each landmark designation in terms of the purposes and
criteria set forth in this chapter. Thereafter, the Commission, by
certified mail, shall:
(1) Notify each owner that his property has been tentatively
designated an historic landmark.
(2) Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of such
tentative designation, and advise him/her of his/her opportunities
and rights to challenge or contest such designation.
(3) Invite each owner to consent voluntarily to final designation
without the need for public hearing or other procedure.
C. Public hearings.
(1) The Commission shall, as soon as practicable, make public a
complete list and map of the tentatively designated landmarks and
districts specifying the locations, boundaries and popular names
thereof. In designating any landmark or Historic district the
Commission may exempt any improvement or any portion of any
Tax Map lot the demolition or alteration or improving of which
would not affect the landmark or district as to the purposes and
criteria set forth in this chapter. Such exemption shall only be for
good cause shown and upon affirmative vote of 2/3 of the full
authorized membership of the Commission, The tentative list and
map shall thereafter be submitted at a public hearing to the
examination and criticism of the public. Interested persons shall be
entitled to present their opinions, suggestions and objections at
this public hearing. A list and map showing all proposed Historic
districts and landmarks shall be published, together with notice of
the hearing on same, in the official newspaper not less than 10 days
before such hearing is to be held.
(2) After full consideration of the evidence brought forth at the special
hearing, the Commission shall make its final decisions on the
designations and shall issue its final report to the public stating
reasons in support of its actions with respect to each landmark and
Historic District designation.
§ 214-3 UNION CITY CODE § 214-4
1:352
§ 214-5. Procedures to ensure preservation.
D. Adoption of list.
(1) The list shall be submitted thereafter to the Clerk. The Board of
Commissioners shall then consider whether to adopt the
designation list and map by ordinance. Once adopted, the
designation list and map may be amended in the same manner in
which it was adopted.
(2) Copies of the designation list and official map as adopted shall be
made public and distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing
development applications and all building and housing permits. A
certificate of designation shall be served by certified mail upon the
owner of each site included in the final list, and a true copy thereof
shall be filed with the County Clerk for recordation in the same
manner as certificates of lien upon real property.
E. Plaques. Each designated Historic District or landmark may be marked
by an appropriate plaque, in such form as the Commission shall
promulgate by regulation.
A. Certificates of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness issued
by the Landmarks Commission shall be required before a permit can be
issued or, in the event no other type of permit is otherwise required,
before any of the following work can commence on the property of any
landmark or within any Historic District:
(1) Demolition of a historic landmark or of any improvement within any
Historic District.
(2) Relocation of any historic landmark or of any improvement within
any Historic District.
(3) Change in the exterior appearance of any existing landmark or of
any improvement within any Historic District by addition,
alteration or replacement.
(4) Any new construction of a principal or accessory structure.
(5) Changes in or addition of new signs or exterior lighting, except that
no certificate of appropriateness shall be required for one unlit sign
per premises if the surface area of such sign does not exceed one
square foot.
B. Exceptions. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for
any repainting, repair or exact replacement of any existing
improvement. In the event that the color or exterior surface material of
the improvement is changed as a result of such repainting, repair or
exact replacement, a certificate of appropriateness shall not be
required of the new color or exterior surface is one that has been
previously approved by regulations duly promulgated by the
§ 214-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-5
1:353
Commission for similar improvement in that district or as to that
landmark. In the event that the repainting, repair or exact replacement
does not conform to the regulations, a certificate of appropriateness
shall be required.
C. Applications for certificates.
(1) Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made on
forms available therefor from the secretary of the Landmarks
Commission. Completed applications shall be delivered to:
Landmarks Commission, City of Union City, City Clerk's Office,
3715 Palisade Avenue, Union City, NJ 07087.
(2) Applications shall include the following:
(a) All forms shall be completed by the applicant.
(b) A certificate that all property owners within 200 feet of the lot
lines of the landmark property have been sent certified mail
notice of the application not less than 10 days before the
hearing.
(c) Proof of publication of a notice of the application in the official
newspaper not less than 10 days prior to the hearing.
(d) The following exhibits:
[1] An overall site plan layout, at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 20 feet, showing the location of all adjacent
properties.
[2] Sufficient color photographs of all adjacent properties and
buildings within a minimum of 60 feet of the landmark
property lines. Each photograph shall be properly
identified and referenced on the site plan.
[3] Elevation drawings may be optional at the Commission's
request. All building elevations required shall be at a
minimum scale of 1/8 inch equals one foot.
(3) The Landmarks Commission shall reach a decision on the
application within 21 days after the secretary has declared an
application to be complete; otherwise the application shall be
deemed to have been approved. Nothing herein shall prohibit an
extension of time by mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Landmarks Commission. The Landmarks Commission may advise
the applicant and make recommendations in regard to the
appropriateness of proposed action, and may grant approval upon
such conditions as it deems appropriate within the intent and
purposes of this chapter. If an application is approved, the
Landmarks Commission shall forthwith issue a certificate of
appropriateness. If the Landmarks Commission disapproves an
application, the Commission shall state its reasons, in writing, in
§ 214-5 UNION CITY CODE § 214-5
1:354
resolution form, within 10 days of such decision. In case of
disapproval, the Landmarks Commission shall notify the applicant,
in writing, of such resolution of disapproval and provide the
applicant with a certified copy thereof. A summary of the
Commission's action shall be published in the official newspaper.
(4) In the event that an applicant alleges that compliance with the
requirements of this section would be an unreasonable hardship
and that the nature of his application is such that the minor change
sought neither justifies the time and expense of the plenary
proceeding nor will impact negatively on the public good nor
specifically on the historic qualities sought to be preserved. The
Commission, by a two-thirds affirmative vote of its full authorized
membership, may grant such relief from the requirements of this
section as it deems consistent with the public good and the
purposes of this chapter.
(5) An applicant may allege that a certificate of appropriateness should
be granted without his/her fulfilling all of the application
requirements set forth herein because the addition or alteration
contemplated will not be visible from any place to which the public
normally has access and, therefore, that the addition or alteration
cannot adversely affect the public interest. In that event the
Commission, by a majority vote of its full authorized membership,
upon a finding that the applicant's claim is accurate, may forthwith
grant a certificate of appropriateness on that basis.
D. Issuance of certificate; effects. Issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness shall be deemed to be final approval pursuant to this
chapter. Such approval shall neither cause nor prevent the filing of any
collateral application or other proceeding required by any other City
ordinance to be made prior to undertaking the action requested vis-avis
the landmark or structure in the Historic District.
E. Denial; appeal.
(1) Denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed to
preclude the applicant from undertaking the activity applied for
vis-a-vis a landmark or improvement in a Historic District.
(2) The granting or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may be
appealed to the Board of Commissioners in the same manner as if
the appeal were taken, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17 from action
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the right of judicial review
of the municipal action after an appeal is concluded by the Board of
Commissioners.
F. Permit review. All municipal officials reviewing all permit applications
involving real property or improvements thereon shall determine
whether such application involves any activity which should also be the
§ 214-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-5
1:355
§ 214-6. Standards of consideration.
subject of an application for a certificate of appropriateness. If it
should, such official shall inform both the secretary of the Commission
and the applicant.
A. Demolitions. In regard to an application to demolish a historic landmark
or any improvement within a Historic District, the following matters
shall be considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural and aesthetic significance.
(2) Its use.
(3) Its importance to the City and the extent to which its historical or
architectural value is such that its removal would be detrimental to
the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values,
generating business, creating new jobs, attracting tourists,
students, writers, historians, artists and artisans, attracting new
residents, encouraging study and interest in American history,
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design,
educating citizens in American culture and heritage or making the
City a more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(6) If it is within a Historic District, the probable impact of its removal
upon the ambience of the Historic District.
B. Removals out of the City. In regard to an application to move a historic
landmark within a Historic District, to a location outside the City, the
following matters shall be considered:
(1) The historic loss to the site of original location.
(2) The compelling reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure
at its present site.
(3) The proximity of the proposed new location to the City, including
the accessibility to the residents of the City and other citizens.
(4) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure
itself.
(5) The applicable matters listed in Subsection A.
C. Removals within the City. In regard to an application to move a historic
landmark or any structure in a Historic District to a new location within
§ 214-5 UNION CITY CODE § 214-6
1:356
the City, following matters shall be considered in addition to the
matters listed in Subsection B:
(1) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this chapter.
(2) If the proposed new location is within a Historic District, the visual
compatibility factors as set forth in Subsection G.
D. Additions or removals. In regard to an application to move a landmark
or structure into, or to construct a new structure or add to or alter an
existing structure within a Historic District, or a landmark, the visual
compatibility of the proposed structure with the structures and
surroundings to which it would be visually related shall be considered
in terms of the visual compatibility factors as set forth in Subsection G.
E. Consideration on other actions. In regard to an application for other
approval of any proposed action as set forth in § 214-5A, the following
matters shall be considered:
(1) If a historic landmark or a structure in a Historic District is
involved:
(a) The impact of the proposed change on its historic and
architectural character.
(b) Its importance to the City and the extent to which its historic or
architectural interest would be adversely affected to the
detriment of the public interest.
(c) The extent to which there would be involvement of textures
and materials that could not be reproduced or could be
reproduced only with great difficulty.
(2) The use of any structure involved.
(3) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view of a landmark or structure within a Historic District
from a public street.
(4) If the application deals with a structure within a Historic District,
the impact the proposed change would have on the character and
ambiance of the Historic District, and the structure's visual
compatibility with the buildings, places and structures to which it
would be visually related in terms of the visual compatibility factors
set forth in Subsection G.
F. Interiors. In regard to all applications, additional pertinent matters may
be considered, but in no instance shall interior arrangement be
considered.
§ 214-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-6
1:357
G. Visual compatibility factors. The following factors shall be used in
determining the visual compatibility of a building, structure or
appurtenance thereof with the buildings and places to which they are
visually related and shall be known as "visual compatibility factors":
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of the front facade. The relationship of the width of the
building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings. The relationship of the width of windows to
the height of windows in a building shall be visually compatible
with the buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids on front facades. The relationship of
solids to void in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(7) Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls,
open-type fencing, evergreen landscape masses, shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a building in
relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and
balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places
to which it is visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
§ 214-6 UNION CITY CODE § 214-6
1:358
§ 214-7. Maintenance of landmarks.
related in its directional character, whether this is vertical
character, horizontal character, or nondirectional character.
A. Findings. Recognizing the need for preventive maintenance to ensure
the continued useful life of landmarks and structures in Historic
Districts, the Board of Commissioners hereby declares that code
enforcement vis-a-vis landmarks and structures in Historic Districts is a
high municipal priority.
B. Notice of violations. In the event that any landmark or improvement in a
Historic District deteriorates to the point that, in the best estimate of
the Department of Inspections, the cost of correcting the outstanding
code violations equals more than 25% of the cost of replacing the entire
improvement on which the violations occur, the Department shall serve
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice on the
owner of the landmark listing the violations, the estimate for their
abatement, and the replacement cost of the improvement and stating
that if the owner does not take all necessary remedial action within 90
days, or such extensions as the Department shall for good cause grant,
the City may, at the expiration of 90 days, enter upon the property and
abate such violations itself and cause the cost thereof to become a lien
on the property.
C. Hearing.
(1) Upon receipt of such notice the owner, within 10 days after such
receipt, may notify the Department of Inspections of his/her wish to
have a hearing as to the allegations and estimates set forth in the
department's notice. Such hearing shall be conducted by the
construction official and so far as possible, by a formal adversary
proceeding in which the Department of Inspections, shall establish
the matters alleged in the notice by a preponderance of the
evidence.
(2) If the owner does not request a hearing, the procedures set forth in
Subsection B shall prevail. If a hearing is requested, the
Construction Official, within 10 days following the hearing, will
serve on the owner an opinion, in writing, setting forth his/her
conclusions and the reasons therefor. Such opinion shall be deemed
to be a first notice pursuant to Subsection B.
D. Abatement by City.
(1) Thereafter, if the owner does not comply, the Department may
enter onto the premises and, by use of municipal labor or outside
contractors or both, perform such work as is necessary to abate all
violations.
(2) The head of the Department shall then certify to the Board of
Commissioners the cost of such work, plus all administrative,
§ 214-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-7
1:359
§ 214-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 219
clerical and legal costs and overhead attributable thereto and shall
present same to the Commissioners.
(3) The Board of Commissioners, by resolution, may vote to cause the
sum so certified to become a lien upon the landmark property
payable with the next quarter's property taxes, and if not then paid
shall bear interest at the same rate as delinquent taxes.
A. Violation.
(1) If any person shall undertake any activity vis-a-vis a landmark or
improvement within a Historic District without first having
obtained a certificate or appropriateness, such person shall be
deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
(2) Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally
serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring,
a notice describing the violation in detail and giving the owner 10
days to abate the violation by restoring the landmark or
improvement to its status quo ante. If the owner cannot be
personally served within the City with the notice, a copy shall be
posted on site and a copy sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner at his/her last known address as it appears
on the municipal tax rolls.
(3) In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 days of
service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer
shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint, returnable in
the Municipal Court, charging violation of this chapter. Each
separate day the violation exists shall be deemed to be a new and
separate violation of this chapter.
B. Penalties. The penalty for violations shall be as follows:
(1) Up to 10 days: not more than $25 per day.
(2) Eleven to 25 days: not more than $50 per day.
(3) Each day beyond 25 days: not more than $75 per day.
C. Emergency procedures. In the event that any action which would
permanently change adversely the landmark or Historic District such as
demolition or removal is about to occur without a certificate of
appropriateness having been issued, the Zoning Officer is hereby
authorized to apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for such
injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent the destruction of any
landmark.
§ 214-7 UNION CITY CODE § 214-8
1:360
HOTELS AND BOARDINGHOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122. Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
§ 219-1. Definitions.
§ 219-2. Permit required; inspections.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, a hotel, lodging, boardinghouse or
rooming house shall include every dwelling house or other structure
kept, held or used where sleeping, lodging or light housekeeping rooms
are offered for pay for three or more persons.
B. The following words used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly
stated or unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, shall
have the following meanings:
BOARDINGHOUSE — A house where the business of keeping boarders
generally is carried on and where a furnished room and meals are
regularly served as a part of such accommodations.
HOTEL — A house where the business of furnishing sleeping
accommodations to guests, with or without meals, is carried on.
LODGING HOUSE — A house where the business of accommodating
lodgers is carried on in substantially the same manner as a rooming
house, except that the unit rented as a part of such accommodations is
a furnished apartment rather than a furnished room.
ROOMING HOUSE — A house where the business of accommodating
roomers is carried on in substantially the same manner as a
boardinghouse, except that no meals are served as a part of such
accommodations.
A. No structure, or parts of a structure, shall be used as a hotel, rooming,
lodging house or boardinghouse before the person desiring such use
makes application for, and receives from the License Inspector of the
City a permit authorizing such use. The permit shall be issued only to
persons of good moral character and shall not be transferable. Permits
shall run from January 1 of each year and shall terminate on December
31 of the same year. Permits after January 1 shall also expire on
December 31 of the same year. Applications for renewal of permits must
be the same as if an original permit is applied for. The permit shall be
signed by the License Inspector and shall be posted in a prominent
place on the premises.
B. Before any permit is issued, the License Inspector shall submit the
application, together with the plans and other data, to the Building
Inspector and to the Health Officer and shall not issue any permit until
§ 214-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-2
1:361
§ 219-3. Required facilities.
(s)he has received a written approval from the Health Officer certifying
compliance with the terms of this chapter, the Sanitary Code of the
county and state, and the codes and health ordinances of the City,
and the written approval of the Building Inspector, showing that the
structure complies with the local Building Code. The structure must
also comply with any building regulations prescribed by the statutes of
the State of New Jersey.
A. No permit shall be issued until each room, furnished room and
furnished apartment in any hotel, lodging house, rooming house or
boardinghouse shall contain a separate room which affords privacy to
the person within the room and which separate room is equipped with a
bathtub or shower, a toilet or flush water closet and a lavatory basin in
good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer
system approved by the Building Inspector and the Health Officer, and
which bathtub or shower and lavatory basin shall be properly
connected with hot and cold waterlines, and shall be supplied with
adequate hot and cold water. Every bathroom and toilet or water closet
compartment shall have a window comprising 5% of the total floor
space of the bathroom and toilet or water closet compartment, except
that no windows shall be required in an adequately ventilated bathroom
and toilet or water closet compartment equipped with a ventilating
system which is kept in continuous operation and approved by the
Building Inspector and the Health Officer. Every bathroom and toilet or
water closet compartment shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or
wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be
properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working
condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a
safe manner.
B. No owner, operator or occupant of any room, furnished room or
furnished apartment in any hotel, rooming house, lodging house or
boardinghouse shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility
which is required under this chapter to be removed or shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied hotel room, furnished room or furnished
apartment, in any hotel, rooming house, lodging house or
boardinghouse, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while additional repairs or alterations are in process, or
during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is
approved by the Health Officer.
C. The requirement of a separate private room containing a bathtub or
shower and a toilet or water closet and lavatory basin shall not apply to
any existing hotel, lodging house, rooming house or boardinghouse, the
owner or operator of which had a license and a permit for the operation
thereof, which license and permit was in force and effect on December
19, 1963, or to any renewal or renewals of the license and permit, or to
§ 219-2 UNION CITY CODE § 219-3
1:362
§ 219-4. Application requirements.
§ 219-5. Standard hotel register to be kept.
the heirs, next of kin or personal representatives of the holder of such
license and permit.
D. The number of beds in rooming houses, regardless of referral sources
or statutory classification of their clientele, shall be limited to 187 beds.
This number represents the number of beds contained in rooming
houses, boardinghouses and boarding homes located within the City
and licensed by the State of New Jersey as of January 1, 1989.
A. All applications for permits must be in writing and presented to the
License Inspector on blanks setting forth the name of the applicant, his/
her address, occupation and if (s)he is not the owner of the structure,
the location where the business is to be conducted, the number of
rooms in the structure, and which rooms are to be occupied as sleeping
rooms, together with the sanitary facilities, which include wash basins
and toilets.
B. Before a permit is issued, the person making the application, in addition
to the facts set forth in the application, must also make a statement of
the number of lodgers housed on each floor and the number of lodgers
to be housed in each room, which must be written in on the application
required to be filed.
C. Before a permit is issued, the person must file plans, in duplicate,
showing one private bathroom and toilet or flush water closed
compartment connected with each hotel room, furnished room or
furnished apartment, for the private use of the occupant or occupants
of each such hotel room, furnished room or furnished apartment, in
each hotel, lodging house, rooming house or boardinghouse governed
by the provisions of this chapter. The private bathroom and toilet or
flush water closet compartment must comply with the terms of this
chapter, the codes of the City, county and state, the Building Code and
other requirements and building regulations prescribed by the statutes
of the State of New Jersey.
A. Every person operating a hotel, lodging house, boardinghouse or
rooming house shall keep therein at all times a standard hotel register
in which shall be inscribed with ink the name and home address of each
and every guest or person renting or occupying a room or rooms
therein. The names of such guests shall be written upon the register by
the persons themselves, and if they cannot write, the names shall be
written in by the person renting the room or rooms, stating that the
person renting the room could not sign his or her name. The register
shall also include the home address of such person, and the person
renting the room shall thereupon write opposite the name so registered
the number of the room or rooms assigned to each guest and the time
when the same is rented, whether a.m. or p.m. Until all such entries
§ 219-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:363
§ 219-6. Fire escapes required.
§ 219-7. Minimum floor space; heat.
have been made in such register, no guest shall be permitted to occupy
privately any room in the house. At any time any room or rooms are
surrendered, it shall be the further duty of the agent to enter the time
thereof in the register opposite the names of all the persons making
such surrender. The register shall be open at all times to the inspection
of any guest of the house and any code enforcement and police officer
of the City.
B. In case a reference book or other record is kept in addition to the
standard hotel register, the information herein required, in whole or in
part may be kept in such reference book or record, and all entries shall
be a part of the hotel, lodging house, boarding or rooming house record,
and shall be subject to the same inspection as the standard hotel
register.
A. Fire escapes must conform to Tenement House Laws of the State of
New Jersey, except that no structure three or more stories in height and
containing more than 10 bedrooms shall hereafter be used as a hotel,
motel, rooming house, lodging house or boardinghouse unless such
structure shall be equipped with at least two fire escapes, placed on
opposite sides of the structure, reaching from the topmost story thereof
to the ground. The exits to fire escapes shall be at least three feet in
width and shall at all times be open and unencumbered so that there is
no obstruction to their use. A red light on the passageway or doorway
leading to the fire escape or exit shall be lighted at all times. Doors
leading to fire escapes must be hung so that they may be opened
outwardly and be unlocked from the inside at all times so that they can
be unfastened by anyone on the inside thereof.
B. Should a hotel, lodging house, boardinghouse or rooming house contain
less than 10 bedrooms and be three or more stories in height, then all
bedrooms located on the third floor and above shall be equipped with a
knotted rope or automatic slide, as approved by the Building Inspector
and the approved type as required by the State of New Jersey in hotels.
Such approved ropes or slides must conform with local climatic
conditions. Such portable escapes or slides must be erected near a
window and under the strict supervision of the Fire Department and the
Building Department of the City.
A. No more than four occupants shall be permitted to sleep in one sleeping
room, except in dormitories. No room shall be used for sleeping
purposes unless there is at least 50 square feet of floor space and 400
cubic feet of air space for each occupant occupying any sleeping room
or dormitory in the house. All rooms, hallways, bathrooms and toilets
shall have adequate and sufficient ventilating, heating, sanitary and
lighting facilities and services.
§ 219-5 UNION CITY CODE § 219-7
1:364
§ 219-8. Additional regulations.
§ 219-9. Revocation of permits; hearing; procedure.
B. All bedrooms must have sufficient heat furnished during the heating
season, namely from September 15 to May 15, from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m. daily. The temperature in such bedrooms during those hours and
the period of times fixed herein shall not be less than 68° F., and if
individual heating equipment is installed, such individual heating units
must be approved by the Building Inspector before installation.
C. The permittee at all times shall comply with all local, county and state
health, sanitary, fire, police and Building Department regulations and
requirements, the Building Code of the City and regulations prescribed
by the statutes of the State of New Jersey.
A. No person shall write or cause to be written in any register in any hotel,
lodging house, boardinghouse or rooming house any other or different
name than the true name of such person or the name by which such
person is generally known.
B. No room in any hotel, lodging house, boardinghouse or rooming house
shall be rented for sleeping or lodging purposes more than once
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day,
except to bona fide travelers with baggage.
C. Every person conducting a hotel, lodging house, boardinghouse or
rooming house shall cause each sleeping room to be numbered in a
plain and conspicuous manner. The number shall be placed on the
outside door of the room, and no two rooms shall bear the same
number.
D. In the conduct of any hotel, lodging house, boardinghouse or rooming
house, the acts of the agent, servants or employees of the owner thereof
shall be deemed to be the acts of the employer or owner.
A. Permits issued under this chapter may be revoked by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners, whenever it shall find that the permittee or
owner has violated the provisions of this chapter or permitted the same
to be violated, or has violated any other ordinance of the City or any
statutes of the State of New Jersey in the conduct of the business for
which the permit is granted, provided that no permit shall be revoked
unless charges in writing shall first have been filed with the City Clerk,
setting forth with reasonable certainty the nature of the charges
against the permittee. Upon the filing of charges, the Board of
Commissioners shall fix the time and place for the hearing of the
charges, and a copy of the charges as filed, together with notice of time
and place of hearing, shall be served on the permittee at least five days
prior to the date fixed by the Commissioners for the hearing.
§ 219-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-9
1:365
§ 219-10. Inspections.
Any inspections which may be made by the License Inspector, Health Officer
or Building Inspector may be made by any one of them or anyone duly
authorized by them to make such inspection or inspections, and they may
make inspections before or after the permit is issued, at all reasonable
hours. If access is denied, a search warrant shall be obtained by due process
of law.
§ 219-11. Effect of chapter on other licensing regulations.
§ 219-12. Exception.
The lodging of relatives by marriage or blood of the permittee shall not
come within the terms of this chapter.
§ 219-13. Conflict with state law.
Nothing herein contained in this chapter is intended to or shall conflict with
the State of New Jersey Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1
et seq.) or any amendments thereto or with any regulations promulgated
thereunder pertaining to the construction and maintenance of hotels and
multiple dwellings.

B. Any notice thereof for charges against the permittee shall be served
either by delivering a copy personally to the permittee or by leaving a
copy with some person of suitable age and discretion in the place of the
business of the permittee, or, if no such person can be found at the
place of business of the permittee, by leaving such notice in a
conspicuous place on the premises and leaving a copy of such notice for
the permittee at his/her place of business as set forth in his/her
application for license.
C. At the hearing of the charges, the permittee shall have the right to
appear and defend the charges and to be represented by counsel if
(s)he so desires.
A. This chapter is not adopted and perpetuated for revenue but is
regulatory and is enacted to safeguard the health, life and safety of the
occupants of the structures for which the permits are issued and of the
general public, and shall in no way amend or supersede any laws or
ordinances requiring license fees to be paid for the operation of hotels,
lodging houses, rooming houses or boardinghouses. [Amended
5-21-2013]
B. This permit shall be necessary in addition to the license, and the
premises cannot be operated for the purpose mentioned herein unless
the permit is obtained and a license is obtained, and there shall be no
fee for the permit required under this chapter.
§ 219-9 UNION CITY CODE § 219-13
1:366

Chapter 223
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 40.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 102.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 171.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 175.
Historic areas — See Ch. 214.
Noise — See Ch. 261.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 370.
§ 219-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-13
1:367

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 223-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Development Ordinance of the
City of Union City."
§ 223-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a pattern for the use of
land and buildings based on the land use element of the Master Plan, to
implement the Master Plan and to encourage municipal action to guide
the appropriate and orderly development of land in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people.
This chapter is intended to:
A. Regulate the use of land within zoning districts; secure safety from fire,
flood, panic, and other natural and man-made disasters;
B. Provide adequate light, air, and open spaces; limit and restrict buildings
and structures to specified zones and regulate buildings and structures
according to their type and the nature and extent of their use, and
regulate the nature and extent of the use of land for trade, industry,
residence, open space or other purposes;
C. Regulate the bulk, height, number of stories, and size of buildings and
other structures;
D. Avoid a conflict with the development and general welfare of
neighboring municipalities, the county and the state;
E. Establish appropriate population densities and concentrations
contributing to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities
and regions and the preservation of the environment; provide sufficient
space for residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and
open space;
F. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight; promote a
desirable visual environment;
G. Promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources
and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment
through improper use of land;
H. Encourage coordination of various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of
such development and to the more efficient use of land;
I. Promote utilization of renewable energy resources; and
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-2
1:369
§ 223-3. Contents.
The Land Development Ordinance of the City of Union City consists of text
maps and schedules set forth in Chapter 223 of the Code of the City of
Union City, New Jersey or referred to therein.
§ 223-4. Explanatory preface.
Uses are regulated in the text and within the Schedule of Bulk Regulations.
Some are permitted by right and some may or may not be permitted under
certain conditions laid down by the approving authority.
J. Promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning
practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan goals and to
complement municipal recycling programs.
A. All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited.
B. Any use, building or structure legally existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter, as determined by the enforcing agency, may
be continued even though such use, building or structure may not
conform to the provisions of this chapter for the zone in which it is
located, except as otherwise specified for nonconforming uses,
structures, sites or lots.
C. Building location and dimensions are regulated by the Schedule of Bulk
Regulations.20
D. Areas in which different regulations operate (districts or zones) are
shown on the Zoning Map.21
E. All provisions are minimum unless otherwise stated or clearly maximum
by context. They apply with equal force to initial construction and
subsequent modification or addition.
F. Related facilities, such as yards and parking, cannot be attributed more
than once to structures; e.g., a side yard belongs to the house on its lot
and cannot also serve the house on the adjacent lot.
G. In order to avoid their repetition in the text for each zone, matters
pertaining to all zones are covered in individual sections.
H. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. No building permit shall be issued unless the
plans are accompanied by an approved zoning permit. No zoning permit
shall be issued unless the proposed structure, use, temporary activity,
or construction activity is in compliance with this chapter or is a valid
prior nonconforming use. In cases involving the new use of an existing
20.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Bulk Regulations is attached to this chapter.
21.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is attached to this chapter.
§ 223-2 UNION CITY CODE § 223-4
1:370
§ 223-5. Definitions.
structure, no certificate of occupancy for the new tenant shall be issued
until a zoning permit has been issued.
I. Amendments may be made from time to time in accordance with
applicable requirements.
A. Scope of meaning of certain terms. Unless the context clearly indicates
the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural, the singular.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:
(1) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is
permissive.
(2) The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
(3) The word "structure" includes the word "building."
(4) The term "erected" shall be deemed to include "constructed,"
"structurally altered," "enlarged" or "moved."
(5) The word "use" and the word "used" refer to any purpose for which
a lot or land or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be
used, occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use and
to any purpose for which a building or structure or part thereof is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained,
made available or offered for use or erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged, moved or rebuilt with the intention or design or
using the same.
(6) The word "person" shall be deemed to include persons,
corporations or partnerships where appropriate.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein
are defined as follows:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property, or a cessation of
the use of property, by the owner or lessee for a period of 12 or more
consecutive months.
ABUT — To physically touch or border upon or to share a common
property line but not overlap. (See also "contiguous.")
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide a vehicle or
pedestrian physical entrance to a property. (See also "driveway.")
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building detached from and subordinate
to the principal building on a lot and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of the principal building. (See "accessory structure"
and "accessory use.")
§ 223-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:371
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure detached from a principal
building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal building or use. (See also "accessory
building" and "accessory use.")
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or a building or structure or portion
thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land, building or structure and located on the same lot as the
principal use. (See also "accessory building" and "accessory structure.")
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The development of a new use for an older
building or for a building originally designed for a special or specific
purpose.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height to an
existing building or structure.
ADJOINING LOT OR LAND — A lot or parcel of land that shares all or
part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the City of Union
City.
AIR RIGHTS — The rights to inclusive and undisturbed use and control
of a designated space within delineated boundaries, either at the
surface or above a stated elevation of another structure. Such rights
may be purchased or leased for the construction of improvements.
AISLE or PARKING AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and
depart parking spaces.
ALLEY — A service roadway providing a secondary means of access to
abutting property and not intended for general circulation.
ALTERATIONS — Any change or rearrangement in the supporting
members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, girders, or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors,
windows, means of ingress or egress, or any enlargement to or
diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically,
or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
Normal repairs and maintenance shall not be considered as alterations.
AMATEUR RADIO OR TELEVISION TOWER — A structure utilized by
a single homeowner to send and/or receive radio and/or television
communications.
AMENDMENT, ZONING — See "zoning amendment or Zoning Map
amendment."
ANTENNA, RADIO AND TELEVISION — Antennas used by
homeowners to receive radio or television communications.
APARTMENT — An independent, self-contained dwelling unit with its
own sleeping, sanitary and cooking facilities in a building containing
four or more such dwelling units or in a mixed-use building.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:372
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building containing four or more
apartments, including common areas restricted to the use of residents
such as laundry rooms, administrative offices, computer rooms,
common rooms, vending machines and health clubs restricted to the
use of residents.
APARTMENT BUILDING, LOW-RISE — An apartment building
containing three or fewer stories.
APARTMENT BUILDING, MID-RISE — An apartment building
containing from four to six stories.
APARTMENT BUILDING, HIGH-RISE — An apartment building
containing seven or more stories.
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application for development.
(See also "developer.")
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents and exhibits required of an applicant by an
approving authority for development review purposes.
APPROVED PLAN — A plan that has been granted final approval by the
appropriate approving authority.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment or other legally designated individual or agency that has
been charged with the review and approval of plans and/or
applications.
ARCHITECTURAL ELEVATION — A fully dimensioned drawing of the
front, rear or side of a building showing features such as windows,
doors and relationship of grade to floor level.
AS-BUILT PLAN — A plan drawn by a professional engineer or
registered architect to scale showing the exact layout and dimensions
of an existing completed structure or building.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Residences for the frail elderly that
provide rooms, meals, personal care and the supervision of selfadministered
medication and may, in addition, provide recreational
activities, financial services and transportation for the residents.
ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — See "row house."
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below, and wholly
or partly within, the roof framing.
AUDIO, RADIO, VIDEO AND TELEVISION STATION AND STUDIO —
A building or portion thereof utilized to produce audio, radio, video or
television programs.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE or ATM — Any establishment or
device whose purpose is the performance of financial transactions to a
customer without the aid of a teller.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:373
AUTOMOBILE — A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle with four
wheels, usually used to transport not more than six passengers, and
licensed by an appropriate agency as a passenger vehicle.
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR TRUCK BODY REPAIR SHOP — An
establishment engaged in the repair, service, maintenance or painting
of an automobile and/or truck body, but not wrecking or salvage.
AUTOMOBILE PARTS AND SUPPLY STORE — A retail store whose
business is the sale of automobile parts and supplies only, and which
does not include any repair, service or installation, no matter how minor
or infrequent.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP — An establishment engaged in
furnishing automobile repair, service or maintenance, but not including
body work or painting.
AUTOMOBILE STORAGE YARD — An establishment whose principal
use is the storage of automobiles. Space utilized for the storage of
automobiles shall not be considered parking spaces within the meaning
of this chapter.
AUTOMOBILE SUPPLY AND SERVICE STORE — A retail store whose
primary business is the sale of automobile parts and supplies, and
which provides for the service or installation of such parts on the
premises as an accessory use.
AWNING — A roof-like cover generally made of cloth, canvas or similar
material that permanently projects from the wall of a building for the
purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements, not
including a marquee. In residential districts, awnings and canopies
shall be deemed structural projections.
AWNING OR CANOPY, RETRACTABLE — See "retractable awning or
canopy."
BANNER — Any temporary sign applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of
any kind, which may be permitted by the governing body by permit.
BANK — A business establishment authorized to perform financial
transactions such as receiving and lending money, but not including
check cashing stores or pawnshops.
BANK, DRIVE-THROUGH — See "drive-through bank."
BANK, DRIVE-THRU — See "drive-through bank."
BAR — An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the
drink to the general public.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its
clear height above the average level of the adjoining finished grade. A
basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is four or more feet
above the average finished grade at its perimeter.
BEDROCK — Continuous solid rock that underlies regolith.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:374
BEDROOM — A private room intended or used for sleeping separated
from other rooms by a door or other physical barrier.
BERM — A mound of earth used to shield, screen and buffer
undesirable views.
BILLBOARD — Any sign erected or maintained for the purpose of
displaying outdoor advertising for products or services provided either
on or off premises.
BLOCK — That property abutting on one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest
intersecting or intercepting street or railroad right-of-way, park
boundary or waterway.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the
City of Union City.
BOARDER — An individual other than a member of a family or
household occupying a dwelling unit or part thereof who is furnished
sleeping accommodations for a fee and may be furnished with meals
and/or other services as part of the consideration.
BOARDING- , LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling or part
thereof in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator to more
than one boarder.
BOUNDARY — The border or outer physical limit of a lot or property.
BUFFER or BUFFER AREA — An open space or landscaped area
consisting of trees, shrubs, berms, walls, solid fencing or a combination
of all, so installed as to provide both a visual and an acoustical barrier
between one use or property and another use or property.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any
individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind.
Structures divided by unpierced masonry division walls extending from
the ground to the roof shall be deemed to be separate "buildings."
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See "accessory building."
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas, taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level, of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The total of areas, taken on a horizontal
plane at the main grade level, of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT — See "height of a building."
BUILDING, HISTORIC — See "historic or landmark site."
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front line and removed from it
by the depth of the required front yard.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:375
BUILDING PERMIT — Written permission or authorization issued by
the Zoning Officer for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to
a structure or building, or the alteration of a lot or land.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — See "principal building."
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to the street line or lot line
touching that part of the building closest to that street line or lot line.
CABARET or NIGHTCLUB — Any room, place, space or premises
operated as a commercial establishment in which eating and/or
drinking may take place and in which there is also provided
entertainment. Such entertainment may include music by a live
musician or musicians, or any mechanical, electronic or other means,
such as records, laser discs, audio or videotapes or other audio or
audiovisual means; this does include the operation of a motion-picture
theater. Also included as entertainment are any act, play, burlesque
show, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act or song-and-dance act
participated in by one or more employees, guests, customers or any
other person or persons. For the purpose of this definition, background
piped-in music shall not be deemed as a form of entertainment.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk as measured from six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter, and 12
inches above ground level for trunks of trees with diameters in excess
of four inches.
CANOPY — A nonretractable structure that permanently projects from
the wall of a building, to shield a doorway, window or sidewalk,
generally made of rigid building materials and supported by a metal
frame.
CANOPY SIGN — See "sign, canopy."
CARNIVAL — A temporary enterprise offering amusements,
entertainment, exhibitions, foods, contests and livestock exhibits, with
or without the payment of a fee, admission or subscription. A carnival
may also include a fair, rodeo, tent park, amusement trailer center or
other similar appellations.
CARPORT — A roofed structure providing space for the parking of
motor vehicles and enclosed on two sides or fewer.
CAR WASH — A building or premises used for the washing of
automobiles.
CATERING FACILITY — See "banquet or catering facility."
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
clear height below the average level of the adjoining finished grade or
having less than four feet of clear height above the average level of the
adjoining finished grade.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which is different in use classification, as
provided for in Article VI of this chapter, from the previous use.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:376
CHECK CASHING STORE — An establishment primarily engaged in the
business of cashing of checks for individuals and not offering the full
range of financial services normally associated with a bank.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A facility providing for the care, supervision
and protection of children which is required to be licensed by the State
of New Jersey Department of Human Services.
CHURCH — See "place of worship."
CITY — The City of Union City, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey.
CITY CLERK — The Clerk of the City of Union City.
CIVIC USE — A nongovernmental use whose affairs relate to the City or
its citizens, but not including government or municipal uses as defined
herein.
CLIFF FACE — A sheer, nearly vertical slope of exposed bedrock.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL — See "medical or dental clinic."
CLUB — A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue
common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized by
certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular
meetings, and a constitution and bylaws.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION USE, INDOOR — See "indoor commercial
recreation use."
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — An educational or training establishment
operated for a business, including the instruction of language, dance,
fine or applied arts, martial arts, business, computers, trades,
vocations, or the like.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle licensed by the state as
a commercial vehicle.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space within or related to a site
designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements
as are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents
and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building used for neighborhood meetings
and recreational activities, whether or not on the basis of fees or
charges, and exclusive of a building accessory to a church or religious
organization.
CONCEPT PLAN — A plan or sketch for development provided for the
purposes of informal review which carries no legal obligations or vested
rights on the applicant, the approving authority or any other party.
CONCEPT REVIEW — See "informal review or concept review."
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:377
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the zoning provisions of this chapter, and upon the
issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — A building or group of buildings in which dwelling
units, offices, or floor area are owned individually, and the structure,
common areas and facilities are owned by the owners on a proportional,
undivided basis.
CONFORMING APPLICATION OR PLAN — An application or plan
which meets all of the requirements of this chapter and other applicable
requirements of the Code of the City of Union City.
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY — A facility for ambulatory elderly
residents consisting of apartment units with communal dining facilities
and services such as housekeeping, organized social and recreational
activities, transportation services and other support services
appropriate for the residents.
CONTIGUOUS — Next to, abutting or touching and having a boundary
or portion thereof that is coterminous. (See also "abut.")
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and
magazines, and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods for off-site
consumption.
COUNTY — The County of Hudson of the State of New Jersey.
COURT or COURTYARD — An open, unoccupied space bounded on at
least two opposing sides by a building wall, but not a front, side or rear
yard. An outer court is a court which has one side facing a street, a
front yard or a rear yard and which is surrounded on all other sides by
building walls and/or side lot lines. Any other court is an inner court. An
offset to a court shall be deemed a separate inner court for the purpose
of determining its least dimension, its area and the least dimension and
area of the court to which it is contiguous. The width of a court is the
dimension parallel to the open side in the case of an outer court and
is the least dimension in the case of an inner court. For a court which
opens upon a side yard, the measurement at right angles to the side lot
line may be measured from the building wall to such side lot line across
the side yard. The horizontal depth of a court is the dimension at right
angles to its width. For a court which opens upon a rear yard or upon
a front yard or street, the horizontal depth may be measured from the
building wall of the court to the rear line or front line of the building,
and such horizontal depth will not be construed to include the depth of
the rear yard or front yard.
CROSS SECTION — See "profile."
CUL-DE-SAC or CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A street with a single common
ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end. (See also "deadend
street.")
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:378
CURB — A stone, concrete or other improved boundary marking the
edge of a roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curbline or edge of pavement at
which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
CUT AND FILL — The excavation of rock fragments and mineral grains,
including soil, in one place and the deposit of the material as fill in
another place.
DEAD END of DEAD-END STREET — A street with a single common
ingress or egress with no turnaround at the end. (See also "cul-de-sac
street.")
DECK — An uncovered structure, usually constructed of wood or
concrete, extending from the exterior wall of a residential dwelling, no
more than three feet above the finished ground elevation of the wall
from which it extends. Any such structure which is more than three feet
above the finished elevation shall be considered part of the principal
structure for purposes of setback. (See also "patio" and "porch.")
DEED RESTRICTION or RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on
the use of land as set forth in the deed.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of
land to be developed.
DENTAL CLINIC — See "medical or dental clinic."
DENTAL OFFICE — See "medical office."
DEPTH, LOT — See "lot depth."
DEVELOPABLE AREA — The area of a lot exclusive of any portion which
contains cliff face.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land. (See also "applicant.")
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure,
or of any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use
of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
for which permission may be required pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law.22
DISTRICT — See "zone or district."
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
or stormwater from roofs or paved areas by drains, grading, or other
means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development.
22.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:379
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — Premises constructed for the sale of
any goods or services by means of curb, window-counter, or selfservice,
for the motoring public.[Amended 5-21-2013]
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — An establishment where food or drink is
served to a customer in an automobile outside the confines of a building
for consumption on the premises. (See also "drive-through or drive-thru
restaurant.")
DRIVE-THROUGH OR DRIVE-THRU BANK — A bank where
transactions are made to customers within an automobile outside the
confines of a building.
DRIVE-THROUGH OR DRIVE-THRU RESTAURANT — An
establishment where food is served for immediate consumption outside
the confines of a building and where all or part of that consumption
occurs outside the confines of the building, off the premises.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular way on private property which provides
access to a street or highway. (See also "access.")
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT — A retail establishment used
primarily for the purposes of picking up or dropping off clothing by
customers for dry-cleaning purposes, and in which only those clothes
dropped off by the customers at such an establishment and no other are
dry cleaned within the premises. (See also "dry-cleaning plant.")
DRY-CLEANING PLANT — An establishment in which clothing dropped
off by customers at the establishment, and from other establishments,
is dry cleaned within the premises. (See also "dry-cleaning
establishment.")
DWELLING — A building containing dwelling units. The term
"dwelling" shall not be deemed to include hotel, motel, rooming house
or other accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building
containing four or more dwelling units, each with its own sleeping,
sanitary and cooking facilities.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit
only.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY — A building containing three dwelling
units only.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A building containing three or more
dwelling units wherein each unit has its own front and rear access to
the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each is separated
from the other by one or more common vertical walls. (See also "row
house or attached single-family dwelling.")
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units
only.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:380
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof used for living
purposes by one family and having cooking and sanitary facilities for its
exclusive use.
EASEMENT — A permanent right in an individual, the public or other
entity to use the land of another for a specific purpose not inconsistent
with the general ownership of the property. (See also "right-of-way.")
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — A retail establishment
serving prepared food or drink within an enclosed building for
immediate consumption within the building or off the premises,
including restaurants, lunch counters, ice cream and pizza parlors, and
luncheonettes, which have a customer service area limited to eight
seats or space for no more than eight customers to eat within the
establishment, but excluding all drive-in or drive-through restaurants,
and bars or taverns. (See also "food and beverage store.")
ELEVATION — A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference.
ELEVATION, ARCHITECTURAL — See "architectural elevation."
ELEVATION, GRADE — See "grade elevation."
ENLARGEMENT — An increase in the size of an existing structure,
building or use, including the physical size of a property, structure,
building, parking or other improvements.
ENFORCING AGENCY — The municipal administrative entity charged
with the administration and enforcement of the regulations in
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23-1 et seq., which shall be the Construction Code Official or his
designee unless otherwise designated.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix,
including, but not limited to, the painting of wall signs.
EVERGREEN — A plant with foliage that remains green year-round.
EXISTING GRADE or EXISTING ELEVATION — The vertical location
above some elevation point of the ground surface prior to excavating or
filling.
FACADE — The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view or
that wall viewed by persons not within the building.
FACING — The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the
message is displayed or illuminated on the sign.
FAMILY — A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood,
marriage, adoption or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit
as a single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any
society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, federation or like
organizations, or any group of individuals who are in a group living
arrangement as a result of criminal offenses.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — The private residence of a family day-care
provider which is registered as a family day-care home pursuant to the
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:381
Family Day Care Provider Registration Act, P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A.
30:5B-16 et seq.).
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment in which food is preprepared
and sold over a counter in disposable containers or wrappers
selected from a limited menu for consumption on or off the premises.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FLAG LOT or FLAGPOLE LOT — See "lot, flag or flagpole lot."
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — That portion of the floodplain as designated
by the Federal Insurance Administration or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, as constituting particular hazards or risks
applicable to the community by reason of flooding.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING, GROSS — See "gross floor area."
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) OF A BUILDING — The quotient of the gross
floor area of a building divided by its lot area. Above-grade structured
parking is included in the FAR while below-grade parking shall be
excluded from the FAR calculation.
FLOOR, MEZZANINE — See "mezzanine."
FOOD AND BEVERAGE STORE — An establishment selling food and
beverages to the public, including but not limited to meat, poultry, fish,
specialty foods, beverages, candy, nuts, dairy products, health food,
liquor and wine, and including convenience stores, delicatessens and
bakeries (for sale of goods on premises only), but not including eating
and drinking establishments or restaurants.
FREESTANDING SIGN — See "sign, freestanding."
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting a street.
FRONT LOT LINE — The lot line separating the front of a lot from a
street right-of-way. (See also "street line or right-of-way.")
FRONT OF A STRUCTURE — When erected on a plot abutting on two
or more streets, that abutting side which is so designated on the plot
plan by the owner.
FRONT YARD — A space extending the full width of the lot between any
building and the front lot line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — See "private parking garage."
GARAGE, PUBLIC — See "public parking garage."
GARAGE, REPAIR SHOP — See "automobile repair shop."
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An establishment primarily used for
the retail dispensing of vehicular fuel and oil to automobiles and the
incidental servicing thereof, but not including body work or painting.
GOVERNMENT USE — The use of land, buildings or structures by
any department, commission, independent agency or instrumentality
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:382
of the United States, of a state, county, authority, district or other
governmental unit other than the City of Union City.
GRADE or GRADIENT — The percent of rise or descent of a sloping
surface, or where measuring the height of a building, grade is defined
as the average ground elevation of the land around the exterior walls of
a building or structure. (See also "grade elevation.")
GRADE ELEVATION — The average ground elevation of the land
around the exterior walls of a building or structure.
GREYFIELD — A vacant building and/or property formerly used for
industrial purposes or commercial purposes, as further defined in
§ 223-43D of this chapter.
GREYFIELD REDEVELOPMENT — The reuse of a greyfield consistent
with the conditional use standards of § 223-43D of this chapter.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors and mezzanine floors of a building and its accessory
buildings on the same lot, excluding basement or cellar areas devoted
to parking and mechanical equipment space. All dimensions shall be
measured between exterior faces of walls.
GROUND AREA OF A BUILDING — See "building coverage."
GUARANTEE — See "performance guarantee."
HEALTH CARE FACILITY, RESIDENTIAL — See "residential health care
facility."
HEALTH CLUB or GYMNASIUM — An establishment that provides
facilities for physical exercise such as aerobics, running, jogging,
weight lifting, game courts, swimming facilities, and accessory saunas,
showers, massage rooms and lockers, within an enclosed building or
buildings.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL — An establishment which involves basic
processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly
from extracted or raw materials. (See also "light industrial" and
"medium industrial.")
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
reference level to the level of the highest point of the roof beams.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity carried out for gain by a resident,
conducted entirely within a dwelling unit, which is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the lot for residential purposes. The term
shall not include businesses or occupations such as the operation of a
beauty parlor, barbershop, automobile repair servicing or body shop,
convalescent or nursing home, insurance or real estate agency,
boardinghouse, kennel or stable, massage parlor, dancing instructions,
band instrument instructions in group, child-care centers, drug
counseling centers, antique shops, restaurants, tearooms, tourist
homes, real estate offices, insurance offices, mortuary establishments,
stores, trades, veterinary hospitals or similar establishments offering
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:383
services to the general public. (See also "home occupation, major" and
"home occupation, minor.")
HOME OCCUPATION, MAJOR — A home occupation that involves up
to two employees other than a resident of the dwelling unit in which
the occupation is being conducted. See § 223-43F for additional
regulations.
HOME OCCUPATION, MINOR — A home occupation that does not
involve any employees other than a resident of the dwelling unit in
which the occupation is being conducted. See § 223-8G(2)(a) for
additional regulations.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An association of homeowners
organized to own, maintain, operate and share the cost of maintaining
common facilities and to enhance and protect their common interests.
HOSPITAL — An institution which maintains and operates organized
facilities and services for the diagnosis, treatment or care of persons
suffering from illness, injury or deformity and/or obstetrics, and in
which all diagnosis, treatment and care are administered by or
performed under the direction of persons licensed to practice medicine
in the State of New Jersey.
HOSPITAL, VETERINARY — See "veterinary office or hospital."
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public wherein all rooms are connected to interior hallways,
and thereby to interior elevators, lobbies or stairways, through which
access to the exterior is gained. Hotels may include but not be limited
to related services such as restaurants, meeting rooms or recreation
facilities.
HOUSE — See "dwelling unit."
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access thereto and common use of all living and eating areas
and all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food
within the dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water.
IMPROVEMENT — Any permanent structure that becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
IMPROVEMENT, OFF-SITE — See "off-site improvement."
INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USE — A building or group
of buildings used for recreational purposes and operated as a business
and open to the public for a fee, including bowling alleys, skating and
roller rinks, pool and billiard halls, indoor rifle and pistol ranges, indoor
batting cages, recreation centers, and indoor swimming pools or tennis
courts. (See also "recreation use or facility.")
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:384
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT — See "light industrial."
INFORMAL REVIEW or CONCEPT REVIEW — A review process
undertaken by the Planning Board at the option of the applicant as
provided for in this chapter, for the purposes of assisting an applicant to
prepare an application for formal submission and to provide direction
and feedback on such application, at which no decisions, resolutions or
formal actions are taken, and wherein all comments or communications
carry no legal obligation or vested rights, nor are binding on any party.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit or public use, such as a library,
public or private school, or government-owned or -operated building,
structure, or land used for public purpose.
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot. (See also "corner lot"
and "through lot.")
LABORATORIES — An establishment or part thereof equipped and used
for experimental study, testing or analysis in a field of science.
LANDSCAPED AREA — Areas containing trees, shrubs and ground
covers, pedestrian and recreation areas, ponds, streams or any other
areas or features which can be reasonably included, but shall not
include areas occupied by buildings or structures, paving for parking,
loading or access thereto, required buffers or areas utilized for outside
storage.
LANDSCAPING — Lawns, trees, plants and other natural materials
such as rock and wood chips, and decorative features, including
sculpture, patterned walks, fountains and pools.
LAUNDROMAT — A business premises equipped with individual
clothes-washing machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive of
laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an apartment building
or hotel.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — An establishment engaged in light nonnuisance
fabrication or the assembly, packaging, storage and distribution of
products from finished products or parts.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Any form of entertainment which is
performed in person before an attending audience.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — An apartment designed to provide space in which
to conduct a business or trade, including offices, studios, crafts
workshop area or laboratory space.
LOADING BERTH — See "loading space or berth."
LOADING, OFF-STREET — See "off-street loading."
LOADING SPACE OR BERTH — An off-street space or berth used for
the loading or unloading of cargo, products or materials from vehicles.
LODGING HOUSE — See "boarding- , lodging or rooming house."
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:385
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding the area expressed in terms of square feet. Any portion
of a lot included in a public or private street right-of-way shall not be
included in calculating "lot area."
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed on 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — The area of the lot covered by impervious surfaces,
including buildings and other structures.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines. Where the front property line is an arc of a circle or
irregular in shape, the depth shall be the average distance between the
front and rear lines.
LOT, FLAG or FLAGPOLE LOT — A lot which does not meet the
minimum lot width requirements and where access from the lot to the
public road is by means of a narrow private right-of-way or driveway.
LOT, INTERIOR — See "interior lot."
LOT LINE — The boundary line of a parcel of land as shown on a
certified filed map, Tax Map or as defined by a field map. A lot line shall
not be considered unless legally subdivided or apportioned.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The street line of a lot. On a corner lot, the front
line shall be the shorter street line. On a corner lot with equal street
lines, or having more than the required lot depth on two or more streets
or on a through lot, the owner may elect which street line shall be
considered the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line which is more distant from and most
nearly parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot which fronts upon two parallel streets
or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the
boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The mean width of any lot, measured at right angles to
its depth.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming lot."
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — A security acceptable to the City of
Union City to assure that necessary improvements installed or
completed by a developer will function as required for a specific period
of time.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:386
MARQUEE — A permanent nonretractable cover made of rigid building
materials constructed as an integral part of the building, the supports
of which are part of the original structure, which extends from the
building over an entrance or sidewalk to shield a doorway, window or
sidewalk from the elements.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where massages are administered for pay, including but
not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This
definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home
or medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor,
osteopath or duly licensed massage therapist, physical therapist or
health professional or barbershops or beauty salons in which massages
are administered only to scalp, face, neck or shoulders. This definition
also shall exclude health clubs which have facilities for physical
exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise rooms,
and which do not receive their primarily source of revenue through the
administration of massages.
MASTER PLAN — The current Master Plan of the City of Union City
adopted in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MEDICAL OFFICE — The office of recognized medical practitioners,
including but not limited to doctors, dentists, dental surgeons,
veterinarians, chiropractors, podiatrists, psychologists, and licensed
therapists.
MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC — An establishment where patients are
admitted for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by one
or more physicians, dentists, other medical personnel, psychologists,
or social workers and where patients are not lodged overnight, and
are provided treatment not commonly performed in medical or dental
offices.
MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL — An establishment engaged in the processing,
fabrication, treatment, packaging, storage and distribution of
predominantly previously prepared materials, or finished products or
parts, but excluding basic processing or manufacturing from
predominantly new or extracted materials. (See also "heavy industrial"
and "light industrial.")
MEZZANINE — An intermediate floor between the floor and ceiling
of any story and covering less than 1/3 of the floor area immediately
below. A mezzanine shall not be counted as a story, but its floor area
shall be included in the computation of gross floor area.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building containing nonresidential use on
the ground floor and residential use on upper floors.
MOTEL or MOTOR HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public wherein all rooms are not
connected to interior hallways, and thereby to interior elevators,
lobbies or stairways, through which access to the exterior is gained.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:387
MOTOR VEHICLE USES — Any one of the following as defined herein:
automobile body repair shops, automobile rental or short-term leasing
establishments, automobile repair shops, automobile sales or long-term
leasing establishments, gasoline service stations, automobile storage
yards, automobile supply and service stores, automobile washes,
convenience stores in conjunction with gasoline service stations,
transport service businesses, truck and bus depots, rental, storage,
leasing and sales establishments, truck and bus service stations, and
repair shops.
MUNICIPAL USE — Any use of land, building or structure by the City
of Union City or an agency thereof.
NADIR — The lowest point.
NIGHTCLUB — See "cabaret or nightclub."
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment. (See also "nonconforming structure" and "nonconforming
use.")
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or
amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption, revision or amendment. (See also "nonconforming lot"
and "nonconforming use.")
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior
to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment. (See also
"nonconforming structure" and "nonconforming use.")
NURSING HOME — An institution licensed and approved to provide
health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours
to two or more patients who are not related to the institution's operator
by marriage, blood or adoption.
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the offices of
a business, profession, service, industry or government, and generally
furnished with desks, tables, files, and communication equipment,
including offices of general, business, executive, legal, accounting,
architect, planning, engineer, real estate, contractor and employment
agencies.
OFFICE, MEDICAL — See "medical office."
OFF-SITE OR OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Improvements to be
made off site as a result of an application for development and
including, but not limited to, road widening and upgrading, stormwater
facilities, and traffic improvements.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:388
OFF-SITE PARKING — Parking provided for a specific use but located
on a site other than the one on which the specific use is located.
OFF-STREET LOADING — Designated areas located adjacent to
buildings where trucks may load and unload cargo. (See also "loading
space or berth.")
OFF-STREET PARKING — Parking for a motor vehicle not located
within a street right-of-way. (See also "on-street parking.")
ON-STREET PARKING — Parking for motor vehicles located within a
street right-of-way. (See also "off-street parking.")
OPEN-AIR MARKET — A public marketplace where food and
merchandise is sold.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners,
occupants and their guests, of land adjoining or adjacent to such open
space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See "common open space."
OUTDOOR SALES — The outdoor display of goods and merchandise
for sale, and shall include but not be limited to garage sales and the
like. All outdoor sales shall be subject to the provisions of § 223-49
herein.[Added 12-3-2013 by Ord. No. 29-2013]
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping of any goods, junk, material,
merchandise or vehicles outdoors in the same place overnight or
continually for a period of more than 12 hours.
OWNER — Owner of real property.
PARCEL — A contiguous lot or tract of land owned and recorded as the
property of the same persons or controlled by a single entity, including
members of an immediate family. (See also "lot" and "tract.")
PARK or PLAYGROUND — A tract of land designated and used by the
public for active and passive recreation.
PARKING AISLE — See "aisle or parking aisle."
PARKING AREA — Any public or private area, inside, under or outside
of a building or structure, designed and used for parking motor vehicles
including parking lots, garages, private driveways, and legally
designated areas of public streets.
PARKING GARAGE — See "private parking garage" and "public parking
garage."
PARKING LOT — An unenclosed parking area for the parking of
vehicles.
PARKING LOT, NONACCESSORY — A parking lot that is the principal
use of a property and is not an accessory use to any other use.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:389
PARKING, OFF-STREET — See "off-street parking."
PARKING, SHARED — Any off-street parking when land uses having
different parking demand patterns are able to use the same parking
spaces/areas throughout the day. Shared parking is most effective when
these land uses have significantly different peak parking characteristics
that vary by time of day, day of week, and/or season of the year. In these
situations, shared parking strategies will result in fewer total parking
spaces needed when compared to the total number of spaces needed
for each land use or business separately.
PARKING SPACE — A space conforming to applicable standards of this
chapter for the parking of a motor vehicle within a parking area.
PATIO — A level, landscaped or surfaced area directly adjacent to a
principal building at grade and not covered by a permanent roof. (See
also "deck" and "porch.")
PAWN SHOP or PAWNBROKER'S SHOP — An establishment in which
the proprietor lends money on the security of personal property
pledged in his or her keeping.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire
or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. This shall also
include streamers and flags.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — A security that is acceptable to the
City of Union City to assure that improvements that are required as
part of an approved development will be satisfactorily installed or
completed.
PERMITTED USE — A use of a building or land that conforms with the
provisions of this chapter.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged
primarily in providing services involving the care of a person or his or
her personal goods or apparel, including but not limited to linen supply,
beauty and barber shops, dressmaker, tailor shops, watch repair,
clothing and shoe repair, laundromats, drop-off laundry and dry
cleaners (not including dry-cleaning establishments or plants), nail
salons and tanning salons.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or
other building or group of buildings which by design and construction
is intended for the conducting of organized religious services and
accessory uses associated therewith.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Union City.
PLAYGROUND — See "park or playground."
PLOT — See "lot."
PORCH — A roofed open area which may be screened but not enclosed
by glazing, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to and
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:390
from a building. Porches are part of a principal structure for purposes
of setback. (See also "deck" and "patio.")
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any lot, parcel,
structure or building.
PRIVATE PARKING GARAGE — A structure that is accessory to a
residential use which is used for the parking of vehicles, and which is
not used by the general public.
PRIVATE STREET — A street that has not been accepted by the City
of Union City or other governmental entity, but which is shown on the
Official Map of the City of Union City.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool located as an
accessory use on the same lot as the principal use it serves, which is
utilized only by the owner or tenants or his or their nonpaying guests.
PROFILE or CROSS SECTION — A drawing or side or sectional
elevation showing the vertical elements of a structure from below
ground through the top of the structure.
PROHIBITED USE — A use not permitted within a district. Those uses
not permitted by Article VI of this chapter are prohibited. The listing
of certain uses as specifically prohibited reiterates the prohibition
regarding those particular uses to avoid doubt or confusion.
PROJECTION — An extension of a building which protrudes or juts out
from the vertical plane of the building.
PROPERTY — A lot, parcel or tract of land together with the building
and structures located thereon. (See also "lot, parcel" and "tract.")
PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE — A building, or portion thereof, other than
a private customer and employee garage or private residential garage,
used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to
the general public.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE UTILITY — Any agency that, under public
franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and
necessity, or by grant of authority by a governmental agency, provides
the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication,
transportation, water, sewage collection or other similar services.
RADIO ANTENNA — See "antenna, radio or television."
RADIO STATION or STUDIO — See "audio, radio, video and "television
station and studio."
RADIO TOWER, AMATEUR — See amateur radio or television tower.
(See also "telecommunications tower.")
RECONSTRUCTION — Any project where the extent and nature of the
work is such that the work area cannot be occupied while the work is in
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:391
progress and where a new certificate of occupancy is required before
the work area can be reoccupied. Reconstruction may include repair,
renovation, alteration or any combination thereof. Reconstruction shall
not include projects comprised only of floor finish replacement, painting
or wallpapering, or the replacement of equipment or furnishings.
Asbestos hazard abatement and lead hazard abatement projects shall
not be classified as reconstruction solely because occupancy of the
work area is not permitted.
RECREATION USE OR FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for
the conduct of sports and leisure time activities.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A vehicular-type portable structure without
permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled or driven and
designed primarily as a temporary living accommodation for recreation,
camping and travel use, including but not limited to travel trailers,
truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
REFERENCE LEVEL — The level of the established curb at the center
of that street frontage of the building where the average curb level
is highest. Where no curb level has been established or wherever the
grade elevation of that portion of the parcel is higher than the curb
level, such grade elevation shall be considered to be the reference level
for the purpose of this chapter.
REGOLITH — The noncemented rock fragments and mineral grains,
including soil, which overlie bedrock.
RENOVATION — The removal and replacement or covering of existing
interior or exterior finish, trim, doors, windows, or other materials with
new materials that serve the same purpose and do not change the
configuration of space. Renovation shall include the replacement of
equipment or fixtures.
REQUIRED SETBACK LINE — That line that is the required minimum
distance from any lot line and that establishes the area in which a
building must be erected or placed.
REQUIRED YARD — The open space between the lot line and the
required setback line measured perpendicular to the lot line and within
which no structure shall be located except as provided in this chapter.
RESIDENCE — A home, abode or place where an individual or
household is actually living at a specific point in time.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Any facility so defined by
N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. and regulated by the New Jersey Department
of Health and Senior Services. "Residential health care facility" shall
include the terms assisted living, congregate care, nursing home,
convalescent home, extended care, and long-term care.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any use in which one or more dwelling units or
residences are present.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:392
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are prepared,
served and consumed within an enclosed building, and wherein food
is served only to be consumed by customers seated at tables on the
premises. (See also "eating and "drinking establishment," "drive-in
restaurant" and "drive-through restaurant.")
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — See "drive-in restaurant."
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — See "drive-through restaurant."
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THRU — See "drive-through restaurant."
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — See "fast-food restaurant."
RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal
or household use, including automobile parts and supplies (with no
service), clothing and shoes, fabrics, curtains, drapes, floor coverings,
furniture, lamps, appliances, radios, television sets, computers,
electronics, upholstery, china and glassware, luggage and leather
goods, antiques, home wares, paint and wallpaper, arts and crafts,
candles, records, tapes, videos, musical instruments, pets, books and
stationery, flowers, tobacco, drugs, sporting goods, jewelry, sewing
machines, photography equipment, keys, cards, gifts, and toys, and
including television, appliance, computer and electronics sales and
repair establishments, department stores, variety stores, hardware
stores (with products for sale predominantly to the public), interior
decorating stores, hobby shops and art galleries.
RETRACTABLE AWNING OR CANOPY — An awning or canopy that may
be retracted by mechanical means so as not to project beyond the front
facade of a building.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An easement for ingress and egress, sometimes
together with the right to maintain utilities within the easement area.
(See also "easement.")
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — See "street line or right-of-way line."
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boarding- , lodging or rooming house" and
"border."
ROW HOUSE or ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — See
"dwelling, townhouse."
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any accessory structure capable of receiving
and/or transmitting, for the sole benefit of the principal use, radio
or television signals from a transmitter or transmitter relay located
in planetary orbit and including but not limited to satellite receivers,
satellite dish antennas, satellite disks, direct broadcast systems (DBSs),
and television reception only systems (TVROs).
SCHOOL — Any place of education or instruction, other than a
commercial school, college, university, theological seminary, convent,
monastery, child-care center, children's day camp or religious retreat.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:393
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring one
abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls,
berms or densely planted vegetation. (See also "buffer or buffer area.")
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A facility consisting of a building or group
of buildings in a controlled-access compound that contains varying
sizes of individual compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or
lockers for the dead storage of customers' goods and wares.
SETBACK — The distance between a building and any lot line. When
two or more lots under one ownership are used for a single
development, the exterior lot lines so grouped shall be used in
determining the setback.
SHADE TREE — A tree with a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches, usually
deciduous, planted primarily for overhead canopy.
SHED — A small, fully-enclosed structure for storage. (See also
"accessory structure.")
SIDE SLOPE — The section of a slope that is below the talus slope and
generally of moderate or lesser gradient than the talus slope or cliff
face.
SIDE YARD — A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line.
SIGN — Any device, either freestanding or attached to a building
or structure or erected, painted, represented or reproduced upon or
in, to the extent provided herein, any building or structure, which
displays reproduces or includes any letter, word, name, number, model,
insignia, emblem, design, device or representation used for one or
more of the following purposes: to identify the premises or occupant
or owner of the premises; to advertise any trade, business, profession,
industry, service or other activity; to rent or use all or a part of the
premises, including that upon which it is displayed; to direct vehicular
or pedestrian traffic, other than state, county or municipal highway and
roadway markers; and shall include any announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or any representation used
to advertise or intended to advertise or promote the interest of any
person. In no event shall the word "sign" be construed to mean any sign
in the interior of any structure except as specifically set forth in this
chapter.
SIGN, AREA — The area of a sign face that encompasses the extreme
limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together
with the sign frame and any material or color forming an integral part
of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from
the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, or by delineating
the area established by reason of distinctive variation in background
color or by borders, whichever is greater.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — See "billboard."
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:394
SIGN, BUILDING — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
SIGN, BUSINESS OR NONRESIDENTIAL — A sign which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered upon the premises, provided that, at any
location where a business sign is permitted, there shall also be
permitted a sign containing noncommercial images or messages in
lieu of any other images or messages, regardless of whether such
noncommercial images or messages relate to activity conducted upon
the premises.
SIGN, CANOPY — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by a structure or
supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are
independent from any building or other structure.
SIGN, HANGING — See "sign, projecting."
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a
part of the sign.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign, generally informational, that has a
purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as
"no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position
off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
SIGN, LIGHT BOX — A permanent wall-mounted sign with an exposed
frame, a flat translucent face and internal illumination.
SIGN, MAINTENANCE — Includes replacement without substantial
change of any parts or support of any sign and the painting without
change of text, design or size of any sign, without removal of the sign
from the wall or structure supporting it.
SIGN, MONUMENT — A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in
which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground.
SIGN, POLITICAL — Any sign, notice, poster or other device calculated
to convey a pre-election political message or to obtain votes for a
particular candidate, slate of candidates, public question or political
issue when the same is placed in the view of the general public.
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported,
including but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means
of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board
signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:395
right-of-way, unless such vehicles are used in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign attached to a structure, building wall
or facade that projects at a right angle and/or is perpendicular to a
building facade or structure.
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL — Any sign located in a district zoned for
residential uses that contains no commercial message except
advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where
the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms
with all requirements of the zoning ordinance.23
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over
the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending
vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign used temporarily for a period not to
exceed 30 days that is not permanently mounted or maintained on an
existing structure. Temporary signage is subject to § 223-45E.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign attached to a wall, parapet or facade of a
building or structure, in which the exposed face of the sign is erected
on a plane parallel to the wall on which the sign is mounted.
SIGN, WINDOW or SIGN, WINDOW DISPLAY — Includes all signs,
as defined herein, which are situated within 12 inches of the window
surface. Window signage is subject to § 223-45C(3).[Amended
5-21-2013]
SITE PLAN — A rendering, drawing, or sketch prepared to
specifications and containing necessary elements, as set forth in Article
IV of this chapter, which shows the arrangement, layout and design of
the proposed use of a single parcel of land as shown on said plan.
SITE PLAN, EXEMPT — [Amended 12-17-2013]
Site plan approval shall not be required for the following:
Individual lot applications for new detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37;
(a)
The conversion, creation or legalization of units within
preexisting dwellings, provided that the total number of units
resulting from the conversion, creation or legalization i) do not
exceed three in number; and ii) are permitted by the provisions
of Chapter 223 of the City Code;
(b)
Building alterations which do not involve a change in use,
additional parking, or additional building area; and
(c)
(d) Changes in use which do not require additional parking.
(1)
23.Editor's Note: See Art. VI, Zoning, of this chapter.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:396
SLOPE — The inclination of the surface of land from the horizontal.
SLUMP BLOCK — Unstable areas of very steep slope with tendency for
vertical separation.
STEEP SLOPE — Slopes greater than 15% to be developed in
accordance with Palisades Preservation Overlay District provisions
herein.24
STORAGE FACILITY — An establishment engaged in the storage of
goods, products or materials primarily for business or industrial
purposes.
STORAGE FACILITY, SELF-SERVICE — See "mini-warehouse or selfservice
storage facility."
STORAGE, OUTDOOR — See "outdoor storage."
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is four or more
feet above the average finished grade at its perimeter. An attic having,
when within its space, possible floor area with headroom of seven feet
six inches or greater over 75% or more of the story directly beneath
shall be considered a story.[Amended 5-21-2013]
STORY, HALF — Any space partially within the roof framing where
the possible floor area with headroom of five feet or greater occupies
less than 75% of the story directly beneath.[Amended 5-21-2013;
1-5-2016]
STREET-FACING SETBACK — The minimum distance from a public
roadway or driveway from which a building may be located. Within a
fee simple subdivision, this setback is typically referred to as the front
yard setback.
STREET LINE or RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The dividing line between the
street and a lot.
STREETSCAPE — A design term referring to all the elements that
constitute the physical makeup of a street and that, as a group, define
its character, including building frontage, street paving, street
furniture, landscaping, including trees and other plantings, awnings
and marquees, signs and lighting.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — See "alterations."
Any dwellings, units and/or properties exempt from the site plan
requirements of the City Code shall be required to comply with
any and all provisions of the Uniform Construction Code and the
Uniform Fire Code, all necessary permits shall be obtained, and a
certificate of occupancy shall be required therefor.
(2)
24.Editor's Note: See § 223-42L.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:397
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction
for use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or
below the surface of land or water, which includes but is not limited
to buildings, stadiums, platforms, towers, sheds, trailers, storage bins,
fences, swimming pools and signs. (See also "building.")
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — See "accessory structure."
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming structure."
STUDIO — The workshop of an artist, sculptor, photographer or
craftsperson or a place where radio, television or movies are produced.
(See also "live/work unit.")
SURFACE — See "facing."
TALUS SLOPE — The apron, cone or embankment of rock waste sloping
outward from the base of the cliff face that is the course of the rock
waste.
TENNIS OR SPORTS COURT — A structure constructed on the ground
consisting of a playing area of whatever consistency used to engage in
the game of tennis or other sports. A backstop, consisting of netting,
fencing or similar material and designed to prevent the passage of
tennis or other balls shall be considered to be part of the tennis or
sports court.
THEATER OR MOVIE THEATER — A building or part of a building
devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical or
other live performances to the public for a fee.
TOP OF CLIFF — The portion of a slope located above the cliff face,
overlain with regolith, and generally known as the plateau or hill crest.
TOWNHOUSE or TOWNHOUSE DWELLING — See "dwelling,
townhouse."
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land or property that is the
subject of a development application. (See also "lot" and "parcel.")
TRAILER — A structure which temporarily or permanently stands on
wheels, and is capable of being towed or hauled by another vehicle and
used for temporary or long-term human occupation.
TREE, SPECIMEN OR SIGNIFICANT — Any tree that has a diameter
of 20 or more inches or any tree which is a particularly impressive or
unusual example of a species due to the size, shade, age or any other
trait that epitomizes the character of the species.
USE — The specific purpose for which land, building or structure is
designed or arranged for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not
allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:398
VETERINARY OFFICE OR HOSPITAL — An office or hospital where
animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited
to short-term care incidental to the principal use.
WALL — A structure of wood, stone or other materials or combination
thereof intended for defense, security, screening or enclosure or for
the retention of earth, stone, fill or other materials as in the case of
retaining walls.
WINDOW — Includes any opening in the exterior wall or roof of any
structure for the purpose of admitting air or light, whether or not
covered with glass, plastic, or other covering.
WINDOW AREA — Window area includes the aggregate square footage
of all windows on a facade or story of a building regardless of the
angle or angles at which they are set. In computing "window area", all
portions of any door which contains a window shall also be included.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS (WT) — Any personal wireless
services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 which
includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications
services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS),
specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
(ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may
in the future be developed. It does not include any amateur radio
facility that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur
radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas,
nor does it include noncellular telephone services.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (WT ANTENNA) —
Antenna of any type of design, which is or may be used for the delivery
of wireless telecommunications, except for those radio antenna, dish
antenna, or satellite receiving stations regulated pursuant to Article VI.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT (WT EQUIPMENT)
— Any building, structure, or equipment, including without limitation,
transmitters, power sources, or other equipment, except antennas or
towers, which are or may be used for the delivery of wireless
telecommunications.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPOUND (WT EQUIPMENT
COMPOUND) — The area which houses any combination of WT
equipment.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER (WT
SERVICE PROVIDER) — Any person, business organization, or other
entity of any kind, whether public or private, which seeks to install,
operate, or maintain any combination of WT technology within the
boundaries of the City of Union City, or which already operates or
maintains such WT technology as of the effective date of this chapter.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (WT
TECHNOLOGY) — Collectively, refers to all WT antennas, WT
equipment, WT equipment compound and WT towers.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:399
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER (WT TOWER) — A
vertical structure which is or may be used to support any WT antenna
or other WT equipment, whether freestanding or attached to any
existing structure.
YARD — An open space, which lies between the principal building
or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as herein permitted.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the front line of the lot and nearest point of the principal
building. The depth of the front yard shall be measured at right angles
to the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot
measured from the rear lot lines. The depth of a rear yard shall be
measured at right angles to the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest
point of the principal building and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard or, in the absence of either or both such yards, to the front
and/or rear lot line, as the case may be. A corner side yard is the yard
extending to a corner side lot line and an interior side yard is the yard
extending to an interior side lot line. The width of a side yard shall be
measured at right angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONE or DISTRICT — A specifically delineated area as shown on the
Official Zoning Map of the City of Union City within which regulations
and requirements govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land
and buildings.
ZONING AMENDMENT or ZONING MAP AMENDMENT — An
alteration of or addition to the text of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning
Map by the City of Union City.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment
of the City of Union City.
ZONING MAP — The map or maps which are part of the Zoning
Ordinance as set forth in § 223-35 of this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the City of Union City.
ZONING PERMIT — An approval issued by the Zoning Officer
indicating that the proposed construction work or property
development conforms to the requirements of this chapter and any
resolutions of approval issued by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
§ 223-5 UNION CITY CODE § 223-5
1:400
ARTICLE II
General Regulations
§ 223-6. Minimum requirements.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. If the lot or yard
areas required by this chapter for a particular structure are diminished, the
existence of such structure shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The
lot or yard areas of structures existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter shall not be diminished below the requirements herein provided
for structures hereafter erected, and such required lot or yard areas shall
not be included as a part of the required lot or yard areas of any structure
hereafter erected.
§ 223-7. Relation to other regulations.
§ 223-8. Supplementary regulations.
A. This chapter shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance or any rules
or regulations previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted
or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings, structures,
lots or land, provided that, where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings, structures, lots or land or upon
the height of structures or requires larger lots or yards than are
imposed or required by such existing provisions or regulations, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
B. Conflicting standards. This chapter shall not be deemed to affect in any
manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or other agreements
between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a
greater or lesser restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon
the erection, construction, establishment, movement, alteration or
enlargement of buildings than are imposed by other ordinances, rules,
regulations, licenses, certificates or other authorizations, or by
easements, covenants or agreements, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
A. General. The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other
space shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this
chapter; and, if already less than the minimum required by this chapter,
said area or dimension shall not be further reduced.
B. Yard regulations.
(1) Required yards.
§ 223-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-8
1:401
(a) Every lot shall include front, side and rear yards having the
areas and dimensions required within the particular zone in
which said lot is located.
(b) No yard or other open space provided for any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this article shall be
considered as providing a yard or other open space for any
other building on any other lot.
(c) No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill open space,
minimum areas, minimum yard and setback requirements,
parking or other similar requirements for uses in
nonresidential zones.
(2) Projections and encroachments. No building, structure or part
thereof, such as balconies, porches or overhangs, shall be
permitted to encroach into any street or other public right-of-way
or extend over any property line, except that awnings on the first
floor of a building may encroach not more than two feet into a
street or other public right-of-way and wall signs may encroach not
more than six inches into a street or other public right-of-way.
Encroachments into a street or other public right-of-way other than
those permitted by this section shall be specifically approved by
way of the granting of an easement by the Board of Commissioners.
Yards and courts required by this article shall be free of buildings,
structures or parts thereof, and no building or structure shall
project into any front, side or rear yard required by this article, nor
shall use be made of such yard, except as follows:
(a) Unenclosed porches, including steps extending not more than
72 inches from the building line and not exceeding more than
20 square feet in size.
(b) Window wells affording light and air to basement and cellar
areas.
(c) Chimneys, cornices and eaves which may project not more
than two feet into any required yard.
(d) Driveways providing access to permitted garages or parking
areas; provided, however, that on single-family and two-family
lots, driveways used to provide access to private garages shall
not be wider than 10 feet.
(e) Sills, leaders and similar ornamental or structural features
which may project not more than six inches into any required
yard.
(f) Fences and retaining walls, where specifically permitted in this
chapter.
§ 223-8 UNION CITY CODE § 223-8
1:402
(g) Freestanding flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerial
masts, children's playground equipment, outdoor fireplaces
and yard clothes lines and posts but must be set back at least
three feet from any property line and shall not be located in the
front yard, except for freestanding flagpoles.
(h) Accessory buildings and uses, including swimming pools,
where specifically permitted in this chapter.
(i) Residential heating and cooling units, if located in the side
yard and which shall be buffered from adjacent neighbors with
evergreen plantings or a fence to help mitigate visual
appearance, noise and vibration.
(j) Parking areas in connection with existing and proposed
residences in the R Low Density Residential District and
existing and proposed one-, two- and three-family dwellings in
any zone or district. [Added 3-18-2014]
(3) Lots abutting municipal parking lots. Any nonresidential lot
abutting a municipal parking lot shall be required to meet only 1/2
of the minimum yard requirements for the zone in which located for
the yard abutting the municipal parking lot.
(4) Prevailing setback. In order to maintain the character of the
established building streetscape in residential neighborhoods, the
average of the front setback of each existing building on the same
side of the same street within the same block within 100 feet shall
be calculated in those districts noted to require a prevailing
setback calculation within the zoning schedule at the end of this
chapter. The prevailing front setback shall be no more than twice
the front setback noted within the zoning schedule for said
district.25
C. Lot frontage.
(1) Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with the minimum
required frontage upon an approved street which shall be improved
in accordance with the street standards established by the City of
Union City or the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS),
as applicable.
(2) On any through lot, the front yard shall be considered that frontage
upon which the majority of the buildings in the same block front,
but in case there has been no clearly defined building frontage
established, the owner shall, when applying for a building permit,
specify which lot line shall be considered the front lot line.
D. Corner lots.
25.Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Bulk Regulations attached to this chapter.
§ 223-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-8
1:403
(1) Side yard requirements of a corner lot. The side street setback line
of any corner lot shall not be less than the minimum front yard
required on any adjoining lot fronting on a side street.
(2) Wherein an existing lot is a corner lot as defined in this chapter, any
future subdivision of that parcel of land shall be required to front
new lots created by subdivision on the shorter street frontages
bounding the limits of the City block in which the subject parcel is
located.
E. Principal buildings.
(1) Only one principal building may be erected on a lot in the R Zone.
In all other zones, related compatible buildings under one
management may be erected, used or occupied, provided that all
other open space, setback and coverage requirements of this
article and Article VI are met.
(2) No new building shall be constructed on or any existing building
altered or moved onto any lot for use as a dwelling when there
exists on said lot a building which is being used for dwelling
purposes. No building other than a structure permitted in and by
this article shall be constructed in front of or moved to the front of a
principal building situated on the same lot.
F. Height exceptions.
(1) Appurtenances attached to principal structures. Church spires,
belfries, domes or antennas attached to buildings, stair towers,
chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads and
necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above roof
level shall not be considered when determining the height of the
building and are not subject to height limitations, except that the
total square footage of such features shall not exceed 20% of total
roof area and shall not exceed a height such as is necessary to
accomplish the purpose for which it is intended to serve.
(2) Freestanding noncommercial accessory structures. Water towers
and radio and television antennas which are erected as
freestanding structures may be erected to a height which can be
demonstrated to the approving authority is necessary to
accomplish their intended function. Federally licensed amateur
radio facilities shall be subject to Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) rules which govern the height of licensed
amateur operator radio antennas. The height of the tower or
antennas shall conform to United States Federal Communications
Commission Regulations governing licensed amateur radio
operators and, if required, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
notification and FCC approval. All freestanding noncommercial
accessory structures shall not be located within any required front,
side or rear yard setback areas and shall be subject to the
§ 223-8 UNION CITY CODE § 223-8
1:404
structural provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
G. Accessory structures and uses.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Any accessory structure attached to the principal building shall
be considered part of the principal building.
(b) No accessory building shall be constructed on any lot on which
there is not a principal building structure.
(c) No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any
front yard.
(d) On through lots, no accessory structure erected in the rear
yard shall be nearer to the "rear" street line than the minimum
front yard setback for the zone in which such lot is located.
(e) Except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter, accessory
buildings built in a rear yard on interior lots shall be no closer
than three feet to any side or rear property line of the lot
containing said accessory building; provided, however, that no
accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to said
line on any lot which has a rear lot line that serves as a side line
of an adjoining property.
(f) No accessory building or structure shall be located closer than
10 feet to from a principal building.
(g) Except as specifically permitted elsewhere in this article, no
accessory building or structure shall exceed 15 feet in height.
(h) No accessory building shall have floor or ground area in excess
of 500 square feet or 1/3 of the floor or ground area of the
principal building, whichever is greater.
(i) No accessory building shall be used for human habitation.
(2) Requirements for specific accessory structures and uses.
(a) Minor home occupations. Minor home occupations shall be
permitted as accessory uses in all residential zones and shall
be exempt from approval by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment if the following standards are satisfied:
[1] The practitioner must be the owner or lessee of the
residence in which the minor home occupation is
contained.
[2] The practitioner must reside in the home.
§ 223-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-8
1:405
[3] There are no nonresidential employees working on the
premises.
[4] The minor home occupation is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the dwelling for
residential purposes. The maximum area devoted to the
minor home occupation shall be limited to not more than
25% of the total area of the floor where located, excluding
space used for a private garage or 400 square feet,
whichever is smaller.
[5] There is no external evidence of the minor home
occupation.
[6] No retail sales shall be conducted on the site.
[7] No clients shall visit the site.
[8] There is no sign identifying the minor home occupation.
[9] There are no delivery vehicles other than those associated
with the residential use on site.
[10]No equipment or process shall be used in such minor home
occupation which creates noise, glare, fumes, odors,
electrical interference, medical waste or other nuisance
factors detectable to the normal sense or to radio,
telephone or television equipment off the lot.
(b) Amusement machines. Such machines shall be permitted in the
C-C, C-G, C-N, MU and UTOD Zones as accessory uses to
establishments where the primary use is a recreational/
entertainment use, such as theaters, in accordance with the
following limitations:
[1] There shall be 60 square feet of operating area for each
machine. The calculations of the operating areas shall
exclude any area of the premises which is used for other
purposes, but shall include access and walkways primarily
serving the machine.
[2] Not more than five such machines as accessory uses shall
be permitted in any single establishment.
[3] The maximum area devoted to such machines (60 square
feet by number of licensed machines) shall not constitute
more than 30% of the gross floor area of the
establishment.
(c) Satellite antennas.
[1] Permitted districts. A receive-only satellite antenna shall
be permitted as an accessory use in all zone districts.
§ 223-8 UNION CITY CODE § 223-8
1:406
Satellite antennas shall not require site plan approval from
the approving authority.
[2] Performance standards.
[a] No satellite antenna may be placed in the front yard of
any lot in the City. A corner lot shall be deemed to
have a front yard facing each street.
[b] The diameter of satellite antennas shall not exceed
three feet. Receive-only satellite antennas shall be the
only type permitted.
[c] No satellite antenna shall be closer to the side
property line than a distance equal to the diameter of
said antenna or side yard setback requirement for the
principal structure on the lot, whichever results in the
greater setback.
[d] No satellite antenna shall be closer to the rear
property line than a distance equal to the diameter of
said antenna or rear yard setback requirement for the
principal structure on the lot, whichever results in the
greater setback.
[e] When mounted on the ground, the overall height from
the surrounding ground level to the lowest point of the
antenna shall not exceed two feet, except in instances
where additional clearance is needed to satisfactorily
receive and/or transmit signals. No ground-mounted
satellite antenna shall exceed five feet in height, as
measured from the average grade of the base of the
antenna to the highest point of the antenna.
[f] Roof-mounted antennas.
[g] Flat roofs and mansard-style roofs. No roof-mounted
satellite antenna may extend above the roofline more
than four feet when mounted on a flat roof or
mansard-style roof. However, upon a showing that
such a roof-mounted antenna will not receive
adequate reception under the restrictions of this
subsection, the minimum height necessary for
reasonable satisfactory reception may be allowed.
Roof-mounted antennas on a flat roof shall be located
in the center of the roof structure to reduce visibility.
[h] All other style roofs. No roof-mounted satellite
antennas may extend above the highest point of the
roof more than three feet when mounted on all other
style roofs, and the roof-mounted satellite antenna
must be located on the portion of the roof facing the
§ 223-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-8
1:407
rear yard or, if this would unreasonably limit signal
reception, the side yard. However, upon a showing
that such a roof-mounted antenna will not receive
adequate reception under the restrictions of this
subsection, the minimum height necessary for
reasonably satisfactory reception may be allowed.
[i] All satellite antennas shall be painted a solid, dark,
nonmetallic, nonglossy color if ground-mounted. Roofmounted
antennas mounted on a flat roof or mansardstyle
roof shall be painted a solid, dark, nonmetallic,
nonglossy light to medium gray. When mounted on all
other style roofs, the satellite antenna shall be painted
the color of the surface to which it is attached.
[j] The number of allowable satellite antennas on
buildings containing a residential use shall be one per
dwelling unit.
[k] The satellite antenna may only be used for occupants
of the building located on the property.
[l] When the use of a satellite antenna is abandoned it
shall be removed within 30 days.
[m] Satellite antennas may not be mounted on a portable
or movable structure, such as a trailer.
[n] To the extent permitted by law, no satellite antenna
shall be located on or abutting any property which is
located within the National or State Register of
Historic Places.
[o] No satellite antenna shall be erected on a public utility
easement without the consent of the easement holder.
[p] Screening. Ground-mounted antennas shall be
screened as to minimize visibility from public streets
and adjoining properties. Screening shall be
accompanied by the installation of landscaping and/or
fencing or in the form of a wall or structure enclosing
the antenna. The species, quantity, size and spacing of
plant materials shall be specified on the site plan.
[3] Such satellite antennas, appurtenances, landscaping and
fencing shall be kept and maintained in good condition.
(d) Outdoor storage.
[1] Outdoor storage of any kind is prohibited within the front
yard.
§ 223-8 UNION CITY CODE § 223-8
1:408
[2] The outdoor storage of any items, materials and
equipment, other than those customarily placed in
courtyards and yards, incidental to authorized residential
use and occupancy, is prohibited in all residential zones.
[3] No outdoor vertical stacking of vehicles shall be permitted.
[4] Outdoor storage of garbage trucks in any zone is
specifically prohibited.
[5] No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored above ground unless as otherwise required by
applicable federal, state or local regulations. Tanks or
drums of fuel directly connecting with heating devices or
appliances located on the same premises as the tanks or
drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
[6] All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by a fence
or wall not to exceed six feet in height adequate to conceal
such facilities and the contents thereof from adjacent
property and shall meet all required accessory building
setbacks for the zone in which located. This provision shall
not apply to outdoor storage of new cars or other vehicles
on the premises of a dealer.
[7] No materials or wastes shall be stored on any premises in
such form or manner that they may be transferred off such
premises by natural causes or forces such as wind or
water.
[8] All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by
or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be
stored outdoors only in closed containers.
(e) Decks, patios and terraces over three feet in height must meet
the required yard setbacks for principal buildings.
(f) Swimming pools.
[1] No nonstorable pool and any related decking shall be
closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line.
[2] On any corner lot, no part of any private swimming pool
shall be constructed within the front yard area required to
be provided on either street.
[3] Artificial lights used or maintained in connection with a
private swimming pool shall be so located and shielded
that the illumination therefrom is not directed upon any
adjacent property.
§ 223-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-8
1:409
[4] No private swimming pool shall be used other than as an
accessory use of the premises whereon it is located.
[5] The fence requirement set forth in this section shall be
complied with.
[6] Any buildings or structures erected in conjunction with a
swimming pool shall comply with the provisions on
accessory structures.
(g) Family day-care homes. Family day-care homes as defined in
§ 223-5 are permitted as accessory uses in all residential
zones.
(h) Automated teller machines (ATMs). Outdoor ATMs are
permitted in association with on-site financial institutions, in
accordance with the bulk and design standards of this chapter.
Measures to enhance personal security at the ATM stations
shall be provided. Other commercial uses shall be permitted to
contain indoor ATMs that may operate during normal business
hours and will be subject to the sign requirements of this
chapter, where applicable.26
(i) Certain nonresidential accessory uses.
[1] Vending machines. In the C-C, C-G, C-N, MU and UTOD
Zone Districts, a nonresidential property is permitted to
have no more than two outdoor vending machines in
accordance with the following:
[a] The machine(s) shall be appropriately located so as
not to interfere with sight triangles, required
setbacks, on-site circulation, landscaping and parking.
[b] The machine(s) shall be accessory to an existing
nonresidential use.
[c] A zoning permit for outdoor vending machines shall be
required. The permit shall be granted when it is
determined by the Zoning Officer that the most
appropriate location for the machine(s) has been
achieved.
[2] Used clothing bins. In the C-N Zone District, a
nonresidential property is permitted to have up to two
used clothing bins in accordance with the following:
[a] The bin(s) shall be appropriately located so as not to
interfere with sight triangles, and on-site circulation,
required setbacks, on site, circulation, landscaping
and parking.
26.Editor's Note: See § 223-45, Signs.
§ 223-8 UNION CITY CODE § 223-8
1:410
[b] The bin(s) shall be accessory to an existing
nonresidential use.
[c] A zoning permit for used clothing bins shall be
required. The permit shall be granted when it is
determined by the Zoning Officer that the most
appropriate location for the bin(s) has been achieved.
[3] Phone booths, mail and courier boxes and newspaper
distribution boxes. These items may not be located in
required sight triangles and should be located so as to not
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation and
safety. These uses are recommended to be as aesthetically
pleasing as possible and to incorporate a design theme
where appropriate.
(j) Permanent standby generators required in certain residential
properties (new construction only). [Added 12-15-2015]
[1] Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMON AREA — A common undivided space intended
for the use or enjoyment by all residents of the dwelling
and their invitees, such as an elevator, hallway, lobby, or
stairway.
PERMANENT STANDBY GENERATOR — Generators
permanently connected to the property's electrical
systems in order to provide backup power in the event
of power outages to the residential structure. Once utility
power is restored, the generator automatically transfers
the electrical load back to the utilities, or is manually
switched off and power is turned back to the utilities.
PORTABLE STANDBY GENERATOR — Generators not
permanently connected to the property's electric systems,
which use a self-contained fuel source and have wheels or
are light enough to be carried.
[2] Applicability and purpose.
[a] This subsection is applicable on new construction only.
[b] This subsection shall apply to the owner(s) of any
residential property having:
[i] Five or more stories; or
[ii] Twenty or more residential units.
[c] The owner(s) of residential property to whom this
subsection is applicable shall be required to install a
permanent standby generator to provide backup
§ 223-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-8
1:411
power, in the event of a power outage, to all common
areas of the property, including smoke detectors,
carbon monoxide detectors, and emergency lights
located therein.
[3] Fuel. All permanent standby generators shall operate only
on natural gas.
[4] Time of use. All permanent standby generators shall only
be used during electrical power outages and as required
by the manufacturer for maintenance purposes.
Maintenance operation shall only take place during
daylight hours between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., not to exceed once a week.
[5] Siting and placement requirements. All permanent
standby generators must be located within the structure or
on the rooftop of the structure in accordance with all
applicable Code requirements.
[6] Impact on neighboring properties.
[a] All permanent standby generators shall be placed so
as to minimize the visual impact on adjacent
properties with the use of appropriate sound
attenuating architectural materials and landscape
screening such as shrubbery or fencing.
[b] The noise level of any permanent standby generator,
when in use, shall not create a nuisance as determined
by the New Jersey State noise statutes and
regulations.
[7] Regulatory compliance.
[a] The permanent standby generators shall be installed
and operated in accordance with manufacturer's
requirements as well as all building codes adopted by
the State of New Jersey, whichever is more stringent.
[8] Enforcement.
[a] Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall
violate any of the provisions of this subsection shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article IV, General Penalty, except that
each violation therein shall be subject to a maximum
fine of $500 and each day that such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Fines
are payable through the Municipal Court Violations
Bureau.
§ 223-8 UNION CITY CODE § 223-8
1:412
§ 223-9. Certain permitted uses.
[b] Violation of any provision of this subsection shall be
cause for a Municipal Court summons to be issued by
the Police Department, Code Enforcement Official,
and Health Officer.
[c] Any person convicted of violating any provision of this
subsection in a criminal case or found to be in
violation of this subsection in a civil case brought by a
law enforcement agency shall be ordered to reimburse
the City and other participating law enforcement
agencies their full investigative costs.
[d] Any interested person may seek an injunction or other
relief to prevent or remedy violations of this
subsection. The prevailing party in such an action
shall be entitled to recover reasonable costs and any
attorney fees.
[e] The remedies provided in this subsection are not
exclusive, and nothing in this subsection shall
preclude the use or application of any other remedies,
penalties or procedures established by law.
H. Affordable housing. The City of Union City is committed to addressing
its constitutional obligation to provide a fair share of affordable housing
for moderate- and low-income households. It is the intent of this
chapter to incorporate the applicable rules of the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing or any other agency of the State of New Jersey
that is responsible for administering affordable housing requirements.
A. Amusement events. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, the following uses may be permitted only by the Board of
Commissioners, subject to all applicable ordinances:
(1) Temporary circuses, pony rides, animal acts, carnivals, bazaars,
and educational sports, music or theatrical enterprises and
displays when held out of doors in any zone, provided that the same
are sponsored by a recreational, religious, charitable, social or
services organization located within the City of Union City.
(2) Cultural or athletic events which are part of a house of worship,
community house or school, and which are held on the premises
owned or leased by or otherwise under the control of the institution
conducting or sponsoring said program.
(3) Bingo, raffles or other legalized games of chance, when properly
licensed in accordance with state and municipal requirements.
§ 223-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-9
1:413
B. Apartments above the ground floor. Where apartments are permitted as
a principal permitted use on upper floors only, the following
requirements shall be met:
(1) Each apartment shall have its own entrance to a hallway, staircase
or to the exterior.
(2) The ground floor entrance to the apartment unit or units shall be
separated from the entrance to the ground floor use.
(3) An applicant or developer shall provide credible evidence to the
satisfaction of the approving authority that sufficient parking
spaces are available and/or reserved in either public or private offstreet
parking lots for the overnight parking of vehicles of the
prospective tenants of the apartment or apartments where offstreet
parking is required, except that for buildings located on
Bergenline Avenue between 30th Street and 47th Street or on
Summit Avenue between 5th Street and 18th Street, no parking
shall be required for the first six dwelling units in a building.
(4) A principal nonresidential use must be located on the ground floor
of the building.
C. Child-care centers. Child-care centers as defined in § 223-5 are
permitted uses in all nonresidential zones pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6 and 40:55D-66.7. The floor area
occupied in any building or structure as a child-care center shall be
excluded in calculating 1) any parking requirement otherwise
applicable to that number of units or amount of floor space, as
appropriate, under state or local laws or regulations adopted
thereunder; and 2) the permitted density allowable for that building or
structure. New buildings shall comply with City parking standards.
D. Essential services. Public utility lines for the transportation,
distribution and/or control of water, electricity, gas, oil, steam and
telegraph and telephone communications, and their supporting
members, other than buildings and structures, including pipes, shall
not be required to be located on a lot, nor shall this chapter be
interpreted to prohibit the use of a property in any zone for the above
uses. For purposes of this provision, wireless telecommunications
facilities shall not be deemed an essential service.
E. Outdoor dining on private property. It is the intent of this section to
permit outdoor dining areas accessory to restaurant uses subject to site
plan approval by the appropriate approving authority. Outdoor dining
areas on private property shall comply with all applicable regulations of
Chapter 185, Article IV, Outdoor Dining, as well as the following:
(1) The area utilized for outdoor dining areas must be accessory in
nature to a fully enclosed eating establishment.
§ 223-9 UNION CITY CODE § 223-9
1:414
(2) Applicants proposing to establish outdoor dining areas shall submit
to the approving authority a layout of the proposed seating areas,
which shall include but not be limited to a depiction of the
maximum size of the area, the maximum number and general
layout of seats and tables, all aisles and routes of ingress and
egress, clearances between tables and chairs, the location of all
food preparation and serving areas, an illustration, rendering and/
or photograph of all proposed furniture, umbrellas, awnings and
signage and any other site detail the authority deems necessary in
order to reach a decision for site plan approval. Tables and chairs
shall be placed and maintained in an orderly fashion and shall not
create a hazard. No picnic style tables are permitted.
(3) No more than 25% of total on-site restaurant seating shall be
provided outdoors. The actual maximum number of outdoor seats
shall be decided by the approving authority during the site plan
review process. This number shall be based on the total number of
seats, the size of the property, the amount of on-site/available
parking, the size of the outdoor area, and any other health and
safety recommendations the authority or any agency of the City
deems appropriate.
(4) The seating contained in an outdoor dining shall be considered in
determining the parking space requirement for a retail food
establishment.
(5) The outdoor dining and area must be directly accessible to the
interior eating area. Areas that must be accessed via property not
controlled by the applicant or property owner are not considered
directly accessible.
(6) All outdoor dining areas shall provide adequate aisle area for the
unimpeded passage of handicapped individuals.
(7) A six-foot fence and a minimum five-foot wide evergreen buffer
shall be provided if the outdoor dining area is adjacent to a
residential zone or property.
(8) All service areas shall be inside the enclosed restaurant area. No
food or dining shall be prepared in the outdoor dining area, and no
food or condiments shall be stored outside. Food and drink served
in outdoor dining areas shall be the same as that served in the
restaurant.
(9) All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least four feet of
unobstructed access to building entrances and exits.
(10)No outdoor dining area shall be located in front of any driveway,
parking lot entrance, alley, or other vehicular thoroughfare nor
impede adequate sight distance for motorists.
§ 223-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-9
1:415
§ 223-10. Applicability to municipal government.
Regardless of whether the City is acting in or pursuant to the performance
of a governmental function carrying out a legislative mandate or in the
(11) The applicant is responsible for keeping the area and the adjacent
public and private areas free and clear of any debris or litter. Areas
must be cleaned as needed and at the time the business is closed
for the evening. Failure to keep outdoor dining areas clean shall
constitute a fine in an amount not less than $100 per violation.
(12) The applicant shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from
the outdoor dining area any bell, siren, whistle, loudspeaker public
address-system, or similar device. Outdoor music is permitted,
provided that all noise audible from the outside shall be kept at
such a level as to comply with all provisions of the City ordinances
relating to noise.27
(13) Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor dining
areas for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this chapter or
other rule or regulation. Nothing herein shall be construed to vary,
alter, or amend any rule or regulation relating to the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages may be
served in outdoor dining areas operated by restaurants having a
valid Alcoholic Beverage Control retail consumption license, but
only in the licensed area and in accordance with the terms of the
license.
(14) Permits for outdoor cafes shall be valid for one year from the date
of issuance of the permit. Applicants receiving site plan approval
for an outdoor dining area shall obtain from the City Construction
Code Official a permit each year they wish to continue the area,
provided that the operations have not changed and the applicant is
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable City codes.
(15) There shall be no additional signage on any part of an outdoor cafe.
F. Outdoor dining in sidewalk cafe areas. Sidewalk cafe areas shall be
permitted accessory to indoor food businesses with frontage on Park
Avenue from 49th Street to South Marginal Highway and on Broadway
from 49th Street to 45th Street and shall be governed by Chapter 185,
Article IV, Outdoor Dining.
G. Temporary offices. Trailers or mobile structures used as temporary
offices, workshops or for the storage of equipment and materials in
connection with permitted construction of new buildings or structures
may be temporarily permitted on the same site during the actual period
of construction.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 261, Noise.
§ 223-9 UNION CITY CODE § 223-10
1:416
exercise of its private right as a corporate body, any municipally owned,
operated or controlled building, structure, facility or use, either existing
or proposed, shall be permitted in any class of zone, it being the intention
that whatever the City may be authorized to do shall constitute a function
of government and that whenever the City shall act pursuant to granted
authority, it acts as government and not as a private entrepreneur. Further,
the City shall submit development plans to the Planning Board for its review
and recommendation but shall not pay to itself application fees.
§ 223-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-10
1:417

ARTICLE III
Development Requirements and Standards
§ 223-11. Design standards.
A. Purpose and applicability.
(1) The intent of this section is to ensure that all developments
conform to design standards encouraging sound development
patterns within the City. Where an Official Map or Master Plan has
been adopted, development shall conform to them in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44 et seq.
(2) The standards in this section shall apply to all developments in the
City requiring site plan or subdivision approval, except that
developments consisting solely of residential uses shall comply
with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS), N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq., wherever there is a conflict between
RSIS and the standards in this section. Unless required otherwise
by law or regulation, RSIS shall not apply to nonresidential or
mixed-use development.
(3) Relief from the standards herein shall be granted by way of
exception pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
B. General provisions.
(1) Layout. New streets and blocks shall be laid out in a manner which
conforms to the historic street grid pattern of the City. New streets
should be extensions of existing streets.
(2) Compatibility. New development shall be compatible with existing
and proposed development with regard to urban design, pedestrian
and vehicular circulation, infrastructure improvements, public
access to the waterfront, and public open space.
C. Blocks.
(1) Geometry. Blocks shall be rectangular except where preexisting
diagonal streets, natural features, municipal boundaries or railroad
rights-of-way dictate otherwise.
(2) Boundaries. Block boundaries shall be defined by:
(a) Streets or pedestrianways which conform to the requirements
of § 223-11N;
(b) Municipal boundaries; and/or
(c) Other unusual natural features such as cliffs.
(3) Block dimensions.
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:419
(a) The maximum length of any block face with a north-south
orientation shall be 250 feet. The minimum length shall be 200
feet.
(b) The maximum length of any block face with an east-west
orientation shall be 500 feet. The minimum length shall be 200
feet.
(c) In areas with steeply sloping topography or other unusual
natural features or adjacent to municipal boundaries, the
approving authority may permit longer or shorter blocks than
provided hereinabove.
D. Curbs and gutters.
(1) Concrete or granite curb shall be installed along all streets. Curbs
shall also be required along all edges of pavement within a site,
except where natural drainage methods are utilized. Curb and
gutter design details shall be in conformance with current
engineering standards and shall be subject to approval by the
enforcing agency.
(2) Barrier-free curb ramps shall be constructed at all intersections
and other appropriate locations in accordance with accessible
design standards promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
E. Fences and walls.
(1) Height. The maximum height of a fence, wall or railing shall be four
feet in front and side yards and six feet in any rear yard.
(2) Materials. Fences, walls and gates adjacent to public rights-of-way
shall be constructed of a durable and decorative material such as
decorative aluminum or wrought iron. Other fences may be of any
material or style.
(3) Electrified fences, razor wire and barbed wire are prohibited.
(4) In all districts the finished side of the fence shall face the
neighboring property.
F. Lighting.
(1) All streets, alleys, sidewalks, pedestrianways and parking facilities
shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property
and the safety of persons.
(2) All entrances and exits in buildings used for nonresidential
purposes or containing two or more dwelling units shall be
adequately lighted.
G. Location of utility wires, boxes, meters, panels, devices and other
similar equipment and installations. [Amended 12-15-2015]
§ 223-11 UNION CITY CODE § 223-11
1:420
(1) All electric power, telephone, cable television, Internet and other
utility lines serving new development, other than an individual oneto
three-family home shall be placed underground, subject to utility
company requirements.
(2) Electric power, telephone, cable television, Internet, gas and other
utility boxes, meters, panels, devices and similar equipment and
installations shall not be constructed, placed and/or relocated to
the portion(s) of any structure that is located adjacent to a street or
roadway.
H. Lots.
(1) Each lot must front upon an approved street. No lot shall front on
an alley.
(2) Lots shall be rectangular insofar as practical. Side lot lines should
be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
Rear lot lines should be parallel to streets.
(3) Lot lines bordering streets shall be coterminous with the street
right-of-way.
I. Low-rise and mid-rise apartment buildings.
(1) Building design and articulation.
(a) All multifamily structures shall be situated with proper
consideration of their relationship to other buildings, both
existing and proposed, in terms of light, air and usable open
spaces, access to public rights-of-way and off street parking,
height and bulk.
(b) Groups of related buildings including low-rise and mid-rise
apartments, along with architectural focal points, shall be
designed to present a harmonious appearance in terms of
building silhouette, architectural style and scale; massing of
building form; surface material, finish and texture; decorative
features; window and doorway proportions, entryway
placement and location, signage and landscaping.
(c) Efforts to coordinate the actual and apparent height of
adjacent structures are encouraged. This is especially
applicable where buildings are located very close to each
other. It is often possible to adjust the height of a wall, cornice
or parapet line to match that of an adjacent building. Similar
design linkages can be achieved to adjust apparent height by
placing window lines, belt courses, and other horizontal
elements in a pattern that reflects the same elements on
neighboring buildings.
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:421
(d) Large structures should be designed to reduce their perceived
height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smallerscale
components.
(e) Projects should be compatible with the scale of development
anticipated by the applicable land use policies for the
surrounding area and should be sited and designed to provide
a sensitive transition to nearby, less-intensive zones. Projects
on zone edges should be developed in a manner that creates a
step in perceived height, bulk and scale between the project
and development in adjacent zones.
(f) Multiple buildings on the same site shall be designed to create
a cohesive visual relationship between the buildings.
(2) Bay spacing and differentiation.
(a) All street-facing building facades longer than 50 feet shall be
broken up into smaller bays so as to give the appearance of a
series of different buildings rather than a large building mass.
(b) The design and dimensions of bays along one building facade
should create a varied articulation; a monotonous repetition of
bays along a very long facade should be avoided.
(3) Vertical differentiation for mid-rise apartment buildings.
(a) All mid-rise apartment buildings shall be articulated with a
base, middle and top. This breaks down the scale of tall
buildings while maintaining a pedestrian-friendly environment
along the streets.
(b) Base. The base is the lower one or two levels of a building. To
define a base in residential buildings, unique materials and
window pattern and proportion are encouraged. A base of
bulkhead area of contrasting material is encouraged in order
to highlight the first level.
(c) Middle. The middle of the building should be distinguished
from the top and the base by horizontal belt courses or trim
cornices, stepbacks, and setback changes in material, masonry
or fenestration pattern; and/or other appropriate means.
(d) Top and roof. Depending on the height and design of the
building, the top of the building may be just the roofline or the
top one or two floors. The roofline should relate to the bay
massing so as to appear as a series of side-by-side buildings.
Rooflines should be emphasized for example by variation in
roof forms such flat roofs, with parapets and/or cornices. Flat
roof areas can serve as landscaped roof decks for adjacent
units or for the entire building or may be used as green roofs.
(4) Building entries.
§ 223-11 UNION CITY CODE § 223-11
1:422
(a) Primary pedestrian entrances should be sited to face, frame
and open onto the interior streets, required open spaces and
community facilities rather than alleys, driveways and parking
lots.
(b) Provisions shall be made in any low-rise, mid-rise and high-rise
apartment structure to provide access for the handicapped,
pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(5) Building stepbacks. Building stepbacks are an effective design
strategy to reduce the overall mass and appearance of mid-rise and
high-rise buildings and to create valuable private spaces such as
terraces on upper stories. To achieve this design strategy, the
following is required:
(a) Buildings taller than three stories shall provide front-facade
and/or side-facade stepback or other change in massing at
upper floors in order to downplay their mass and visibility.
(b) Stepbacks are measured with respect to lower-level facades
and not property lines.
(c) One front-facade stepback or change in massing of at least five
feet shall be provided, beginning at the fourth floor for mid-rise
buildings. Other options include varying heights of facades,
cornices or parapet lines to emphasize the top of the third story
in a mid-rise building and arrangements of window lines, belt
courses, and other horizontal elements in a pattern that
reflects the same elements on neighboring buildings. Other
techniques are possible, and use of more than one technique is
encouraged.
(d) The following regulations apply to all multifamily residential
buildings and refer to stepbacks along the side facades, thus
reducing the overall scale and mass of building facades:
[1] No stepbacks are required for building stories one through
three.
[2] In a mid-rise building, for stories four, five and six, where
applicable, building facades shall stepback a minimum of
15% of the building footprint at the fifth floor.
[3] Stepbacks are not required on facades that do not face a
public street. For example stepbacks are not required on
internal lot lines or on rear facades.
(6) Rooftop mechanical equipment.
(a) All mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened from
view from properties directly adjacent to the property line.
This may be achieved in a variety of ways including using
landscaping, decorative walls, and decorative fencing.
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:423
(b) All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be set back at least 10
feet from the upper-level building facades and be setback far
enough that it is not visible from public rights-of-way.
(c) All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view in a manner
consistent with the architectural design and materials of the
buildings.
(7) Building transparency.
(a) Principal entries shall be visible and easily identifiable and
highlighted by prominent architectural features.
(b) Secondary entrances should be clearly designed as secondary
in importance with the overall facade requirements.
(c) Service entrances shall face parking lots or driveways and be
placed at the rear and not facing streets or other public spaces.
(d) All residential multifamily buildings shall have primary entry
hall or lobby area connected to the sidewalk via a pedestrian
walkway. Individual entries for ground-floor units are
encouraged as well.
(e) Secondary entries also shall be connected to the sidewalk by
pedestrian paths and should be clearly designed to be
secondary in importance in the overall facade arrangement.
(8) Ground-floor elevations.
(a) For all residential buildings, it is important to balance the need
to provide a sense of privacy and separation for first-floor units
with the need to provide transparency and a relationship to the
street and the sidewalk.
(b) Common building entrances shall be located at grade. The
finished floor elevations of ground-floor units should be raised
at least several steps above grade but shall not be more than
four feet above sidewalk grade.
(9) Windows.
(a) Window size and proportion are allowed to vary in order to
complement a variety of building styles.
(b) Residential windows.
[1] For ground level residential and parking areas disguised
with architectural detailing, windows shall be provided,
occupying at least 35% of the facade area.
[2] At least 25% of the facade area of upper-level residential
floors shall be glazed with transparent windows.
§ 223-11 UNION CITY CODE § 223-11
1:424
(c) Blank walls are prohibited for all buildings, except where
Building or Fire Codes prohibit windows or doors.
(10) Common elements.
(a) The developer shall submit proposals for ownership and
maintenance of common elements, including open space,
recreation facilities, meeting rooms, parking areas, driveways,
private streets and similar facilities. The proposal shall be
reviewed and approved by the approving authority as a
condition of preliminary site plan approval.
(b) Apartment buildings with 50 or more dwelling units shall
provide on-site amenities for residents, which may include
open space, recreation facilities and/or meeting rooms.
(c) All mid-rise and high-rise apartment buildings shall provide an
indoor refuse and recycling storage area.
(11) Parking design.
(a) As part of the goal of encouraging pedestrian-friendly design,
the visibility of off-street parking areas from streets, sidewalks,
open spaces and other public spaces shall be minimized.
(b) On-site parking areas and streets shall be paved with asphalt
and curbed with concrete or granite block as approved by the
enforcing agency.
(c) Structured parking is permitted on the first, second and third
levels of buildings and is the preferred solution; provided that
such parking is hidden from direct view of streets, open spaces
and other public areas by being located behind residential and
common lobby spaces.
(d) The rear parking facades can be screened architecturally as
described below:
[1] Parking garage facades shall be architecturally screened
to harmonize with the building;
[2] The facades shall be architecturally integrated with the
building facade both vertically and horizontally. Parking
facades shall be broken into bays and fenestration
patterns similar to the rest of the building mass; and
[3] Articulation of bays for the rear structured parking facade
may begin above the second floor, creating a podium or
terrace above the parking area.
[4] Exposed parking structures below buildings supported by
columns or "pilotis" are not permitted.
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:425
(e) Garage doors may not exceed 20 feet in width and garage curb
cuts shall not exceed 24 feet in width.
(f) Off-street surface parking lots shall be located to the rear of
the residential buildings and away from direct view of streets.
(g) All parking areas shall be adequately screened to prevent
impacts on adjacent properties and streets, as required by
§ 223-46B(9)(d).
(12) Mechanical and utilities. A wall of venting for mechanical rooms
shall not be permitted along facades facing streets, pathways, and
open spaces.
(13) Minimum unit size. Minimum unit size in all multifamily buildings
shall be as follows:
(a) Studio: 400 square feet.
(b) One-bedroom: 550 square feet.
(c) Two-bedroom: 750 square feet.
(d) Three-bedroom: 900 square feet.
(14) Signs.
(a) One project identification sign shall be permitted per entrance
and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area on either side and
eight feet in height. The sign may include only the name of the
project and the street address.
(b) No other signs, other than pedestrian and vehicular directional
signs, shall be visible from off the premises.
J. Mixed-use buildings.
(1) Indoor/outdoor operations. All permitted uses in mixed-use
buildings must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings
unless otherwise expressly authorized. This requirement does not
apply to off-street parking or loading areas, automated teller
machines, or outdoor seating areas.
(2) Floor-to-floor heights and floor area of ground-floor space.
(a) All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a
mixed-use building must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling
height of 11 feet.
(b) Transparency.
[1] A minimum of 70% of the street-facing building facade
between two feet and eight feet in height must be
comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor
space or product display areas. Ground floor windows for
§ 223-11 UNION CITY CODE § 223-11
1:426
office buildings shall be designed similarly to retail
windows so as to allow flexibility for future change in use
to retail.
[2] The bottom of any window or product display window used
to satisfy the transparency standard referenced above may
not be more than four feet above the adjacent sidewalk.
[3] Product display windows used to satisfy these
requirements must be internally lighted.
(c) Doors and entrances.
[1] Buildings must have a primary entrance door facing a
public sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be
used to satisfy this requirement.
[2] Building entrances may include doors to individual shops
or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrianoriented
plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of
shops or businesses.
(3) Except for all applicable requirements in Subsection J(1) and (2)
above, mixed-use buildings shall also meet the building design
standards found within § 223-11I.
K. Refuse and recycling facilities.
(1) Outdoor refuse and recycling containers shall be visually screened
within a durable enclosure, so as not to be visible from adjacent lots
or sites, neighboring properties or streets.
(2) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes, dust, odor or
which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in sealed and covered containers which are adequate to
eliminate such hazards.
(3) Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be effectively designed
to contain all refuse generated on site and deposited between
collections.
(4) Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be located to provide
clear and convenient access to refuse collection vehicles.
(5) Medical, hazardous or other regulated waste shall meet the state
and federal standards for such materials.
(6) Recycling facilities for apartment buildings.
(a) There shall be included in any apartment building that requires
subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling
area for the collection and storage of residentially generated
recyclable materials. (Only an indoor recycling area shall be
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:427
permitted for any mid-rise or high-rise apartment building.)
The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number and which are consistent with
anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the
area in which the project is located.
(b) The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials by
residents of the apartment building, preferably near, but
clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
(c) The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and
easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles.
Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of
recyclable materials, bins or containers.
(d) Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of
recyclable paper or cardboard and which are located in an
outdoor recycling area shall be equipped with a lid, or
otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
(e) Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of
access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall
be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed
therein.
(f) Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any
outdoor recycling area and shall be developed in an
aesthetically pleasing manner.
L. Screening of exterior mechanical equipment.
(1) Electrical and mechanical equipment shall be located within the
interior of a building wherever possible. When an interior location
is not practical, such equipment shall be placed in a location where
it can be substantially screened from public view. Roof-mounted
equipment shall be located so as to not be visible from the public
road and shall be hidden with parapets or screens of materials
which are in harmony with the building's architecture.
(2) Process equipment, such as stacks, hoppers, compactors, bins,
storage vessels, blowers, compressors, piping, ducting, conveyors
and the like, shall be located and screened so as to minimize the
visual impact on adjacent properties.
(3) Ground-level utilities shall be screened so as to be unobtrusive
when viewed from the public rights-of-way and adjacent uses.
M. Sidewalks and street trees.
§ 223-11 UNION CITY CODE § 223-11
1:428
(1) Location and dimensions of sidewalks.
(a) A sidewalk shall be provided within the right-of-way along both
sides of all streets.
(b) The sidewalk shall be constructed flush with the curb.
(c) The minimum sidewalk width shall be three feet in areas
designed or intended primarily for ground-floor residential use
and six feet in areas designed or intended primarily for groundfloor
nonresidential use.
(2) Trees.
(a) One tree shall be provided for each 25 feet of sidewalk. Trees
shall be evenly spaced to the extent practicable. Trees shall be
planted at least three feet from the curb, but shall be situated
so as to provide at least four feet of clear sidewalk between the
tree and the right-of-way line.
(b) All trees coming from the nursery shall have straight stems of
2.5 inches in caliper or more, with single leaders. Trees shall
be of a species capable of tolerating harsh urban conditions
and branching a minimum of seven feet from the ground. All
trees shall be subject to approval by the enforcing agency.
(c) Trees shall be planted as soon as is practicable following the
final paving of the sidewalk.
(d) Trees shall not interfere with traffic signs, streetlights and fire
hydrants.
(e) Any tree planted under a utility wire or wires shall have a
mature height under 20 feet.
(f) Upon planting, trees shall be supported, maintained and
watered thoroughly and shall be subject to inspection by the
enforcing agency.
(g) The recommended types of street trees are as follows:
White oak Honey locust Bartlett pear
Black oak London plane Callery pear
Scarlet oak Sweet gum Cornelian cherry
Red oak Sour gum Sargent cherry
Tree selection should consider localized conditions, such as
amount of traffic and presence of commercial uses. Small or
large-leaf lindens, poplar, elm, ash, soft maple or sycamore
trees are not recommended.
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:429
(h) Trees must be free of susceptibility to infestation by the Asian
longhorn beetle.
(3) Trenches and materials. To provide adequate soil for the roots of
street trees, a continuous trench or system of root path trenches
shall be required underneath sidewalks.
(a) A continuous trench shall be at least 30 inches in depth by six
feet in width and shall consist of structural soil or open-graded
crushed aggregate mixed with soil. Where two or more trees
are planted, the trench shall be continuous for the length of the
planting. Pavement materials over continuous trenches shall
have frequent open joints to admit air and water into the
trench.
(b) If the root path trench method is selected, loam-filled trenches
measuring four inches wide by 12 inches deep shall be
provided under the base course to guide the growth of tree
roots. For each tree, four radial trenches extending the length
and width of the section of sidewalk being constructed shall be
provided at ninety-degree angles. Where two or more trees are
planted, trenches shall connect adjacent trees.
(c) Underground drainage structures may be required by the
enforcing agency.
(d) The design details of sidewalks and trenches shall be
appropriate to the method selected and shall subject to
acceptance by the enforcing agency.
N. Streets, alleys and pedestrianways.
(1) Relationship of streets, alleys and pedestrianways to blocks. All
blocks shall be bounded by streets, pedestrianways, municipal
boundaries and/or natural features in accordance with the
provisions of § 223-11C. Blocks may be penetrated by
pedestrianways or alleys which serve the rear of buildings.
(2) Dead-end streets are prohibited except where through streets are
made infeasible by natural features or railroad rights-of-way.
(3) Any new streets or alleys or extensions of existing streets or alleys
should be dedicated to the City, conditioned upon the City's
acceptance of such improvement. If a developer chooses to make a
street or alley private, a permanent public easement shall be
provided to allow, at minimum, unimpeded pedestrian access to the
street or alley.
(4) All street names shall be subject to approval by the approving
authority. An extension of an existing street shall have the same
name as the existing street. No street shall have a name which will
§ 223-11 UNION CITY CODE § 223-11
1:430
duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the name of
an existing street.
(5) Right-of-way width.
(a) The minimum right-of-way width of a new street which is not
an extension of an existing street shall be 50 feet, except that
wider streets shall be permitted where deemed necessary to
accommodate anticipated vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic
or to accommodate an aesthetic feature such as a landscaped
center median island. The minimum right-of-way width of a
new alley which is not an extension of an existing alley shall be
11 feet for one-way traffic and 22 feet for two-way traffic. The
minimum right-of-way width of a pedestrianway shall be 10
feet.
(b) The right-of-way width of a new street, alley or pedestrianway
which is an extension of an existing street, alley or
pedestrianway shall be the same as the right-of-way width of
the existing street, alley or pedestrianway.
(6) On-street parking. All streets shall provide for parallel or angled
parking on both sides of the street. Alleys are not required to
provide for on-street parking.
(7) Cartway width. The minimum and maximum cartway widths of a
new street or alley shall be as follows:
(a) One-way street with parallel parking on both sides: 30 feet.
(b) Two-way street with parallel parking on both sides: 35 feet.
(c) One-way street with angled parking on one side and parallel
parking on the other side: 44 feet.
(d) Two-way street with angled parking on one side and parallel
parking on the other side: 49 feet.
(e) One-way street with angled parking on both sides: 55 feet.
(f) Two-way street with angled parking on both sides: 60 feet.
(g) One-way alley: nine feet.
(h) Two-way alley: 18 feet.
(8) Intersections.
(a) Offset. New intersections along one side of an existing street
should coincide with existing intersections on the other side of
the same street. Where intersections do not coincide, the
minimum offset between two intersections shall be 150 feet for
the intersection of two streets and 100 feet for the intersection
of a street and an alley.
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:431
§ 223-12. Construction requirements.
(b) Curb return radius. In general, the curb return radius at
intersections should be 15 feet. A smaller or larger curb return
radius may be permitted where appropriate. Smaller curb
return radii induce slower vehicle turning movements and are
safer for pedestrians, while larger curb return radii may be
necessary to allow for turning movements by large vehicles
such as buses and trucks.
(9) Curves. Streets should be straight whenever possible to conform to
the City's historic grid pattern. Where curved streets are necessary,
they should be designed in a manner that conforms with current
engineering practices for the volume of traffic they are expected to
carry and that is acceptable to the enforcing agency.
(10) Drainage. All streets and alleys shall have curb and gutter on both
sides that meet the requirements of § 223-11D. Pedestrianways
shall provide for curb and gutter or natural drainage, as
appropriate.
(11) Sidewalks. All streets shall have sidewalks and street trees on both
sides that meet the requirements of § 223-11M. Sidewalks and
street trees are not required for alleys.
(12) Grading, pavement and subgrade of streets, alleys and
pedestrianways shall be constructed to standards that conform to
current engineering practices for the volume of traffic they are
expected to carry and that are acceptable to the enforcing agency.
Alleys should be paved with materials such as cobbles that are
designed to slow traffic. The approving authority may also require
the use of such materials in portions of streets, at crosswalks and/
or at intersections where needed to slow traffic.
A. City standards. All standards and specifications of the City as now or
hereafter adopted, if any, shall govern the design, construction and
installation of all required improvements. Failure of the developer, his
contractor or agent to conform to said specifications shall be just cause
for the suspension of the work being performed, in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code. No developer shall have the right to
demand or claim damages from the City, its officers, agents or servants
by reason of said suspension.
B. Other standards. In the event that the City has not adopted standards
for a specific type of improvement, then generally accepted engineering
standards, as set forth in current engineering and construction manuals
as may be approved and modified by the enforcing agency for a specific
situation, shall be used.
C. Grades. All construction stakes and grades shall be set by or under the
supervision of a licensed land surveyor. One copy of all cut sheets shall
§ 223-11 UNION CITY CODE § 223-12
1:432
be filed with the enforcing agency prior to the commencement of any
construction.
D. Approved plans. Prior to commencement of construction of required
improvements, the enforcing agency shall have received and approved
the complete plans and profiles of all improvements to be installed or
constructed. No improvements shall be accepted by the governing body
and no performance guaranties released until the enforcing agency has
received and approved drawings showing the plans, grades and profiles
of all improvements as finally constructed. Plans approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be signed and
dated by the Board's Chairman and Secretary.
E. Site conditions. During construction, the site shall be maintained and
left each day in a safe, clean and orderly manner, and any condition
which could lead to personal injury or property damage shall be
immediately corrected by the developer or upon an order by the
Construction Code Official or other authorized personnel.
F. Disposal of dead trees, litter, building materials. All stumps, litter,
rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, debris and excess or scrap
building materials shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the
request of and to the satisfaction of the Construction Code Official prior
to issuing an occupancy permit. No such refuse shall be buried on the
site.
G. Changes in elevation.
(1) No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or
site by the removal of earth to another lot or site other than as
shown on an approved preliminary plan.
(2) Minimal changes in elevation or contours necessitated by field
conditions may be made only after approval by the enforcing
agency. All said changes shall be shown on the final plan and
indicated as a change from the preliminary, or if final approval has
been granted, all changes shall be shown on the as-built plans.
H. Excavations. No excavation shall be created or maintained, except
when required for the foundations of structures or in connection with
and during the installation of facilities for permitted uses. Such
excavation shall be used for the intended purpose or shall be refilled to
the average surrounding ground level, in such a manner as to prevent
the collection of water, erosion of earth or collapse or sliding of banks,
within six months from the date of commencement of such excavation.
I. Topsoil removal. The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits.
J. Preconstruction meeting. Prior to the commencement of construction,
the developer shall arrange for and attend a preconstruction meeting in
conformance with the requirements of the enforcing agency.
§ 223-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-12
1:433
§ 223-13. Improvements.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the applicant shall have installed
or constructed improvements required by the approving authority or have
posted a performance guaranty or surety sufficient to cover the costs of
said improvements. The approving authority may solicit local, county, state,
federal, public or semipublic agencies and knowledgeable individuals on
what improvements shall be required. Improvements recommended by
other agencies, such as a utilities authority, county, state or other
governmental agencies, may be required by the approving authority as a
condition of final approval.
K. Prohibited materials. [Added 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 012015;
amended 12-15-2015]
(1) The following four construction materials, and any other similar or
like materials, are specifically prohibited for all new construction of
a building facade or other street frontage:
(a) Thin brick;
(b) Tile;
(c) Synthetic stucco; and
(d) Hardy planks.
(2) This subsection is applicable on new construction only.
§ 223-12 UNION CITY CODE § 223-13
1:434
ARTICLE IV
Development Review Procedures and Plat Details
§ 223-14. Regulation of land development.
Regulation of land development and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to development applications is an exercise of valid police power
delegated by the state to the City. The applicant shall comply with
reasonable conditions laid down by the approving authority for design,
dedication, improvements, and the use of the land to conform to the
physical and economical development of the municipality and to the safety
and general welfare of the future residents and owners in the development
and the community at large.
§ 223-15. County Planning Board report.
Where County Planning Board review or approval is required on a
subdivision or site plan, the approving authority shall condition any
approval it grants upon either timely receipt of a favorable report by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board due
to its failure to submit a report within the required time period. If the
county's report is negative or attaches conditions, the original action by the
municipal approving authority shall be null and void, and a new resolution
shall be adopted which considers the County Planning Board's report.
§ 223-16. Granting of exceptions.
The approving authority, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval and preliminary site plan approval, shall have
the power to grant such exceptions from the development requirements and
standards in Article III of this chapter as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the provisions for subdivision or site plan
review and approval if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions
of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question. Exceptions from
N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site Improvement Standards, as adopted and
amended, may be granted consistent with RSIS requirements.
§ 223-17. Exemptions from subdivision regulations.
Divisions of land not considered a subdivision as defined in the Municipal
Land Use Law shall be exempt from compliance with the requirements
of this chapter. Unless exempted from the subdivision regulations by the
approving authority, no person can transfer, sell, or agree to transfer or sell,
as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of subdivision for which
approval is required.
§ 223-18. Simultaneous review.
The approving authority shall have the power to act upon subdivisions,
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously without the developer making
§ 223-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-18
1:435
further application or the approving authority holding further hearings. The
longest time period for action by the approving authority, whether it be
for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever
approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer in conjunction
with a site plan or subdivision, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 223-19. Site plan approval required.
A site plan approval is required for all developments which do not meet the
definition of "site plan, exempt."
§ 223-20. Submission of concept plan for minor and major
developments.
§ 223-21. Submission of preliminary plat for major developments.
A. Submittal of a concept plan is optional. Any applicant may be placed on
the agenda of a regular meeting of the Planning Board for discussion on
an informally prepared plat. The purpose will be to review concepts to
assist the applicant in the preparation of subsequent plans. Other than
classification, no decisions will be made, no hearings held, and no
formal action taken on an informal plat.
B. Filing procedure. The developer shall file with the administrative officer
at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the approving authority 14
copies of the informal plat, a narrative description of the proposal by
the developer, and the applicable fee and escrow amounts. In
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, the fee charged for
informal review shall be credited toward the fee for preliminary review
at the time of preliminary submission.
C. Action by the approving authority. The approving authority shall hear
the application at a public meeting and, if appropriate, shall determine
whether the application is to be classified as a major or minor
development and shall render such additional advice as to the
approvals or variances required as a part of the review process.
Discussion on the substantive aspects of the application shall not be
binding on either the applicant or the approving authority.
A. Filing procedure.
(1) Preliminary plats are required for all major site plans and major
subdivisions.
(2) The developer shall submit to the administrative officer at least 21
days prior to the public meeting of the approving authority:
(a) One original and 13 copies of the preliminary site plan;
(b) One original and 13 completed copies of the application for
preliminary approval;
§ 223-18 UNION CITY CODE § 223-21
1:436
(c) One original and 13 copies of the area map and property
owners lists;
(d) One original and one copy of a proposed notice to owners
within 200 feet;
(e) One original and one copy of a proposed public notice
(advertisement);
(f) One original and one completed copy of the preliminary site
plan checklist;
(g) Two completed copies of the County Planning Board
application form;
(h) Two copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions and
easements applying to the land being developed;
(i) Two copies of the drainage calculations, soil erosion and
sediment control data as required in Article III of this chapter,
the applicable fee and escrow; and
(j) One original and one copy of the certification by the Tax
Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(3) Additional requirements may be contained within the relevant
checklists for development applications.
B. Actions following filing.
(1) The administrative officer shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the
submission as a complete application. If rejected, the applicant
shall be notified within 45 days of submission.
(2) If accepted as a complete application, a public hearing date shall be
set and notice given. The applicant shall be responsible for
providing public notice as required by law.
(3) Upon submission of a plat, the administrative officer shall submit
one copy of the plat and supporting data to the enforcing agency,
and any other agency or person as directed by the approving
authority for their review and action. Each shall have not more than
30 days from receipt of the plat to report to the approving
authority. In the event of disapproval, such report shall state the
reasons therefor. If any agency or person fails to report to the
approving authority within the designated period, said plat shall be
deemed to have been approved by them.
(4) Preliminary approval of a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of the date of a complete
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
§ 223-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-21
1:437
the developer. Otherwise, the approving authority shall be deemed
to have granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
(5) The approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary site plan
approval within the following time periods unless some further
time has been consented to by the developer:
(a) A site plan for 10 acres of land or less: within 45 days of the
date of a complete submission.
(b) A site plan of more than 10 acres: within 95 days of the date of
a complete submission.
(6) If the approving authority requires any substantial amendment in
the layout of improvements in either a site plan or subdivision as
proposed by the developer, and that plan has been the subject of a
hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original
application for development. The approving authority shall, if the
proposed development complies with this chapter, grant
preliminary approval.
(7) The approving authority may approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions the application. The decision shall be in writing and
shall be sent to the applicant and the newspaper as required by the
Municipal Land Use Law. If the approving authority grants
preliminary approval, its Chairman and Secretary (or the Vice
Chairman or Assistant Secretary in their absence, respectively)
shall sign each page of the plat indicating approval. If the plat is
conditionally approved, it shall not be signed until all conditions are
complied with; if all conditions are not complied with within 90
days from the date of the meeting at which a plat was conditionally
approved, the conditional approval shall lapse.
(8) Preliminary approval shall, except as provided in Subsection
B(8)(a) below, confer upon the applicant the following rights for a
three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to, use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and offtract
improvements; any requirements peculiar to site plan
approval, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the City from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as related to
public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary plat.
§ 223-21 UNION CITY CODE § 223-21
1:438
§ 223-22. Submission of final plat for minor and major
developments.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority
may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total
extension of two years, provided that if the design standards
have been revised by ordinance such revised standards may
govern.
(d) In the case of a development for an area of 50 acres or more,
the approving authority may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection B(8)(a), (b) and (c) above for such period of time,
longer than three years, as shall be determined by the
approving authority to be reasonable taking into consideration
1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval; 2) the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section(s) awaiting final approval; 3) economic conditions; and
4) the comprehensiveness of the development, provided that, if
the design standards have been revised, such revised
standards may govern.
A. Filing procedure.
(1) The developer shall file with the administrative officer at least 21
days prior to the meeting of the approving authority:
(a) Fourteen paper prints of the plat;
(b) One original and 13 completed copies of the application form
for final approval;
(c) One original and 13 copies of the area map and property
owners' list;
(d) One original and one copy of a proposed notice to owners
within 200 feet of the subject property;
(e) One original and one copy of a proposed public notice
(advertisement);
(f) One original and one completed copy of the final plat checklist;
(g) Two completed copies of the County Planning Board
application form;
(h) The performance guarantee approved by the enforcing agency
including off-tract improvements, if any;
(i) The applicable fee and escrow;
§ 223-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-22
1:439
(j) Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date;
and
(k) Certification by the Soil Conservation District pursuant to the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, Chapter 251 of the
Laws of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.).
(2) Additional requirements may be contained within the relevant
checklists for development applications.
(3) Where utility services are to be extended to a property or into the
tract, the final plat shall be accompanied by letters directed to the
Chairman of the approving authority and signed by a responsible
officer of the water company, sewer authority, and utility which
provides gas, telephone and electricity that has jurisdiction in the
area. Such letters shall approve each proposed utility installation
design and state who will construct the facility.
(4) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the enforcing
agency acknowledging receipt of a map showing all utilities and
other improvements (both in the development and off-tract
improvements) in exact location and elevation; that the Engineer
has examined the drainage, erosion, stormwater control, and
excavation plans and found that the interests of the City and all
nearby properties are fully protected; identifying those portions of
any improvements already installed; and that the developer has
either:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the preliminary plat approval
with a maintenance guarantee accompanying the final plat; or
(b) Posted a performance guarantee that has been approved by the
enforcing agency.
B. Actions following filing.
(1) The approving authority shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates conform to the standards
established by this chapter, the conditions of preliminary approval,
and the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:26A, B and C. Deviations from preliminary approval that are
determined to be minimal by the administrative officer shall not
require the developer to submit another application for preliminary
approval.
(2) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer,
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. An approved final plat shall be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the approving authority (or the Vice Chairman or
Assistant Secretary in their absence, respectively). Failure of the
§ 223-22 UNION CITY CODE § 223-22
1:440
approving authority to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the approving authority to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the county
recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3) or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6), the approving authority shall condition any approval
that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report from the
County Planning Board or upon their failure to submit a report
within the required time period.
(4) Final approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the
date of municipal approval unless within such period a plat in
conformity with such approval, including any conditions imposed
by the approving authority, and in conformity with the provisions of
the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:26A, B and C), or
a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by
the developer with the county recording officer, the City Engineer
and the City Tax Assessor. Such plat or deed accepted for such
filing shall have been signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
approving authority (or the Vice Chairman or Assistant Secretary in
their absence, respectively). In reviewing the application for
development for a proposed minor subdivision the approving
authority may accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing
Law, provided that if the developer chooses to file the minor
subdivision by plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform with
the provisions of said law.
(5) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording
officer. The approving authority may for good cause shown extend
the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190
days from the date of signing of the plat. No subdivision plat shall
be accepted for filing by the county recording officer until it has
been approved by the approving authority as indicated on the
instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
approving authority (or the Vice Chairman or Assistant Secretary in
their absence, respectively) or a certificate has been issued as to
the failure of the approving authority to act within the required
time. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary shall not be
affixed until the developer has posted the required guarantees. If
the county recording officer records any plat without such
approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon
request of the municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the
§ 223-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-22
1:441
§ 223-23. Plat design standards for subdivisions.
official records. It shall be the duty of the county recording officer
to notify the Planning Board in writing within seven days of the
filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of
filing, and official number.
(6) Provided the approved final subdivision plat has been filed with the
county recording officer, the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval first granted to a site plan or a major
subdivision and all other rights conferred upon the developer
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, whether conditionally or
otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
case of final approval. If the developer has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval, the approving authority may extend
such period of protection for extensions of one year, but not to
exceed three extensions. Upon granting of final approval, the rights
conferred upon the applicant by the granting of preliminary
approval shall be terminated.
(7) Provided the approved final plat of a minor subdivision has been
filed with the county recording officer, the zoning requirements and
general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise,
upon which minor subdivision approval was granted, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of subdivision
approval.
(8) The developer shall submit three copies of the approved final plat
to the administrative officer for distribution and shall supply one
translucent cloth or Mylar copy to the administrative officer.
A. Plat conformity. No development application shall be accepted unless
submitted in plat form and no plat, other than an informal plat as set
forth in this article, shall be accepted for consideration unless it
conforms to the following requirements as to form, content and
accompanying information. All plats shall be prepared by qualified
professionals as set forth in N.J.A.C. 13:40.
B. The concept plan for subdivisions shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a
graphic scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall contain
the following: [Amended 5-21-2013]
(1) Existing and proposed street and lot layout, showing that portion
proposed for development in relation to the entire tract.
(2) Existing lot lines to be eliminated.
(3) Area of original tract.
(4) Contours based on USGS data.
(5) Approximate location of existing structures and uses.
§ 223-22 UNION CITY CODE § 223-23
1:442
(6) All setback lines as well as the distances between buildings and
proposed or existing lot lines.
(7) Approximate location of all streams, lakes and drainage rights-ofway
including the direction of flow of all streams, brooks, and
drainage rights-of-way; and the approximate location of flood
hazard areas and floodway lines, steep slopes greater than 10%,
wetlands and swamps based on Soil Conservation Service, USGS or
Department of Interior data.
(8) Zoning district(s).
(9) The name, address, signature, and phone number of the owner,
developer, and person preparing the plat.
(10) A key map with North arrow showing the entire development and
its relation to surrounding areas.
C. The preliminary subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a
graphic scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet and shall be based
on a certified boundary survey and drawn by a land surveyor licensed in
New Jersey with design and improvements drawn by a professional
engineer licensed in New Jersey. If more than one sheet is required to
show the entire subdivision, a separate composite map shall be drawn
showing the entire subdivision on one sheet and the sheets on which
the various sections are shown. The preliminary subdivision plat shall
contain the following: [Amended 5-21-2013]
(1) Key map with North arrow showing the entire subdivision in
relation to surrounding areas including the names of principal
roads and at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(2) Title block with the name of the subdivision; any development
names previously associated with the application; the name of the
municipality; Tax Map sheet, block and lot number; date of
preparation and most recent revision; meridian; North arrow;
graphic scale; the names, addresses, phone numbers, and
signatures of the owner, developer and person(s) who prepared the
plat(s) including the seal of the latter; and space for the application
number.
(3) The names of all property owners within 200 feet of the boundaries
of the development as disclosed on the most recent municipal tax
records, and showing adjoining property in common ownership
with the land on which the subdivision is proposed.
(4) Tract acreage to the nearest 1/1000 of an acre; the number of new
lots; each lot line dimension scaled to the nearest foot; and each lot
area to the nearest square foot.
(5) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals. All elevations
shall be related to a bench mark noted on the plan and wherever
§ 223-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-23
1:443
possible be based on United States Geological Survey mean sea
level datum.
(6) Location of existing natural features such as soil types, slopes
exceeding 10%, wooded areas, rock outcroppings, views within the
development and the location of individual trees having a diameter
of eight inches or more measured five feet above ground level. Soil
types shall be based on United States Soil Conservation Service
data.
(7) Plans and computations for any storm drainage system including
the following:
(a) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or on lands or
roads adjacent to the development and for all required off-site
and off-tract drainage improvements showing size, profile and
slope of the lines, direction of flow, and the location of each
catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert and headwall.
(b) The location and extent of any proposed dry wells, ground
water recharge basins, detention basins, flood control devices,
sedimentation basins or other water conservation devices.
(8) The names, locations and dimensions, including paved widths and
right-of-way widths, of all existing streets within a distance of 200
feet of the boundaries of the development; existing driveways and
any connections from proposed streets, sidewalks, and bike routes
in the development to any adjoining streets, sidewalks or bike
routes.
(9) Plans, cross sections, center-line profiles, tentative grades and
details of all proposed and existing streets in the tract and within
200 feet of the development based on USGS datum, together with
full information as to the disposal of surface drainage, including
plans, cross sections and profiles of streets, storm drains and
drainage structures. Typical street cross sections shall indicate the
type and width of pavement and the location of curbs, sidewalks,
bike routes, typical underground utilities, and shade tree planting.
At intersections, the sight triangles, radii of curblines, crosswalks
and street sign locations shall be shown. Final street naming may
be deferred. For streets where curbs and/or sidewalks are to be
provided, separate curb and sidewalk profiles shall be required at
street intersections.
(10) The names, locations, paved widths, right-of-way widths, and
purpose(s) of existing and proposed easements, streets, and other
rights-of-way in the subdivision. The text of any deed restriction
shall be included.
(11) The location and description of all monuments, existing and
tentatively proposed.
§ 223-23 UNION CITY CODE § 223-23
1:444
(12) All proposed lot lines, and all existing lot lines to remain and those
to be eliminated; all setback lines required by the zoning provisions
of this chapter with the dimensions thereof and any municipal
boundary line where the boundary is within the tract or within 200
feet of the tract. Any lot(s) to be reserved or dedicated to public use
shall be identified. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots
within each block shall be numbered in accordance with numbers
assigned by the City Tax Assessor.28
(13) Locations of all existing structures and their use(s) in the tract and
within 200 feet thereof, including all structures on adjacent
properties even if more than 200 feet from the subject tract,
showing existing and proposed front, rear and side yard setback
distances, structures of historic significance, and an indication of
all existing structures and uses to be retained and those to be
removed.
(14) Plans and profiles of proposed improvements and utility layouts
(sanitary sewers, storm sewers, erosion control, stormwater
control, excavation, etc.) showing location, size, slope, pumping
stations, and other details as well as feasible connections to any
existing or proposed utility systems. If service will be provided by
an existing utility company, a letter from that company shall be
submitted stating that service will be available before occupancy of
any proposed structures.
(15) Zoning district(s) and zoning district lines.
(16) An itemization of all improvements to be made to the site in
accordance with the standards specified in Article III and such
other improvements on site, off site, on tract and off tract as the
public interest may require, together with a listing of the work and
materials to be used in installing such improvements including
estimated quantities of necessary materials, sufficient to enable the
enforcing agency to formulate a performance guarantee estimate.
D. The final subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a graphic
scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet unless a larger scale is
approved by the enforcing agency that is large enough to contain
legibly written data on dimensions, bearings, and all other details of the
boundaries. The plat shall be drawn by a licensed land surveyor in
compliance with Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:26A, B and C). If more
than one sheet is required to show the entire subdivision, a separate
composite map shall be drawn showing the entire subdivision on one
sheet and the sheets on which the various sections are shown. The
submission for final plat approval shall show the following, except that
the plat to be filed with the County Recording Officer need only contain
the data required for filing with the county, and all other data may be
submitted on separate sheets: [Amended 5-21-2013]
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 102, Buildings, Numbering of.
§ 223-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-23
1:445
§ 223-24. Plat design standards for site plans.
(1) Signature blocks for the approving authority, City Engineer, and
other endorsements required by law.
(2) Tract boundary lines; municipal boundary line if within 200 feet of
the tract being subdivided; street names; all lot lines and other site
lines and chord bearings, with the distances of all curves, all based
on an actual survey by a land surveyor licensed to practice in the
State of New Jersey; minimum building setback lines; and the area
of each lot shown to the nearest square foot. All dimensions, both
linear and angular, of the exterior tract boundaries shall be based
on and calculated from surveyed traversing which shall have an
apparent error of field course of 1:10,000 or better and shall be
corrected by accepted balancing methods to final errorless closure.
All final exterior and lot boundaries shall be similarly balanced to
final errorless closure.
(3) Block and lot numbers in accordance with established standards
and in conformity with the City Tax Map as approved by the City
Tax Assessor, and all street numbers, where appropriate, shall be
designed as specified by the approving authority.
(4) The final plat shall be accompanied by the following:
(a) A copy of the preliminary plat revised to show all conditions
and changes required by the approving authority at the time of
preliminary approval.
(b) That the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the
owner has given consent to the development.
(c) Appropriate local, county and state approvals.
A. Plat conformity. No development application shall be accepted unless
submitted in plat form, and no plat shall be accepted for consideration
unless it conforms to the following requirements as to form, content
and accompanying information. All plats shall be prepared by qualified
professionals as set forth in N.J.A.C. 13:40-1.1 et seq. [Amended
5-21-2013]
B. Concept site plan review. An informal site plan for review shall include
the same data as required in § 223-23B. This submission shall also show
to scale the lot lines, proposed building(s), proposed use(s), parking,
loading, on-site circulation, driveways, wooded areas, approximate onsite
or on-tract stormwater detention facilities, and water and sewer
service.
C. Preliminary site plan plat.
(1) Every preliminary site plan shall be at a minimum graphic scale of
one inch equals 50 feet; certified by a New Jersey licensed architect
§ 223-23 UNION CITY CODE § 223-24
1:446
or engineer, including accurate lot lines certified by a New Jersey
licensed land surveyor. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain the
entire territory, a separate composite map shall be drawn showing
the entire development on one sheet and the sheets on which the
various sections are shown. The following data shall be shown on
or shall accompany the site plan:
(a) All lot lines and the exterior boundaries of the tract;
(b) North arrow;
(c) Zone district(s) in which the tract is located;
(d) Existing and proposed streets and street names;
(e) Date of original drawing and each subsequent amendment;
(f) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals
throughout the tract and within 100 feet of any building or
paved area under review;
(g) Title of the plan;
(h) Streams, total area to one square foot;
(i) Total number of parking spaces;
(j) All dimensions, area and distances needed to confirm
conformity with the ordinance such as but not limited to
building lengths, building coverage, lot lines, parking spaces,
setbacks, and yards;
(k) A small key map giving the general location of the parcel
within the City; and
(l) A separate map showing the site in relation to all remaining
lands in the present owner's ownership and buildings and
other improvements on all adjacent lots.
(2) Building and use plan.
(a) The plan shall show:
[1] The size, height, location, arrangement and use of all
proposed buildings, structures, including roof
appurtenances, and signs, including an architect's scaled
elevation of the front, side and rear of any structure and
sign to be erected or modified to the extent necessary to
apprise the approving authority of the scope of the
proposed work;
[2] Any existing structures, identified either to remain or to be
removed;
§ 223-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-24
1:447
[3] A written description of the proposed use(s) and
operation(s) of nonresidential buildings including total
employees, members or expected occupancy;
[4] The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the
maximum number of employees on each shift;
[5] Expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic;
[6] Emission of noise, glare, vibration, heat, odor, air and
water pollution;
[7] Safety hazards; and
[8] Anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the building
design.
(b) Floor plans shall be submitted in apartment and townhouse
projects; the number of dwelling units, by type, shall be shown.
(3) Circulation plan. This plan shall show access streets and street
names, acceleration/deceleration lanes, curbs, aisles and lanes,
access points to public streets, sight triangles, traffic
channelization, easements, fire lanes, driveways, number and
location of parking spaces and loading spaces, pedestrian walks,
bikeways and all related facilities for the movement and storage of
goods, vehicles and persons on the site and including light, lighting
standards, signs and driveways within the tract and within 100 feet
of the tract. Sidewalks shall be shown from each building entrance/
exit along expected paths of pedestrian travel, such as but not
limited to access parking lots, driveways, other buildings on the
site, and across common yard areas between buildings. Plans shall
be accompanied by cross sections of new streets, aisles, lanes,
driveways, sidewalks, and bikeways. Any expansion plans for the
proposed use shall show feasible parking and loading expansion
plans to accompany building expansion.
(4) Natural resources plan. This plan shall show existing and proposed
wooded areas, buffer areas and/or sodded areas, ground cover,
retaining walls, fencing, signs, recreation areas, shrubbery, trees,
and other landscaping features. These plans shall show the location
and type of man-made improvements and the location, number,
species, and caliper of plant material and trees to be located on the
tract. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage, and the planting of
coniferous and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to
maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation in the area and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The
established grades and landscaping on any site shall be planned for
aesthetic, drainage, and erosion control purposes. The grading
§ 223-24 UNION CITY CODE § 223-24
1:448
plan, drainage facilities, and landscaping shall be coordinated to
prevent erosion and siltation as outlined under the provisions in
Article III as well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or
man-made drainage system is sufficient to handle the water from
the site and contributing upstream areas.
(5) Utilities plan. This plan shall show the existing and proposed
locations of all drainage and stormwater runoff; open space;
common property; fire, gas, electric, telephone, sewerage and
waterline locations; and solid waste collection and disposal
methods, including proposed grades, sizes, capacities, and
materials to be used for facilities installed by the developer.
Installations by utility companies need only show their locations on
the plat. All easements acquired or required on tract and off tract
shall be shown, and copies of legal documentation that support the
granting of an easement by the owner of an off-tract lot shall be
included. All proposed lighting shall be shown, including the
direction, angle, and height of each source of light. All utilities shall
be installed underground. All required state and federal approvals
for environmental considerations shall be submitted prior to
preliminary approval or shall include facilities to comply with the
drainage provisions in Article III. All public services shall be
connected to an approved public utilities system where one exists.
D. Final site plan plat. The final plat shall follow preliminary site plan
requirements and shall include all changes required as a condition of
preliminary approval.
§ 223-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-24
1:449

ARTICLE V
Administrative Provisions
§ 223-25. Considerations in decisionmaking.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the City of Union City. Any action taken by the Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Adjustment under the terms of this chapter shall give
the primary consideration to the requirements of this chapter and to the
welfare of the entire community.
§ 223-26. Amendments.
All provisions of this chapter may be amended in accordance with
applicable laws.
§ 223-27. Board of Adjustment procedures.
A. Establishment and composition.
(1) A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven regular members
and four alternate members, all residents of the City of Union City
appointed by the Board of Commissioners to serve for terms of four
years and two years respectively, from January 1 of the year of their
appointment. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Board of Commissioners as "Alternate No. 1,"
"Alternate No. 2," Alternate No. 3," and "Alternate No. 4." The
terms of the members first appointed under this chapter shall be so
determined that to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration
of such terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular members,
evenly over the first four years after their appointment, and in the
case of alternate members, evenly over the first two years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no regular
members shall exceed four years, and that the initial term of no
alternate member shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of
each regular member shall be four years and the term of each
alternate member shall be two years. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(3) Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the
term of any present regular or alternate member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the term for which they were appointed.
§ 223-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-27
1:451
(4) No member of the Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office
of the City of Union City or be employed by the City of Union City.
(5) No member of the Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act on
any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
(6) A member may, after public hearing if he requests it, be removed by
the governing body for cause.
(7) A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
B. Board of Adjustment authority. The Board of Adjustment shall have such
powers as are granted in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
C. Appeals and applications.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party. Each appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of
appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken. Said notice
of appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
(2) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining
order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the
Superior Court of New Jersey on the application or notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(3) Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Twelve copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing
the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to
the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans,
maps, or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
chapter or any rule of Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 223-27 UNION CITY CODE § 223-27
1:452
§ 223-28. Planning Board procedures.
(4) Any application under any subsection of this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency, including the
Planning Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall
not extend the period of time within which the Board of Adjustment
shall act.
(5) Applications for interpretations shall comply with the requirements
of the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
D. Power to reverse or modify decisions. In exercising its power, the Board
of Adjustment may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and make
such other requirements, decisions or determination as ought to be
made and, to that end, have all the powers of the administrative officer
from whom the appeal was taken.
E. Time for decision. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision in
accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Establishment and composition.
(1) A Planning Board is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 et seq., consisting of nine regular members and two
alternate members consisting of the following four classes:
(a) Class I: the Mayor or his designee.
(b) Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a
member of the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor,
provided that if there is an Environmental Commission, the
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among
the Class IV members.
(c) Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by
it.
(d) Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed
by the Mayor.
(2) The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of Education.
Alternate members shall be appointed by the appointing authority
for Class IV members and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV
member of nine-member Planning Boards. Nothing in this chapter
§ 223-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-28
1:453
shall, however, be construed to effect the term of any present
regular or alternate member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which
they were appointed.
B. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
his official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II
and Class III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of
their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a
Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission. The term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for three
years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
(2) The terms of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board
of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever
he is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of
his Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
(3) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent, the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over
the first four years after their appointment, as determined by
resolution of the governing body; provided, however, that no term
of any member shall exceed four years and further provided that
nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years,
except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
(4) Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms
of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year;
provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two years.
(a) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. An alternate member may, after public
hearing if he requests one, be removed by the governing body
for cause.
(b) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall
§ 223-28 UNION CITY CODE § 223-28
1:454
not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must
be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No.
1 shall vote.
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy of any class, including an alternate, shall occur
other than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment as
above provided for the unexpired term.
D. Officers. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from the members of Class IV and shall also select a Secretary who may
or may not be a Board member or another municipal employee.
E. Planning Board Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Planning
Board Attorney. The Planning Board may annually appoint the Planning
Board Attorney who shall be an attorney other than the municipal
attorney. Compensation to be paid to said Planning Board Attorney shall
be established by ordinance adopted by the governing body.
F. Experts and staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for
the services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
G. Powers and duties generally. The Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration
of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall
apply. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
(1) To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for
the physical development of the municipality, including any areas
outside its boundaries, which, in the Board's judgment, bear
essential relation to the planning of the municipality, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
(2) To administer the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(3) To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
(4) To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law regulations.
(5) To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(6) To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects over a term of six years and amendments thereto and
recommend same to the governing body.
§ 223-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-28
1:455
§ 223-29. Previously granted permits and approvals.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in a construction permit,
site plan, or zoning variance which was approved before the enactment of
this chapter, but is in violation of this chapter, provided that construction
based on such a construction permit shall have been started within one
year from the effective date of this chapter, and, in the case of a site plan
or variance a construction permit shall have been issued within one year
following the effective date of this chapter. In all instances the project
shall be continuously pursued to completion, otherwise said approvals and
permits shall be void.
§ 223-30. Compliance required.
All requirements of this chapter shall be met at the time of any erection,
enlargement, moving or change in use. All developments resulting from
subdivision and site plan approvals shall comply with all the design and
performance standards, including conditions imposed by the approving
authority as shown on the approved plat and/or included on the resolution
adopted by the approving authority.
§ 223-31. Effect of new approval.
If there is a prior approval existing on any property that has been granted
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Union
(7) To consider and make a report to the governing body within 35
days after referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a,
and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the
Planning Board by the governing body, pursuant to the provision of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
(8) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment variances
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c from lot area, lot dimensional
setback and yard requirements. Whenever relief is requested,
pursuant to this subsection, notice of a hearing on the application
for development shall include reference to the request for a
variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
(9) To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the governing body for the aid and
assistance of the governing body or other agencies or officers.
H. Advisory Committee. The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a
Citizens Advisory Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning
Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to
vote or take other action required of the Board. Such person or persons
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 223-28 UNION CITY CODE § 223-31
1:456
City that is still in existence at the time another approval is obtained
from either of these Boards, then the prior approval shall be automatically
vacated upon the subsequent approval.
§ 223-32. Conditional uses.
§ 223-33. Escrow deposits, application fees and inspection fees.
A. Before any permit shall be issued for a conditional use, an application
shall be made to the approving authority. The approving authority shall
grant or deny the application after public hearing, but within 95 days of
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. Notice of the hearing for a conditional use shall include reference to all
matters being heard, including site plan and/or subdivision, and the
approving authority shall review and approve or deny the subdivision or
site plan simultaneously with the conditional use application.
C. Failure of the approving authority to act within the required time period
shall constitute approval of the application.
D. In reviewing the conditional use application, the approving authority
shall review the number of employees or users of the property, the
requirements set forth in this chapter, and shall give consideration to all
reasonable elements which would affect the public health, welfare,
safety, comfort and convenience, such as but not limited to the
proposed use(s), the character of the area, vehicular travel patterns and
access, pedestrianways, landscaping, lighting, signs, drainage, sewage
treatment, potable water supply, utilities, and structural location(s) and
orientation(s), and shall conduct a public hearing on the application.
E. A conditional use shall be deemed to be a permitted use in the zoning
district in which it is located if all conditional use standards pertaining
to the conditional use in §§ 223-43 and 223-44 are met, and each
conditional use shall be considered as an individual case.
F. In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof shall
be on the applicant.
G. All conditional uses shall require site plan review and approval by the
approving authority, including changes, modifications or alterations
from one conditional use to another conditional use, or changes,
modifications or alterations within the same conditional use.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment
of a fee schedule for the payment of fees with respect to all applications
submitted to the City of Union City pursuant to the City's zoning and
land use regulations.
B. Procedures.
§ 223-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-33
1:457
(1) Application fees covering administration and overhead shall be
charged to the applicant and shall be submitted at the time of an
application for a review or hearing by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(2) In addition to the fees to be paid herein, the applicant shall submit
escrow deposits at the time of submission of an application for a
review or hearing by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(3) All application fees and escrow funds shall be paid to the City's Tax
Collector in cash, certified check, attorney's check, or money order
made payable to the City of Union City. Application fees and escrow
funds shall be paid to the City Tax Collector with separate certified
checks or money orders. Along with the application fees and
escrow funds, the applicant shall submit a letter breaking out the
totals into its component parts, pursuant to Subsection B(4) and (5)
below.
(4) Where an application involves more than one of the categories
itemized below, the fees and/or escrow deposit applicable to each
category shall be required.
(5) The escrow funds shall be deposited into a separate trust account
by the City, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, and if the deposit
amount required is greater than $5,000, interest will accrue to the
applicant. Disbursements may be made from the escrow fund only
after approval by the City of Union City's Chief Financial Officer.
(6) Escrow funds shall be placed in an escrow account by the Chief
Financial Officer. Such funds shall be used to pay the Board's
Attorney, professional engineer, professional planner, traffic
engineer, and other experts deemed necessary to review and
comment on the application. Said experts shall submit vouchers to
the City for all reasonable and necessary fees for review of the
application, which fees shall be paid from the escrow account in a
manner prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2c and N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16
through 40A:5-18.
(7) Where the review costs exceed the escrow deposit fee, the
applicant shall pay the additional amount within 15 days of the
request. Failure to remit the additional required deposit within the
requested time line shall render the application incomplete, and no
further action or proceedings shall be taken by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment until after compliance. Where the
review costs are less than the amount of the escrow deposit, the
difference shall be returned to the applicant within 120 days of
final disposition of the application.
(8) In the event that an application is withdrawn, application fees are
nonrefundable, but any escrow funds remaining at the time of
withdrawal shall be returned to the applicant. If the same
§ 223-33 UNION CITY CODE § 223-33
1:458
application is resubmitted at a later time, the applicant shall be
required to repay all application fees and establish a new escrow
account.
(9) An application is deemed incomplete until all application fees and
escrow deposits are submitted.
(10)No construction shall commence, nor shall a certificate of
occupancy be issued, until the inspection fees required by
Subsection B(4) of this § 223-33 have been submitted.
C. The schedule of fees and escrow deposits is set forth in § 155-14C of
this Code. [Amended 5-21-2013]
§ 223-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-33
1:459

ARTICLE VI
Zoning
§ 223-34. Districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Union City is hereby divided
into 18 classes of districts, redevelopment districts and overlay districts, as
follows:
Zoning Districts:
R District: Low-Density Residential
R-M District: Medium-Density Residential
C-C District: Center City Core
C-G District: Gateway Commercial
C-N District: Neighborhood Commercial
MU District: Multiple Use
P District: Public
P-A District: Parks-Air Rights
Redevelopment Districts:
D-BG District: Bus Garage Redevelopment
D-RS-A District: Roosevelt Stadium Redevelopment
D-RS-B District: Roosevelt Stadium Redevelopment
D-RS-S District: Roosevelt Stadium Redevelopment
D-ST District: Swiss Town Redevelopment
D-Y District: Yardley Building Redevelopment
Overlay Districts:
HPOD Overlay District: Historic Preservation Overlay District
JFK Overlay District: JFK Boulevard Design Overlay District
PPOD Overlay District: Palisades Preservation Overlay District
UTOD Overlay District: Uptown Transit Oriented Development Overlay
District
§ 223-35. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of these districts are hereby established as
shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map, City of Union City, Hudson County,
New Jersey," dated 3-20-2012, and as may be amended from time to time,
which map accompanies and with all explanatory matter thereon is made
part of this chapter.29
29.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is attached to this chapter.
§ 223-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-36
1:461
§ 223-36. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the location of any boundaries shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 223-37. Filing of copies with City Clerk.
Duly certified copies of this chapter and the Zoning Map, together with all
amendments thereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be open to
public inspection.
§ 223-38. Lots in two or more districts or municipalities.
Where a lot in one ownership of record is divided by one or more district or
municipal boundary lines, the following shall apply:
§ 223-39. Schedule of Bulk Regulations.
The applicable area, yard and building requirements are contained in the
Schedule of Bulk Regulations at the end of this chapter and is hereby made
part of this chapter.
§ 223-40. Permitted uses.
This Zoning article shall be viewed as permissive. After the adoption of this
chapter, no uses or structures shall be permitted in the City which are not
listed as a permitted, accessory or conditional use or unless permitted by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. District boundary lines shall follow street center lines or lot lines or
extensions of and from the same, as such street and lot lines exist at the
time of passage of this chapter, unless such district boundary lines are
referenced by some street line dimension shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
lines of lots or other parcels of record and are not more than 10 feet
distant therefrom, such lot or parcel lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
C. If a district boundary line is not thus referenced or there is doubt in a
particular instance as to what line is determining, the location of such
district boundary line shall be determined by the Zoning Officer by
scaling the Zoning Map.
A. Uses permitted in one district may not extend into another district
where they would not otherwise be permitted.
B. Dimensional requirements shall be measured from lot lines and not
zoning district lines.
§ 223-36 UNION CITY CODE § 223-41
1:462
§ 223-41. Conditional uses.
Notwithstanding compliance with specific conditional use standards
hereinafter set forth, conditional uses shall require site plan approval by the
appropriate approving authority.
§ 223-42. Zoning regulations.
A. R Low-Density Residential District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to preserve the integrity of
existing residential areas by preventing the intrusion of
nonresidential uses into residential neighborhoods and by
maintaining existing development intensity and population density
consistent with residential neighborhood patterns.
(2) Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Three-family dwellings.
(d) Municipal uses.
(e) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(b) Private garages, provided that not more than 50% of the
ground floor area of any dwelling is occupied by attached
garage space.
(c) Noncommercial private swimming pools.
(d) Minor home occupations.
(e) Family day-care homes.
(4) Permitted conditional uses.
(a) Greyfield redevelopment.
(b) Places of worship, subject to institutional use requirements.
(c) Clubs for civic, political, charitable, social service, recreation
or veterans' organizations, subject to institutional use
requirements.
(d) Schools, subject to institutional use requirements.
(e) Nonaccessory parking lots.
§ 223-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:463
B. R-M Medium-Density Residential District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit medium density
residential uses in locations accessible to major roadways,
commercial services, and public facilities.
(2) Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings, subject to the requirements of the R
District.
(b) Two-family dwellings, subject to the requirements of the R
District.
(c) Three-family dwellings, subject to the requirements of the R
District.
(d) Row houses.
(e) Low-rise apartment buildings.
(f) Mid-rise apartment buildings.
(g) Assisted living facilities.
(h) Nursing homes.
(i) Municipal uses.
(j) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(b) Recreation areas.
(c) Minor home occupations.
(d) Family day-care homes.
(4) Permitted conditional uses.
(a) Clubs for civic, political, charitable, social service, recreation
or veterans' organizations, subject to institutional use
requirements.
(b) Public and private parking garages.
(c) Schools, subject to institutional use requirements.
(d) Places of worship, subject to institutional use requirements.
(e) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(f) Nonaccessory parking lots.
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:464
(5) Supplemental requirements.
(a) Minimum distance between apartment buildings: 30 feet.
(b) Minimum building setback from all interior development,
roads, driveways and parking areas: 10 feet.
(c) Minimum accessory building setback from a principal building:
20 feet.
(d) Maximum building length of apartment buildings: 150 feet.
(e) The rear facade of a building face shall not face the front
facade of another building or public street.
C. C-C Center City Core District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to realize the Master Plan's
vision for this area as the primary gateway of the City of Union City,
with iconic architecture, pedestrian-friendly active streetscapes,
public parks, and high-density housing. Design principles for this
district include having new buildings match the scale of existing
historic buildings, encouraging rehabilitation of residential
buildings and preservation of historic buildings, employing a
"pedestrian-first" approach, encouraging retail uses and
prohibiting office and residential uses at street level and centering
development around community buildings and park space.
(2) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Retail sales and personal service establishments.
(b) Offices (upper floors only).
(c) Medical offices (upper floors only).
(d) Apartments (upper floors only) in a low-rise or mid-rise
apartment building that has one or more permitted
nonresidential uses on the ground floor.
(e) Restaurants, excluding drive-through restaurants.
(f) Eating and drinking establishments.
(g) Bars.
(h) Hotels.
(i) Theaters.
(j) Indoor commercial recreation.
(k) Banks, excluding drive-through banks.
(l) Open-air markets.
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:465
(m) Child-care centers.
(n) Municipal uses.
(o) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(b) Outdoor dining: sidewalk cafe areas.
(c) Outdoor dining: private property.
(4) Permitted conditional uses.
(a) Public and private parking garages.
(b) Schools, subject to institutional use requirements.
(c) Places of worship, subject to institutional use requirements.
(d) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(e) Nonaccessory parking lots.
(5) Supplemental requirements.
(a) Minimum setback from a residential district: 1/2 of the
building height, but a minimum of 20 feet.
(b) Maximum front yard setback: 10 feet.
(c) Minimum building height: two stories.
(d) If a nonresidential use is adjacent to a residence district or a
residential use, all facilities and buildings shall be screened by
appropriate fences, walls and landscaping treatment.
(e) All site lighting shall be directed onto the site and shall be
shielded from adjacent residential uses or zones and from the
adjoining street.
(f) Roof structures, machinery, and mechanical equipment, such
as equipment for heating ventilation and air conditioning, shall
be integrated into the design of the buildings.
D. C-G Gateway Commercial District.
(1) Purpose. The Gateway Commercial District is intended to reinforce
a vibrant "gateway commercial core" area and provide amenities,
services, and resources to advance improvements to the public
realm and create a mixed-use area that has a distinct "main street"
identity through the creation of a pedestrian-oriented experience.
The promotion of a vibrant commercial environment and broad
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:466
array of amenities, services, and resources essential to the
neighborhood and community shopping needs of the City with
design controls ensures a compatible relationship to adjacent
residential neighborhoods. The district is further intended to allow
for additional development opportunities while balancing flexibility
and restrictions.
(2) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Retail sales and personal service establishments.
(b) Dry-cleaning establishments.
(c) Offices.
(d) Medical offices.
(e) Apartments (upper floors only) in a low-rise or mid-rise
apartment building that has one or more permitted
nonresidential uses on the ground floor.
(f) Live/work units (upper floors only).
(g) Restaurants, excluding drive-through restaurants.
(h) Eating and drinking establishments.
(i) Bars.
(j) Hotels.
(k) Theaters.
(l) Indoor commercial recreation.
(m) Banks, excluding drive-through banks.
(n) Health clubs.
(o) Community centers.
(p) Child-care centers.
(q) Municipal uses.
(r) Government uses.
(s) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(b) Minor home occupations.
(4) Permitted conditional uses.
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:467
(a) Greyfield redevelopment.
(b) Drive-through banks.
(c) Drive-through restaurants.
(d) Public and private parking garages.
(e) Schools, subject to institutional use requirements.
(f) Places of worship, subject to institutional use requirements.
(g) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(h) Nonaccessory parking lots.
(5) Supplemental requirements.
(a) Minimum setback from a residential district: 1/2 of the
building height, but a minimum of 20 feet.
(b) If a nonresidential use is adjacent to a residence district or a
residential use, all facilities and buildings shall be screened by
appropriate fences, walls and landscaping treatment.
(c) All site lighting shall be directed onto the site and shall be
shielded from adjacent residential uses or zones and from the
adjoining street.
(d) Roof structures, machinery, and mechanical equipment, such
as equipment for heating ventilation and air conditioning, shall
be integrated into the design of the buildings.
E. C-N Neighborhood Commercial District.
(1) Purpose. This zone is intended to provide commercial sales and
service uses for the adjoining neighborhoods.
(2) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Retail sales and personal service establishments.
(b) Offices (upper floors only).
(c) Medical offices (upper floors only).
(d) Apartments (upper floors only) in a low-rise or mid-rise
apartment building that has one or more permitted
nonresidential uses on the ground floor.
(e) Live/work units (upper floors only).
(f) Restaurants, excluding drive-through restaurants.
(g) Eating and drinking establishments.
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:468
(h) Bars.
(i) Banks, excluding drive-through banks.
(j) Health clubs.
(k) Child-care centers.
(l) Municipal uses.
(m) Government uses.
(n) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(b) Minor home occupations.
(4) Permitted conditional uses.
(a) Greyfield redevelopment.
(b) Public and private parking garages.
(c) Places of worship, subject to institutional use requirements.
(d) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(e) Nonaccessory parking lots.
F. MU Multiple Use District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Multiple Use District is to recognize
the existing arrangement of industrial, commercial and residential
properties in close proximity to each other and to encourage
expansion and reinvestment in such properties when adhering to
modern land use controls.
(2) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Low-rise apartment buildings subject to the requirements of
the R-M District.
(b) Mid-rise apartment buildings subject to the requirements of
the R-M District.
(c) Retail sales and personal service establishments.
(d) Offices.
(e) Medical offices.
(f) Dry-cleaning establishments and plants.
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:469
(g) Light industrial.
(h) Self-storage facilities.
(i) Live/work units in conjunction with the adaptive reuse of an
existing building.
(j) Child-care centers.
(k) Municipal uses.
(l) Government uses.
(m) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(b) Minor home occupations.
(4) Permitted conditional uses.
(a) Places of worship, subject to institutional use requirements.
(b) Clubs for civic, political, charitable, social service, recreation
or veterans' organizations, subject to institutional use
requirements.
(c) Drive-through banks.
(d) Car washes.
(e) Public and private parking garages.
(f) Major home occupations.
(g) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(h) Nonaccessory parking lots.
(5) Supplemental requirements.
(a) Minimum setback from a residential district: 1/2 of the
building height, but a minimum of 20 feet.
(b) If a nonresidential use is adjacent to a residence district or a
residential use, all facilities and buildings shall be screened by
appropriate fences, walls and landscaping treatment.
(c) All site lighting shall be directed onto the site and shall be
shielded from adjacent residential uses or zones and from the
adjoining street.
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:470
(d) Roof structures, machinery, and mechanical equipment, such
as equipment for heating ventilation and air conditioning, shall
be integrated into the design of the buildings.
(e) A minimum of one building entrance shall face a public street.
(f) Fire escapes are prohibited on the principal facade of a
building.
(g) Security gates of any kind are prohibited. These include solid
or open gates and roll-up doors.
G. P Public District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit only the principal,
accessory and conditional uses set forth within Subsections G(2)
through (4) below on properties that are owned by the City of
Union City, the Union City Board of Education, the Parking
Authority or other governmental entity. [Amended 8-18-2015]
(2) Permitted principal uses. [Amended 8-18-2015]
(a) Municipal uses.
(b) Government uses.
(c) Schools.
(d) Public parks and playgrounds.
(e) Age-restricted housing and affordable housing in low- or midrise
apartment buildings, only on parking lots that are owned
by the City of Union City, the Union City Board of Education,
the Parking Authority or other governmental entity, subject to
Subsection G(2)(f) through (i) below.
(f) The developers of such parking lots for these additional
principal, permitted uses shall provide a sufficient number of
parking spaces that will account for the number of parking
spaces that will be lost as a result of the development and the
number of parking spaces that are required by the resolution
of approval of the City Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning
Board relative thereto, as applicable.
(g) The development of age-restricted housing and affordable
housing in low- or mid-rise apartment buildings shall not be
permitted on parking lots measuring less than 5,000 square
feet in size.
(h) The development of age-restricted housing and affordable
housing in low- or mid-rise apartment buildings on parking lots
measuring between 5,000 and 9,999 square feet in size shall
comport with the bulk requirements for all other uses set forth
in the Schedule of Bulk Regulations of the Land Development
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:471
Ordinance of the City of Union City as applicable to the R-M
Medium-Density Residential Zone District.30
(i) The development of age-restricted housing and affordable
housing in low- or mid-rise apartment buildings on parking lots
measuring 10,000 square feet or more in size shall comport
with the bulk requirements for mid-rise apartment buildings
set forth in the Schedule of Bulk Regulations of the Land
Development Ordinance of the City of Union City as applicable
to the R-M Medium Density Residential Zone District.31
(3) Permitted accessory uses: accessory buildings having a building
footprint less than 1,000 square feet in area.
(4) Permitted conditional uses: none.
H. P-A Parks-Air Rights District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to encourage decking and
other streetscape improvements over Route 495 to create a public
park to reduce the effects that Route 495 has on dividing the City.
The standards of this zone are intended to create hardscape park
space and do not advocate constructing buildings over Route 495,
with the exception of small buildings of an accessory nature.
(2) Permitted principal uses: public parks and playgrounds within the
air rights of Route 495.
(3) Permitted accessory uses: accessory buildings having a building
footprint less than 1,000 square feet in area.
(4) Permitted conditional uses: none.
I. Redevelopment Districts. The regulations for the following
redevelopment districts shall be in accordance with the respective
redevelopment plan for each district.
(1) D-BG District: Bus Garage Redevelopment.
(2) D-RS-A District: Roosevelt Stadium Redevelopment.
(3) D-RS-B District: Roosevelt Stadium Redevelopment.
(4) D-RS-S District: Roosevelt Stadium Redevelopment.
(5) D-ST District: Swiss Town Redevelopment.
(6) D-Y District: Yardley Building Redevelopment.
J. HPOD Historic Preservation Overlay District.
30.Editor’s Note: The Schedule of Bulk Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
31.Editor’s Note: The Schedule of Bulk Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:472
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Historic Preservation Overlay District
is to provide additional protection to the Monastery of the
Perpetual Rosary (the "Blue Chapel") and the Monastery and
Church of Saint Michael the Archangel historic sites and the
existing residential areas surrounding them by preventing the
intrusion of incompatible uses into the neighborhoods and by
maintaining existing development intensity and population density
consistent with residential neighborhood patterns.
(2) Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Existing institutional uses.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(b) Private garages provided that not more than 50% of the ground
floor area of any dwelling is occupied by attached garage
space.
(c) Noncommercial private swimming pools.
(d) Minor home occupations.
(e) Family day-care homes.
(4) Permitted conditional uses: none.
K. JFK Boulevard Design Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. Areas along John F. Kennedy Boulevard outside of the
commercial core are predominantly nonresidentially zoned. From a
planning perspective, there is concern over the future layout and
scale of development within these areas. It is the intent to preserve,
enhance and improve the existing layout of development. The
overlay district establishes design guidelines and standards for
yards, open space, landscaping, signage, setbacks, connectivity,
and screening. The standards are the basis for development design
in the overlay district unless the requirement of the underlying
zone district standard is more restrictive. In such cases, the more
restrictive standard would govern.
(2) Applicability.
(a) The bulk and design requirements of the overlay zone apply to
all new nonresidential development, expansions, or
redevelopment, except for smaller additions or modification to
an existing use. This exception permits any existing lot in the
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:473
commercial overlay zone on which a building or structure
is located to have additions to the principal building and/or
construction of any accessory building or structures without a
variance from the overlay zone standards and requirements.
An expansion or modification shall meet the following to
qualify for the exception from the overlay zone requirements:
[1] There is no change in the use of the lot or principal
building.
[2] The expansion conforms to the requirements of the
underlying zone district.
[3] The building additions do not cumulatively exceed 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
[4] The development does not disturb more than 5,000 square
feet of ground area.
(b) All residential uses in residential districts shall be governed by
the existing underlying district standards.
(3) Yards, open space, and landscaping.
(a) Off-street parking and loading areas shall not be permitted in
the required front yard setback.
(b) Aboveground detention basins are not permitted in the front
yard area.
(c) A ten-foot buffer shall be located within the minimum yard
setbacks when a nonresidential use adjoins a residential use.
Buffer areas should be located entirely within the property of
the nonresidential use along the edge of parking lots and
property lines that abut residentially zoned lots or uses to
prevent any and all reflection of lights and to prevent
windblown or other debris from being blown or transported to
or be visible from the adjacent or neighboring residential
premises. Buffering should be designed to reduce the impacts
of noise and movement of people and vehicles and to shield
activities from adjacent properties and nearby roadways.
Buffering should consist of fencing, landscaped berms,
evergreens, shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees, plants, or a
combination thereof, and should be installed to have an
immediate positive impact.
(d) A five-foot wide grass/landscaped area shall be established and
maintained along the John F. Kennedy Boulevard roadway
frontage.
(e) Landscaping shall be incorporated at the base of freestanding
signs. A minimum depth of 36 inches should be incorporated
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:474
around the base of the sign to include low-growing shrubs and
ground cover and/or flowering annuals to promote color.
(4) Connectivity between sites. A system of joint-use driveways and
cross-access easements shall be established wherever feasible
along the building site and shall incorporate the following:
(a) A continuous service drive or cross access extending the entire
length of each parcel served to provide for driveway separation
consistent with access management classification system
standards;
(b) Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious
that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross
access via a service drive; and
(c) A unified access and circulation system plan that includes
coordinated or shared parking areas is encouraged.
L. PPOD Palisades Preservation Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this overlay district is to provide for
reasonable control of development within areas of steep slopes
along the Palisades in the City of Union City. The regulations of this
overlay district are intended to minimize the adverse impact
caused by the development of such areas, including, but not limited
to, erosion, siltation, flooding and surface water runoff. The
disturbance of soil and construction and development on steep
slopes and cliff faces creates an additional hazard to the lives and
property of those dwelling on the slopes and below them. The most
appropriate method of alleviating such conditions is through the
regulation of such vegetation and soil disturbances, construction
and development. Therefore, it is determined that the special and
paramount public interest in these slopes justifies the regulation of
property located thereon as provided below, which is the exercise
of the police power by the City for the protection of persons and the
property of its inhabitants and for the preservation of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(2) Establishment of district.
(a) There is hereby established within the City of Union City an
area which shall be known as the Palisades Preservation
Overlay District (PPOD), in which land development and
construction shall be subject to the special regulations
contained in this section.
(b) The PPOD shall be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of
Union City and shall run along the Palisades from 20th Street
to the Jersey City boundary line.
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:475
(c) The PPOD shall prevail upon all land regulated under this
chapter, as well as those properties within a duly adopted
redevelopment area.
(d) All uses permitted in the zone shall meet all setback
regulations and performance standards. This provision shall
apply to any use permitted by right, by conditional use or by
use variance.
(3) Applicability.
(a) Applicants for site plan or subdivision approval shall submit all
information required under this section to the appropriate
approving authority.
(b) Applicants for construction permits, including the construction
of buildings, walls, driveways or other structures or the
clearing of land shall submit an application with the
information required in this section to the City Building
Department whenever development is proposed within the
Palisades Preservation Overlay District to ensure that the
proposed development of the lot will respect the natural
features of the tract and minimize adverse impacts associated
with such clearing and/or construction.
(4) Procedural regulations. The following information shall be
submitted in addition to any information required to be submitted
for site plan and subdivision applications as required in Article IV:
(a) A topographic map of the site at two-foot contour intervals
(drawn in a lighter line weight) where the slope is less than
10%, and ten-foot contour intervals (drawn in a heavier line
weight) where the slope exceeds 10%.
(b) A land form analysis which shows the location and extent of the
site's major landforms, including the top of the cliff, the cliff
face, the side slope and the base of the slope. Any exposed cliff
face shall be shown. The area in each land form category shall
be calculated and shown on the land form analysis.
(c) A physical description of the site which shall include a
technical summary of site characteristics such as soils, loadbearing
capacity, erosion potential, depth to bedrock, etc.
(d) Site grading and development data which shall include the
type and location of development activity, procedures for
grading, excavation, construction access and stockpiling,
extent and phasing of construction and cut and fill operations.
(5) Permitted uses and bulk. The uses permitted in underlying zoning
districts shall be permitted in the PPOD. The applicable bulk
standards for the underlying zones shall apply, as modified by the
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:476
regulations of the PPOD. The standards of the PPOD are the basis
for development design in the overlay zone unless the requirement
of the underlying zone district standard is more restrictive. In such
cases, the more restrictive standard would govern.
(6) Permitted limit of disturbance.
(a) The minimum building setback line from the edge of the cliff
face at the top of the cliff shall be 30 feet. The minimum
building setback line from the edge of the cliff face at the base
of the cliff shall be 65 feet.
(b) For purposes of preservation of the Palisades cliff face, no
portion of any building or structure shall be constructed on
that portion of a lot which has a grade, prior to such
construction, in excess of 30%, or on any portion of the lot,
which lies within 10 feet of the portion having such grade.
(c) Limited disturbance of steep slope areas is permitted under
conditions is referenced herein but only in the following degree
and under said conditions:
Steep Slope Category Maximum Disturbance
5% to 9.99% 70%
10% to 14.99% 40%
15% to 29.99% 10%
30% or greater 0%
(d) No portion of a building built below the Palisades within the
PPOD and within 450 feet of the cliff face, including all
bulkheads, parapets and penthouses, shall extend into the area
occupied by the top 25% of the distance between the top of cliff
and the lowest portion of existing grade of a development site.
(7) Performance standards.
(a) Any exposed soils shall be stabilized both during and after
construction and development.
(b) The number and extent of cuts shall be minimized to prevent
groundwater discharge.
(c) The maximum number of trees and other vegetative cover shall
be preserved.
(d) Soil and rock slippage shall be impeded, and any
environmentally sensitive areas shall be protected.
(e) Improvements shall be designed to follow the natural contours
of the land and to provide the least disruption to the land form.
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:477
(f) Blasting shall not be conducted unless clearly necessary for
site preparation. Blasting shall be conducted during daylight
hours consistent with state and municipal laws.
(8) Design and construction standards.
(a) The lowest lateral dimension of any building greater than three
stories in height must be oriented perpendicular to the Hudson
River.
(b) The uppermost point of a cut slope shall not be higher than the
top of the nearest downhill structure or building.
(c) Vegetation shall be reestablished on all exposed fill slopes.
Exposed graded areas shall be mulched and seeded to provide
a basic ground cover which will prevent erosion and permit
revegetation. In the alternative, these areas may be riprapped
and blended into the natural setting.
(d) Parking spaces and lots in addition to walkways shall not be in
excess of six-percent slope unless a provision is made to ease
pedestrian access either by ramps or steps.
(e) Fill material shall not consist of or include organic material,
nor rocks greater than eight inches in diameter.
(f) Fill material shall be compacted to 90% of maximum density.
(g) No parking structure shall be located so as to hang over the
edge of the cliff face. All such structures shall be depressed
into the ground area.
(9) Minor steep slope areas.
(a) The approving authority or Building Department may
disregard small isolated pockets of steep slope areas that are
under 1,000 square feet in size in their assessment of total
disturbed area where such action would be in the interest of
good planning, not seriously impair the purposes of this
chapter and would otherwise result in practical difficulties to
the applicant.
(b) Where, however, the approving authority or the Building
Department finds such pockets to be significantly proximate
and of such size so as to constitute a substantial contiguous
area, the reviewing authority may consider them significant
and subject to regulation under this chapter. In such case they
would be included in the calculation of disturbed steep slope
area.
(10) Time for decision.
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-42
1:478
(a) Where the request for steep slope disturbances is part of a site
plan, subdivision or variance application, the time periods
regulating those applications shall apply.
(b) Where the request for steep slope disturbance is part of a
construction permit application that does not require site plan
or subdivision approval, the Construction Department shall
approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for a
steep slope disturbance approval within 45 days from the date
of submission of a completed application.
M. UTOD Uptown Transit Oriented Development Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Uptown Transit Oriented Development
(UTOD) Overlay District is to offer incentives to encourage
property owners to develop their properties using transit-oriented
design principles while preserving rights permitted by underlying
district designations. The UTOD Overlay District is established to:
(a) Promote new, well-integrated residential, commercial, office,
institutional and other employment center development close
to the light rail transit station, while protecting and enhancing
existing development;
(b) Ensure that new development takes advantage of compatible,
higher density, transit-friendly design opportunities in close
proximity to transit systems in order to provide options for
economic development;
(c) Manage parking and vehicular access utilizing shared parking
and driveway access to avoid pedestrian conflicts; and
(d) Encourage, through design, configuration, and mix of buildings
and activities, a pedestrian-oriented environment which
provides settings for social interaction and active community
life.
(2) Applicability. To implement the UTOD in a manner consistent with
its stated purpose, the district shall serve as an overlay zone, or
optional development alternative, to the existing underlying zoning
districts as specified on the City's Zoning Map. If a developer/
redeveloper chooses the UTOD overlay option, the standards and
requirements, including permitted uses, described in this chapter
shall apply. Although the underlying zoning remains in place, the
UTOD District designation encourages mixed-use development
close to mass transit systems while enhancing and complementing
existing and adjacent development. An applicant must follow the
provisions of either of the underlying district or the UTOD District.
(3) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Retail sales and personal service establishments.
§ 223-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-42
1:479
§ 223-43. Conditional use standards.
Any use permitted as a conditional use in a particular zoning district shall
comply with the applicable standards pertaining to such use listed in this
section. A conditional use that complies with all such applicable standards
shall be subject to review by the Planning Board. Deviations from the
standards for a particular conditional use listed in this section shall only be
permitted if the Zoning Board of Adjustment grants a variance to permit
such a deviation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(3).
(b) Restaurants and bars, but excluding drive-through windows.
(c) Banks, excluding drive-through banks.
(d) Theaters.
(e) Fitness centers.
(f) Apartments (upper floors only) in a low-rise or mid-rise
apartment building that has one or more permitted
nonresidential uses on the ground floor.
(g) Live/work units (upper floors only).
(h) Offices (upper floors only).
(i) Medical offices (upper floors only).
(j) Child-care centers.
(4) Permitted accessory uses: uses which are customarily incidental
and accessory to the principal use as permitted herein.
(5) Permitted conditional uses: public and private parking garages.
(6) Supplemental requirements.
(a) Development in accordance with the UTOD overlay option
shall comply with the bulk standards of the C-C District.
(b) All nonresidential uses in the UTOD Overlay Zone shall meet
the applicable design standards in Article III.
(c) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the Schedule of
Parking Regulations located within Article VI; however, such
space or spaces may be provided through a shared parking
agreement with the City in accordance with Article III.
A. Car washes. A car wash shall be permitted as a conditional use in the
MU District, provided that it complies with the following standards:
(1) It shall be located on a lot with street frontage of at least 100 feet
on John F. Kennedy Boulevard or Kerrigan Avenue.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
§ 223-42 UNION CITY CODE § 223-43
1:480
(3) A car wash shall be completely enclosed for all operations, except
final hand-drying operations, which may take place on a surface lot.
(4) Outdoor storage and display of accessories, portable signs and
outdoor repair work shall be prohibited at all times. The premises
shall not be used for the sale, rental or display of automobiles,
trailers, mobile homes, boats or other vehicles.
(5) A minimum of eight waiting spaces shall be provided on the
premises. Such spaces may be provided on a surface lot or indoors.
No waiting shall be permitted within the public right-of-way.
(6) Any automatic car wash shall be so soundproofed, the entire
development shall be so arranged, and the operations shall be so
conducted that the noise emanating therefrom, as measured from
any point on adjacent property, shall be no more audible than the
ambient noise emanating from the ordinary street traffic and from
other commercial or industrial uses in the area measured at the
property boundary line.
(7) No vehicles shall be stored outdoors when the business is closed.
(8) There shall be no more than two curb cuts for each street on which
the car wash has frontage, and the maximum width of any curb cut
shall be 10 feet for one-way traffic and 20 feet for two-way traffic.
B. Drive-through banks. A drive-through bank shall be permitted as a
conditional use in the C-G and MU Districts, provided that it complies
with the following standards:
(1) It shall be located on a lot with street frontage of at least 100 feet
on John F. Kennedy Boulevard or Kerrigan Avenue.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
(3) No transaction window or speaker shall be located less than 25 feet
from any property line or 50 feet from a property line of any
residential use or a boundary of the R or R-M District.
(4) Such use shall comply with all applicable City ordinances and state
statutes and regulations pertaining to noise.
(5) No drive-through window shall face any public right-of-way.
C. Drive-through restaurants. A drive-through restaurant shall be
permitted as a conditional use in the C-G District, provided that it
complies with the following standards:
(1) It shall be located on a lot with street frontage of at least 150 feet
on John F. Kennedy Boulevard.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
§ 223-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-43
1:481
(3) No transaction window or speaker shall be located less than 25 feet
from any property line or 50 feet from a property line of any
residential use or a boundary of the R or R-M District.
(4) Such use shall comply with all applicable City ordinances and state
statutes and regulations pertaining to noise.
(5) No drive-through window shall face any public right-of-way.
D. Greyfield redevelopments. A greyfield redevelopment shall be
permitted as a conditional use in the R, C-G and C-N Districts, provided
that it complies with the following standards:
(1) Purpose. The City has determined that greyfields as defined by this
chapter threaten the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Union City. Many of these properties are
contaminated with hazardous substances and pose a health risk to
nearby residents and a threat to the environment. The City finds
that these properties should be treated independently within the
permitted classification of uses with specific redevelopment
standards to encourage their redevelopment and remediation
where contamination is present. Therefore the City finds that
greyfields may be redeveloped in accordance with the following
conditional use standards.
(2) A greyfield may be redeveloped in accordance with the
requirements of the zone in which it is located. Alternatively, a
greyfield may be developed as a mid-rise apartment building if it
complies with the following requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 10 feet or prevailing setback per
§ 223-8B(4).
(d) Minimum side yard: five feet (one), 15 feet (both).
(e) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(f) Maximum building height: four stories/50 feet (five stories/60
feet for lot area of 15,000 square feet or greater).
(g) Maximum building coverage: 50%/70% when parking provided
in building.
(h) Maximum lot coverage: 75%/90% when parking provided in
building.
E. Institutional uses. Institutional uses permitted as conditional uses in
certain zone districts shall comply with the following standards.
Specific uses regulated by this subsection are as follows: clubs in the R,
§ 223-43 UNION CITY CODE § 223-43
1:482
R-M and MU Districts; places of worship in the R, R-M, C-C, C-G, C-N
and MU Districts; and schools in the R, R-M, C-C and C-G Districts.
(1) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum frontage: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: 10 feet. No parking shall be permitted
between the front building line and the street right-of-way.
(4) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(5) Minimum side yards (each): same as zoning district requirements
for permitted uses.
(6) Maximum building height (excluding spires, steeples, cupolas, and
other ornamentation): same as zoning district requirements for
permitted uses.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(8) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(9) Minimum parking setback from property lines: five feet.
F. Major home occupations. A major home occupation shall be permitted
as a conditional use in the MU District, provided that it complies with
the following standards:
(1) The practitioner must be the owner or lessee of the residence in
which the major home occupation is contained.
(2) The practitioner must reside in the home.
(3) The practitioner shall not engage the services of more than two
office employees. Use of the office by groups of other persons shall
not be permitted.
(4) The major home occupation shall not occupy more than 50% of the
total area of the floor where located, excluding space used for a
private garage or 900 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(5) No client shall, in such relationship, remain on the premises
overnight.
(6) No retail sales shall be conducted on the site.
(7) Adequate parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
parking standards of this chapter so that no parking related to the
major home occupation shall occur on the street.
(8) No equipment or process shall be used in such major home
occupation which creates noise, glare, fumes, odors, electrical
interference, medical waste or other nuisance factors detectable to
§ 223-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-43
1:483
the normal senses or to radio, telephone or television equipment off
the lot.
G. Nonaccessory parking lots.
(1) A nonaccessory parking lot shall be permitted as a conditional use
in the R, R-M, C-C, C-G, C-N and MU Districts, provided that it
complies with the following standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum frontage: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum parking setback from property lines: five feet.
(2) Landscaping and/or fencing not less than four nor more than six
feet in height, maintained in good condition, shall be provided
adjacent to side and rear property lines in order to prevent impacts
on adjacent properties.
H. Public and private parking garages. A public or private parking garage
shall be permitted as a conditional use in the R-M, C-C, C-G, C-N, MU
and UTOD Districts, provided that it complies with the following
standards:
(1) Bulk regulations. Parking garages shall adhere to the principal
building setback regulations for the district in which they are
located. The following limitations shall apply in addition to the
setback requirements:
(a) Lot area:
[1] Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
[2] Maximum lot area: 25,000 square feet for a parking
garage serving private uses; 125,000 square feet for a
parking garage serving public uses and located within 100
feet of the public building it is intended to serve.
(b) Lot width:
[1] Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
[2] Maximum lot width: 250 feet for a parking garage serving
private uses; 500 feet for a parking garage serving public
uses and located within 100 feet of the public building it is
intended to serve.
(c) Maximum height. The maximum height for a parking garage
serving private uses shall be the same as for the district in
which it is located.
(d) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage for a
parking garage serving public uses and located within 100 feet
§ 223-43 UNION CITY CODE § 223-43
1:484
§ 223-44. Wireless telecommunications facilities.
A wireless telecommunications facility shall be permitted as a conditional
use in the R-M, C-C, C-G and MU Districts, provided that it complies with
the following standards:
of the public building it is intended to serve shall be 95%. For
other parking garages, the lot coverage requirements for the
district in which the garage is located shall apply.
(2) Principal uses permitted in parking garages. In addition to offstreet
parking, the following uses shall be permitted on ground
level facing the street in a parking garage:
(a) Retail sales and personal service establishments.
(b) Offices.
(c) Medical offices.
(d) Restaurants, excluding drive-through restaurants.
(e) Eating and drinking establishments.
(3) Accessory uses shall be those permitted for the above uses, subject
to all applicable requirements of this chapter.
(4) A parking garage serving public uses and located within 100 feet of
the public building it is intended to serve may be connected to said
building by a pedestrian bridge.
(5) For any parking spaces visible from adjacent properties,
landscaping and/or fencing not less than four nor more than six feet
in height, maintained in good condition, shall be provided adjacent
to side and rear property lines in order to prevent impacts on said
properties.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the location,
placement, operation and maintenance of wireless telecommunication
(WT) technology within the City of Union City.
(1) This section is intended to meet the requirements of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, while at the same time
reasonably regulating WT technology within the City.
(2) This section is also intended to protect the City from the visual or
other adverse impacts of these facilities, while encouraging their
unobtrusive development to provide comprehensive wireless
telecommunications services in the City with its attendant benefits
to residents and businesses.
B. Siting priorities. Pursuant to the needs analysis required by
§ 223-44G(2) below, an application to install, construct, erect, move,
§ 223-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-44
1:485
reconstruct or modify any WT antenna shall be subject to siting
priorities as follows:
(1) If the analysis demonstrates that it is reasonably necessary to
install, construct, erect, move, reconstruct or modify a WT antenna
within the City of Union City, then, subject to all other permitted
conditional use standards, the proposed WT antenna may be
located upon an existing building or other structure within the R-M,
C-C, C-G and MU Districts.
(2) If the analysis demonstrates that it is not reasonably practicable to
install, construct, erect, move, reconstruct, or modify the proposed
WT antenna upon an existing building or structure within the R-M,
C-C, C-G and MU Districts, then, subject to all other permitted
conditional use standards, the proposed WT antenna may be may
be flush-mounted on an existing building within the C-N District
only.
C. WT antennas. WT antennas shall be consistent with the following
requirements:
(1) Microwave dishes, cones, or other antennas used for the purpose of
point-to-point microwave transmission or microwave links are
expressly prohibited.
(2) Platform-mounted or side-arm-mounted antennas of any kind are
expressly prohibited.
(3) Subject to the siting priorities set forth in above, WT antennas may
be flush-mounted on existing buildings or other structures or on
WT towers, provided that:
(a) WT antennas mounted on existing buildings or other structures
shall not, when combined with the height of the building or
structure on which they are located, exceed the maximum
permitted height in the zone or the height of the existing
building or structure, whichever is greater, except when
mounted on the face of new or existing mechanical rooms or
structures on the roof of the building.
(b) WT antennas mounted on WT towers shall not extend beyond
the height limitations for such towers.
(c) WT antennas shall be constructed, finished, painted and
otherwise camouflaged so as to blend in with their background
and minimize their visual impact on the landscape. Decorative
screening of WT antennas shall be provided when mounted on
the roof of a structure.
D. WT towers. WT towers shall be consistent with the following
requirements:
§ 223-44 UNION CITY CODE § 223-44
1:486
(1) WT towers shall be limited to monopole designs only. Freestanding
lattice towers and guyed towers of any kind are prohibited.
(2) Unless technologically infeasible, WT towers shall be designed to
permit co-location of additional antennas.
(3) The maximum height of any WT tower, including any WT antennas
or other equipment mounted thereon, shall not exceed 75 feet,
except where sufficient engineering data clearly establishes that
existing trees or buildings will interfere with the proper operation
of the WT antennas, the height may be increased to a maximum of
100 feet.
(4) No WT tower shall be lighted except as may be required by state or
federal law.
(5) No WT tower shall bear any signs, displays, or advertisements of
any kind except as may be required by law.
(6) WT towers shall be constructed, finished, painted and camouflaged
to blend in with their background and minimize their visual impact
on the landscape.
(7) WT equipment and WT equipment compound. All WT equipment
shall be housed within a WT equipment compound, consistent with
the following requirements:
(a) WT equipment compounds shall be enclosed within a locked
security fence at least seven feet in height, unless located
within or on the roof of an existing building.
(b) No WT equipment compound nor any WT equipment housed
therein shall exceed 12 feet in overall height.
(c) WT equipment compounds, including the fence enclosure, shall
be constructed, finished, painted and camouflaged to minimize
their visual impact on the landscape.
(d) When WT equipment is installed on the roof of a building, the
area of the WT equipment and other structures permitted on
the roof of the building shall not exceed 25% of the total roof
area.
(e) Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of the WT
equipment compound to provide a visual screen or buffer for
adjoining private properties and the public right-of-way.
Required front yard setback areas shall also be landscaped for
the same purpose. All WT equipment shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge seven to 10 feet in height at planting time or
a solid or semisolid fence, or both.
E. Visual impact. The applicant shall demonstrate that all reasonable
efforts were employed to camouflage and minimize the visual impact of
§ 223-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-44
1:487
any WT technology installed or constructed pursuant to the provisions
of the article. All WT technology shall be located to minimize visual
impacts on the surrounding area in accordance with the following
standards. In applying these standards, locations in a higher priority
category under § 223-44B above shall be deemed more acceptable than
lower priority sites.
(1) Sites for WT technology must demonstrate that they provide the
least visual impact on residential areas and public ways. All
potential visual impacts must be analyzed to illustrate that the
selected site provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual
impact of the proposed facility.
(2) WT technology shall be located to avoid being visually solitary or
prominent when viewed from residential areas and the public rightof-
way. Vegetation, tree cover, topographic features and/or other
structures, whether natural or manufactured, shall obscure the
facility to the maximum extent feasible.
(3) WT technology shall be placed to ensure that historically significant
viewscapes, streetscapes, and landscapes are protected. The views
of and vistas from architecturally and/or significant structures shall
not be impaired or diminished by the placement of
telecommunication facilities.
(4) WT technology shall fully conform with all applicable state, federal
and local laws.
(5) Routine maintenance of WT technology shall be limited to the hours
of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
F. Setback requirements for the location of WT technology.
(1) The minimum setback from any school lot line or other lot line on
which a licensed educational facility is located shall be 100 feet.
(2) The minimum setback from the nearest lot line of a one-family, twofamily
or three-family home shall be 100 feet.
(3) No WT technology shall be located in the required setbacks of any
lot.
(4) No WT technology shall be located on any one- to three-family
residential property nor on any nonconforming use.
G. Additional site plan requirements.
(1) In addition to compliance with all applicable zoning and site plan
requirements, applications for approval of WT technology shall
include the following:
(a) The color or colors of the proposed WT equipment and the
camouflage methods used;
§ 223-44 UNION CITY CODE § 223-44
1:488
(b) A map of existing WT technology within the City of Union City
which is owned, leased or otherwise under the custody, control,
or use of the applicant at the time of application, and of sites
within the City of Union City where WT technology is proposed
or projected to be installed, constructed, erected, moved,
reconstructed and/or modified by or for the benefit of the
applicant within the next six months;
(c) A certified load analysis report for the building, structure,
existing WT tower, or proposed WT tower upon which a WT
antenna is proposed to be located, indicating its ability to
support the proposed WT antenna and possible future, colocated
WT antennas;
(d) The approving authority may waive any of these requirements,
for good cause shown, where an application is made to locate
the proposed WT antenna upon an existing building, structure,
or WT tower.
(2) Needs analysis. The needs analysis shall contain documentary
evidence demonstrating the need for the proposed installation,
construction, erection, movement, reconstruction or modification
of any WT technology within the City. This evidence shall include,
at a minimum:
(a) The WT service provider's wireless telecommunications
network layout and coverage area for a radius of at least one
mile from the zone district where the WT technology is
planned, identifying all locations:
[1] In operation as of the filing date of the conditional use
application;
[2] Under construction as of the filing date of the conditional
use application; and
[3] Pending approval before any licensing authority as of the
filing date of the conditional use application.
(b) All results and, to the extent requested by the approving
authority, supporting data derived from tests which must be
conducted to determine before and after signal strength plots.
These results and data:
[1] Shall demonstrate the actual existing signal coverage in
effect at the time of application, contrasted with the
proposed signal coverage which would result from the
proposed installation, construction, erection, movement
reconstruction, or modification of WT technology within
the City of Union City; and
§ 223-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-44
1:489
[2] Shall be certified by a qualified radio frequency engineer.
The City reserves the right to retain a radio frequency
engineer on its own behalf at the applicant's expense to
review the results or data submitted by the applicant.
(c) A search ring of the zone in which the WT technology is
proposed, prepared by a qualified radio frequency engineer
and overlaid on an appropriate background map,
demonstrating the area within the zone where the WT
technology needs to be located in order to provide reasonably
necessary signal strength and coverage to the target cell.
(d) In connection with the signal strength plots and search ring
described above, the applicant must provide a report prepared
by a qualified radio frequency engineer which explains why the
proposed location was selected and which specifically
addresses at a minimum:
[1] If the applicant proposes to install, construct, erect, move,
reconstruct or modify a WT antenna upon an existing
structure or building why it is reasonably necessary to
locate that WT antenna within the City of Union City.
[2] If the applicant proposes to install, construct, erect, move,
reconstruct or modify a WT antenna upon an existing WT
tower:
[a] Why it is reasonably necessary to locate that WT
antenna within the City of Union City; and
[b] Why it is not reasonably practicable to locate or colocate
that WT antenna upon an existing building or
structure within the zone; and
[3] If the applicant proposes to install, construct, erect, move,
reconstruct and/or modify a WT antenna upon a new WT
tower:
[a] Why it is reasonably necessary to locate that WT
antenna within the City of Union City; and
[b] Why it is not reasonably practicable to locate or colocate
that WT antenna upon an existing building or
structure within the zone; and
[c] Why it is not reasonably practicable to locate or colocate
that WT antenna upon an existing WT tower
within the zone.
These requirements do not apply to changing the
direction of any existing WT antenna.
§ 223-44 UNION CITY CODE § 223-44
1:490
[4] The maximum permissible exposure analysis for the power
at which this proposed WT technology is expected to
operate, subject to all applicable state and federal
regulations in effect at the time of the installation.
H. The following criteria shall be considered by the approving authority
prior to the approval or denial of a request for a conditional use
application for WT technology. These criteria may be used as a basis to
impose reasonable conditions on the applicant.
(1) Aesthetics. WT technology shall be located, buffered and
camouflaged to the maximum extent practicable and
technologically feasible to help ensure compatibility with
surrounding land uses. In order to minimize any adverse aesthetic
effect on neighboring residences to the extent possible, the
approving authority may impose reasonable conditions on the
approval of the application including the following:
(a) The approving authority may require the applicant to show
that it has made good-faith efforts to minimize the height of
proposed towers; to co-locate on existing buildings, structures
or WT towers; or to locate proposed new WT towers near
existing towers in an effort to consolidate visual disturbances.
(b) The applicant must submit a copy of its policy regarding colocation
with other potential applicants on any proposed WT
tower.
(c) The approving authority may require the applicant to use
additional camouflage and/or otherwise modify the proposed
construction to minimize the visual impact of the WT
technology.
(2) Radio frequency emissions. The proposed WT antenna shall be
operated such that exposure to the RF emissions in normally
accessible locations remain within Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) exposure guidelines and comply with other
related state or federal regulations or requirements. The approving
authority may impose conditions on the applicant that competent
documentation be provided which establishes that the proposed
WT antenna will comply with these guidelines and requirements,
and that operation of the proposed WT antenna will not interfere
with radio and television reception or with the operation of any
other consumer or medical device.
(3) Removal of WT technology. The applicant shall agree to remove any
WT technology if all or part of any such WT technology becomes
obsolete, is unrepaired for an unreasonable period, or ceases to be
used for its intended purpose for 12 consecutive months.
(a) The City of Union City may, at its sole discretion, require the
applicant to provide a demolition bond to the City of Union City
§ 223-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-44
1:491
for the purpose of assuring the removal of any WT technology
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(b) The applicant will be responsible for providing, on an annual
basis, written estimates to the City of Union City for the cost to
demolish and/or remove the WT technology and to restore the
land upon which it is located. Such estimates will be used to
establish whether any adjustment is required in the amount of
the required demolition bond.
(c) Structural safety. Upon written request from the City of Union
City at any time during the application process or after the
installation, construction, erection, movement, reconstruction,
or modification of any WT technology, the applicant shall
provide a report from a licensed professional engineer
certifying as to the condition of the WT technology with respect
to applicable structural safety standards. Such requests from
the City shall not occur more often than once every three
years.
[1] If the engineer's report recommends that repairs or
maintenance are required, then a letter shall be submitted
to the City which shall contain a reasonable schedule for
the required repairs or maintenance.
[2] Upon their completion, a letter shall promptly be
submitted to the City of Union City to certify same.
[3] In the event the applicant fails to comply with these
requirements regarding structural safety, the City of Union
City reserves the right in addition to all of its other rights
and remedies available under state, federal and local law
to declare the applicant in default of its obligations under
this chapter.
[4] Should that occur, the applicant will have 30 days to notify
the City as to how it intends to cure its default, setting
forth a reasonable schedule for same.
[5] In the event the applicant fails to so notify the City, or fails
to cure as agreed, the City may draw on the applicant's
demolition bond and arrange for the removal and/or
demolition of the applicant's WT technology; declare the
WT technology to be abandoned and arrange for the public
auction of the WT technology; and/or pursue such other
remedies at law and in equity as may be available.
[6] Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
applicant's liability for criminal prosecution.
(4) Technical consultants. The approving authority may retain
technical consultants as it deems necessary to provide assistance in
§ 223-44 UNION CITY CODE § 223-44
1:492
§ 223-45. Signs.
the review of the application, the technical support data, and the
proofs and documents submitted to demonstrate compliance with
the ordinance. The applicant shall bear the reasonable costs
associated with such review and consultation, which cost shall be
deposited in accordance with the City's escrow provisions.
A. Permit required; application; issuance of permits; fees.
(1) Application. No sign shall be erected, altered, located or relocated
within the City, except upon application and the issuance of a
permit as hereinafter provided along with appropriate permits
required by the Uniform Construction Code.
(2) Application for a permit for residential signs. Application for a
permit for a sign for premises used for residential purposes shall be
made, in writing, to the Construction Official or his designee and
presented, together with the filing fee required by Chapter 155,
Fees, and Uniform Construction Code where applicable. Such
application shall be sufficient to describe the premises and the
location at which the sign is to be affixed, together with a rendering
of the sign, inclusive of its dimensions, design and color, and shall
be submitted on a form proscribed by the Construction Official.
There shall also be provided a statement as to the means by which
such sign shall be constructed on the premises. The Construction
Official or his designee shall act upon such application within 20
business days of the receipt thereof. A failure to approve the
application within 20 business days shall constitute a denial of the
application.
(3) Application for a permit for nonresidential signs. Any sign
associated with a change in occupancy or ownership necessitates
an application for a sign permit. Application for a permit for a
permitted nonresidential sign conforming to the regulations set
forth herein shall be made, in writing, to the Construction Official.
Such application shall be sufficient to describe the premises and
location at which the sign is to be affixed and shall include, at a
minimum, the following items:
(a) The name and address of the applicant and name and the
address of the company constructing and installing sign.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the premises.
(c) A statement as to whether the owner has consented to the
application, if the applicant is other than the owner.
(d) A rendering to scale which must show the front elevation and
height of the nonresidential space along with the front
elevation and height of the adjacent stores, indicating the
following dimensions: dimension of the overall width of the
§ 223-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-45
1:493
storefront; dimension of the overall width of the sign;
dimension and depth for the height of the letters; dimension of
the depth of the total sign.
(e) The exact size and style of lettering, artwork and materials
used in the sign.
(f) Drawings shall be accurate to scale and shall specify all details
of sign construction, including materials, thickness, color,
wiring, tubing, transformer specifications, and mounting
details.
(g) An applicant must submit:
[1] Five printed color photographs of the storefront.
[2] Five printed color photographs from a distance, showing
the storefront in relation to the adjacent stores as well as
all other signs on the building.
[3] Five color photographs of the facade with the sign
superimposed to scale as to how it will relate to the
building.
(h) Issuance of permit; fees. Every applicant, before being granted
a permit hereunder, shall pay the City filing fee required by
Chapter 155, Fees, and the Uniform Construction Code where
appropriate for each such sign or other advertising structure
regulated by this chapter. The Construction Official or his
designee shall act upon such application for a permit within 20
days of the receipt thereof. If not granted, it shall be deemed
denied.
(i) Exceptions. The provisions and regulations of this subsection
concerning permits and fees shall not apply to the following
signs:
[1] Real estate signs not exceeding 12 square feet in area
which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises
upon which such signs are located only.
[2] Residential nameplates identifying a single-family
residence and/or street address, not to exceed one square
foot in area.
[3] A sign identifying the architect, engineer or contractor.
When placed upon a work site under construction, the sign
shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, provided that the
sign is set back at least 15 feet from the curb, and further
provided that the same is removed within 24 hours after a
final certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ 223-45 UNION CITY CODE § 223-45
1:494
[4] Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when
constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials.
[5] Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad
crossing signs, danger signs and such temporary,
emergency or nonadvertising signs or signs of any
governmental agency deemed necessary to the public
welfare.
[6] Flags of the United States, the State of New Jersey or
other governmental or quasi-public agencies, subject to
reasonable size and location.
[7] Holiday decorations and lights on residential and
nonresidential premises.
[8] Signs erected to control the movement of traffic on
premises, provided that these signs shall provide traffic
directions only and shall not be used for any advertising
purpose. These signs shall not exceed four square feet in
area and shall have been approved by the appropriate
approving authority.
[9] Political signs. Any sign, notice, poster or other device
calculated to convey a preelection political message or to
obtain votes for a particular candidate, slate of candidates,
public question or political issue, when the same is placed
in the view of the general public.
B. Computation of sign area and sign height. The following principles shall
control the computation of sign area and height:
(1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
shall be computed by drawing a square or rectangle that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem or other display, together with the sign frame and any
material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or
structure against which it is placed, or by delineating the area
established by reason of distinctive variation in background color
or by borders, whichever is greater.
(2) Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical
sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be
viewed from any point at the same time, and when such signs faces
are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches
apart at any point, the sign area shall be computed by the
measurement of one of the faces.
§ 223-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-45
1:495
(3) Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as
the distance from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign.
C. Regulations governing nonresidential signs.
(1) Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall comply with the
following regulations:
(a) No freestanding sign shall exceed an area of one square foot in
size for every 10 feet of linear street frontage or 24 square
feet, whichever is greater.
(b) The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 20 feet.
(c) Freestanding signs shall have an open area not less than three
feet between the base line of such sign and the ground level.
This open space may be filled in with a platform or decorative
latticework, which shall not close off more than 1/2 of said
open space underneath a sign.
(d) Freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from
the street right-of-way line and a minimum of 10 feet from side
lot lines.
(e) Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted for any single
development or lot.
(f) Freestanding signs shall advertise only the permitted use,
products or service located on the premises on which they are
placed.
(2) Wall signs. Wall mounted signs shall comply with the following
regulations:
(a) Wall signs shall advertise only the permitted use, products or
service on the premises on which they are displayed.
(b) One wall sign may be placed along the street frontage,
provided that it does not exceed 10% of the total surface area
of the building face upon which it is placed or 32 square feet,
whichever is lesser.
(c) In those cases where a parcel or lot has more than one street
frontage, one wall sign may be placed on each street frontage,
provided that such wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the total
surface area of the building face upon which it is placed or 24
square feet, whichever is lesser.
(d) For buildings and property containing more than one business
or tenant, and where each business tenant occupies a
physically distinct ground floor space or has a separate ground
floor entrance, each business or tenant may have one wall sign
§ 223-45 UNION CITY CODE § 223-45
1:496
conforming to the requirements of this section. For the
purposes of determining the sign area permitted, only the face
of each respective lease unit to which the respective sign will
be attached shall be counted. Each sign must be attached to
the leased unit containing the business tenant identified.
(e) No wall sign shall be placed above the first floor of any
structure.
(f) No wall sign shall cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening
nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is
attached.
(g) No wall sign shall be permitted to project forward more than
six inches from the building nor be attached to a wall at a
height of less than eight feet above the sidewalk or ground.
(h) No wall sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire
escape.
(i) Signs placed perpendicular to a wall of facade shall be
prohibited.
(3) Window signs. Wall signs shall comply with the following
regulations:
(a) In addition to any sign or signs permitted pursuant to
Subsection C(2) above, window display signs as well as affixed
window signs limited to indicate membership in a retail or
professional organization or credit card or credit association,
to show manufacturers' or required licenses or advertisements
referable to sales within, shall be permitted, provided that the
aggregate area employed for such purpose shall not exceed
10% of the total window area on which it is located.
(b) Signage is also permitted for a second floor professional office
use that shall not exceed 25% of the glass area of one window
facing the street frontage. If a second floor professional office
use includes frontage on more than one street, window signage
may be placed in one window facing the additional street
frontage that shall not exceed 15% of the glass area of the
window. A permit shall be obtained for second floor window
signage from the Construction Official.
(c) No window signs under this section can be illuminated.
D. Regulations governing residential signs. Residential signs, including
name and address plates, professional nameplates, real estate signs
and contractor signs as provided herein, are permitted in accordance
with the applicable standards defined below:
§ 223-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-45
1:497
(1) One real estate sign not exceeding six square feet in area within the
R District or one real estate sign not exceeding 10 square feet for
all other uses in all other residential districts which advertise the
sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which said sign is located.
(2) Residential nameplates identifying a residence and/or street
address, not to exceed one square foot in area.
(3) One multifamily identification sign not more than one square foot
for each 10 linear feet of street frontage, but in no case to exceed
32 square feet in size per face shall be allowed per multifamily
development project except where the project fronts on two or
more streets. One sign shall be permitted on each frontage,
provided that the project has a major traffic entrance on the street
where the sign is to be erected. Multifamily identification signs
shall not exceed eight feet above grade.
(4) One professional nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area
for lawful occupants of the premises under this chapter.
(5) One bulletin board or sign not over 16 square feet in area for
public, charitable or religious institutions when the same are
located on the premises of said institution.
(6) One sign identifying the architect, engineer or contractor, when
placed upon a work site under construction, not to exceed 10
square feet in area, provided that the sign is set back at least 10
feet from the curb, and further provided that the same is removed
within 24 hours after the final certificate of occupancy is issued.
(7) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze
or other incombustible materials.
(8) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger signs and such temporary, emergency or
nonadvertising signs or signs of any governmental agency deemed
necessary to the public.
(9) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies, subject to reasonable size
and location.
E. Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall comply with the following
regulations:
(1) All temporary signage, except as specifically exempted under this
section, shall require prior approval by the Construction Official or
his designee on a form to be proscribed by the Construction
Official. Such approval shall be valid for a period not to exceed 30
days from the issuance thereof and may be renewed for a period
not to exceed 60 days in total.
§ 223-45 UNION CITY CODE § 223-45
1:498
(2) No temporary sign shall exceed an area of 12 square feet, except
temporary signs, such as banners, which are allowed by permit by
the Mayor and Board of Commissioners within the public right-ofway.
(3) Insurance for temporary signs may be required by the Mayor and
Board of Commissioners. Any person obtaining a permit for the
erection of a temporary sign where the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners requires insurance shall provide proof to the
satisfaction of the Construction Official or his or her designee that
the person, firm or corporation actually doing the erecting shall
have in force a public liability insurance policy with limits of no less
than $100,000 for property damage and $300,000 for bodily injury
per occurrence.
(4) Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to permit the erection or
installation of any political signs upon any pole or tree located on
public property or within the public right-of-way within the City,
and their erection or installation is hereby specifically prohibited.
(5) Streamers, flags, pennants and banners shall be permitted as
temporary signs in accordance with the permit requirements and
time restrictions set forth in Subsection E(1) above.
F. Illumination.
(1) No sign shall be an illuminated sign except as provided herein.
(2) No sign shall be internally illuminated by neon gas-filled tubes.
(3) No sign shall be illuminated externally by more than one floodlight
per surface of such sign. Such lighting shall be at grade and
properly directed and shielded so as not to produce glare or
offensive light off the property.
(4) Flashing signs, highly reflective glass or fluorescent paint, either
red, green or yellow, and illuminated tubing outlining roofs, doors,
windows or wall edges of a building, and scrolling text signs are
prohibited.
(5) No sign shall be artificially illuminated after 11:00 p.m. or before
7:00 a.m. unless such premises are occupied and attended, except
in the business and industrial zone of the City.
G. General regulations for signs.
(1) In order to preserve the basically residential character of this
community and to facilitate the improvement of its commercial and
industrial areas in a safe and orderly manner, no commercial
outdoor advertising signs, billboards or other signs which are not
expressly and directly related to the business being conducted on
the premises and which do not conform to the applicable
requirements and standards set forth in other sections of this
§ 223-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-45
1:499
chapter shall be permitted, and all other such commercial outdoor
advertising signs, billboards and other nonconforming signs are
specifically prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to display
upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent
or immoral matter.
(2) No billboard, or billboard signs, shall be permitted. No sign
otherwise lawful under this section shall be prohibited because of
this subsection.
(3) No sign shall be placed, located or displayed upon any sidewalk or
area between sidewalk and curb, nor shall they project on or over a
sidewalk.
(4) No sign shall include a silhouetted or three-dimensional design.
This includes but is not limited to signage lacking a background
and having letters, figures, objects or representational devices
silhouetted against the sky or other open space not a part of the
sign.
(5) No roof sign shall be permitted, and no sign shall be erected to
project beyond the side or top of the wall to which it is affixed.
(6) No sign shall be erected, painted or composed of fluorescent,
phosphorescent or similar material.
(7) No sign shall be, in whole or in part, flashing, intermittent, moving,
fluttering, or revolving.
(8) No signs emitting a sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke or
vapor shall be permitted. No sign erected shall contain audio
equipment.
(9) Canopies and awnings with signage embossed upon them shall be
considered a business sign. The use of awnings or canopies as signs
shall be prohibited, unless no facade area is available on the
building facade to place a wall sign. Determination of whether a
business is permitted an awning or canopy sign due to inadequate
facade area shall be made by the Construction Official. The internal
illumination of awnings or canopies is prohibited.
(10)No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No
sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(11) All signage shall reflect the character of the area of the proposed
sign placement, and will respect the size, scale and mass of the
facade, color, building height and rhythms and sizes of windows
and door openings in the determination of the Construction Code
Inspector. The use of bubble awnings and waterfall awnings are
discouraged, and their use shall be at the discretion of the
Construction Official for the proposed location.
§ 223-45 UNION CITY CODE § 223-45
1:500
(12)No signs shall extend more than six inches in depth from a building
facade.
(13) Projecting signs perpendicular to a wall or placed at right angles to
a facade or building face shall be prohibited. Hanging signs are
strictly prohibited.
(14) Signs which are in a state of disrepair, including illuminated or
neon signs, or signs which are abandoned shall be removed within
30 days following such disrepair or abandonment.
(15) In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, every
business or advertising sign referred to in this chapter must be
kept in good condition and repair and shall not be allowed to
become dilapidated.
(16)No references to the set pricing of products and services shall be
permitted in the wording of a permanent sign, awning or canopy.
(17) Whenever there is a change in occupancy of business premises, all
signs and displays which identify or advertise a business, product,
or other item that is no longer present or available on the premises
shall be removed within 21 days from the date the previous
occupancy ceased. The manner of removal of sign messages shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
(a) In the case of a sign with a painted message, the message shall
be painted in a color which matches the background or in a
light neutral color.
(b) Window signs and displays shall be removed.
(c) In the case of a sign where the message is contained on a panel
that is inserted into the sign frame or structure, the message
panel shall be replaced with a blank panel.
(d) In the case of a sign where the message cannot be removed
without also removing the sign structure, the structure shall be
removed unless the owner demonstrates to the Zoning Official
that the sign message could reasonably apply to the next
occupant of the premises.
(18) A permitted second floor occupancy for a professional office or
second floor retail space shall be permitted one announcement sign
per occupancy of not more than 1.5 square feet at the main
entrance of the building. One nameplate or professional sign with
an area of not more than 1.5 square feet may be mounted flat
against the door of each secondary entrance. Such sign may not be
illuminated by interior or exterior lighting.
(19) All entrance doors must display the street number within 12 inches
of the top of the door, and such street number shall not be less than
three inches and not more than five inches high.
§ 223-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-45
1:501
(20) A wall sign shall not be erected on any wall of a building, unless
such wall fronts on and is immediately adjacent to a public street,
public parking lot, or parking lot servicing the building on which it
is placed. If a business occupies a parcel that includes two street
frontages, a sign is permitted on each street frontage.
(21)No sign may be attached in any form or manner which will interfere
with any opening for ventilation or with any architectural detail.
(22)No sign shall consist of more than four colors, including the
background color.
(23) Facsimile and telephone numbers are prohibited on all signs.
(24) Any light box sign is subject to the following additional limitations:
(a) Only the letters and symbols may be illuminated.
(b) Any opaque background must set off the illuminated sections.
(c) The letters, logos and symbols may take up a maximum of 40%
of the sign area leaving 60% opaque.
(25)No sign or other advertising structure, as regulated by this chapter,
shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner
as to obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where, by
reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of, cause an optical illusion, or be confused with
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or which makes use of
words, phrases, symbols or characters in such manner as to
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(26) All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
of the current Building Code adopted by the State of New Jersey. If
the Construction Official or his designee shall find that any sign is
unsafe or insecure, the Construction Official or his designee shall
give written notice to the owner, agent, or person having the
beneficial use of the premises upon which the sign may be erected.
If such owner, agent or person fails to remove or alter the sign so as
to comply with the standards herein set forth in the notice, after
such notice, such sign or other advertising structure shall be
removed or altered to comply with the Construction Official or his
designee, at the expense of the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial use of the premises upon which such sign may be
erected. The Construction Official or his designee shall cause any
sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to
persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
(27)No temporary signs made of paper, cardboard, canvas or similar
material shall be permitted, except for temporary signage
permitted by this chapter.
§ 223-45 UNION CITY CODE § 223-45
1:502
(28) Signs affixed to vehicles and/or trailers, or automobile windows
which are parked on a public right-of-way, public property or
private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where
the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a
business or activity located on the same or nearby property are
prohibited. However, this is not in any way intended to prohibit
signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as
permanent lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is incidental
to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer, or for pricing
information associated with the sale of new and used cars.
(29) If the City of Union City funds or undertakes a project, it reserves
the right to mandate the type of signage displayed on the building,
whether a private or public project, in accordance with this
chapter.
H. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Any signs existing at the time of the passage of this section which
violate any provisions hereof shall be deemed a nonconforming
sign and may be continued, maintained and repaired upon the
present premises or location, provided that such sign was lawful
under any prior ordinance and that required permits and
inspections were obtained. Any nonconforming sign which is
associated with a change in occupancy or ownership shall
necessitate an application to the appropriate approving authority
and shall be returned to conformity. Any sign unlawful under any
prior ordinance shall remain unlawful unless it complies with the
provisions of this section and there is issued by the Construction
Official a sign erection permit therefor.
(2) Any sign which has been damaged to the extent that the cost of
repairs shall exceed 50% of the current value of such sign shall be
deemed as destroyed, and the owner thereof shall not be permitted
to erect or restore the sign except in accordance with this section.
(3) Hanging signs shall be ordered to be removed to the extent that
they are structurally unsafe and endanger the safety of the public.
(4) Upon abandonment of a nonconforming sign by the existing owner
or lessee, said sign must be removed within 30 days by the landlord
or tenant.
I. Awnings, canopies and marquees.
(1) Fixed or permanent awnings or canopies shall not project more
than three feet from the building, nor be wider than 25 feet, or the
width of the building, whichever is less. No awning shall be higher
than four feet from its lowest point. Fabric swatches (as opposed to
a color rendering) shall be provided to the Construction Official or
his designee for any proposed awnings. An original, flame-resistant
certificate completed by the fabric company shall be provided to
§ 223-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-45
1:503
§ 223-46. Off-street parking and loading.
the Construction Official or his designee. A fax or copy of said
certificate shall not be accepted.
(2) No signage is permitted on any canopies or awnings, unless no
facade area is available on the building facade to place a wall sign.
Determination on whether an awning or canopy sign is permitted
shall be made by the Construction Official.
(3) Awnings, canopies and marquees attached to the same building
shall be the same shape color and height and in accordance with
any applicable provisions of this chapter.
(4) Awnings shall not be illuminated and shall not display any graphic,
logo, or business name.
(5) Awnings, canopies and marquees shall not be permitted above the
first floor of a building, except awnings shall be permitted on the
second floor of a building, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Second floor awnings shall not extend beyond 18 inches in
depth from a building facade or wall.
(b) Second floor awnings shall be the same shape and color as first
floor awnings, canopies and marquees attached to the same
building.
(c) If awnings are installed on the second floor, all awnings must
be installed on all second floor windows.
(d) Second floor awnings shall not extend more than six inches
from either side of a window frame, and no awning shall extend
more than 12 inches above a window frame.
(6) The lowest portion of an awning, canopy or marquee shall not be
less than eight feet from the ground.
A. Off-street parking.
(1) Minimum required off-street parking schedule for nonresidential
uses. The number of off-street parking spaces required for any
nonresidential use shall be determined by reference to Parking
Schedule I below.
Parking Schedule I
Parking Requirements for Nonresidential Uses
Use Required Parking Spaces
Car wash 3 per washing lane
Child-care facilities 1 per employee
§ 223-45 UNION CITY CODE § 223-46
1:504
Parking Schedule I
Parking Requirements for Nonresidential Uses
Use Required Parking Spaces
Banks and financial institutions 1 for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
Educational facility:
Elementary and intermediate
school
1 per employee
Secondary school 1 per employee plus 1 per
each 5 students in grades 11
and 12
Postsecondary and other
educational facility
2 per each 3 full-time students
and 1 for each 5 part-time
students
Gasoline service station or repair
garage
3 for each bay, plus 1 per 300
square feet of gross floor area
of retail space
Health club and fitness center 1 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Home occupation (major) 1 per employee
Hotel 1 per room, plus 1 space for
each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area of ballrooms,
conference rooms or similar
space
Indoor commercial recreation,
including roller rink, ice rink,
recreation center and sports club
4.5 for each 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area
Light industrial, including
laboratory and research uses
1 for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Medical office 1 per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Office 1 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Outdoor recreation:
Court games 4 per court
Other 1 per 150 square feet of
assemblage space
§ 223-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-46
1:505
Parking Schedule I
Parking Requirements for Nonresidential Uses
Use Required Parking Spaces
Places of worship, community
buildings social halls and places
of indoor public assembly
1 for each 3.5 seats. Where
benches are provided, each 2
feet of bench shall be
considered 1 seat. If the
specific amount of seating is
undetermined, then 1 parking
space shall be required for
each 150 square feet of
assemblage area.
Restaurant, eating and drinking
establishments, and barsa
1 for each 3 seats
Retail and service uses not
separately listedb
1 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Theater 1 for each 3 seats
NOTES:
a. Take-out components of restaurants shall add one additional
space for each 25 square feet of take-out service area.
b. Retail uses such as delis, bakeries and coffee shops with on-site
seating shall add one additional space for every 3 seats.
(a) Unscheduled uses. Off-street parking requirements for uses
not listed in Parking Schedule I shall be established by the
approving authority, based upon accepted industry standards.
(b) Combined uses. In the case of a combination of uses, the offstreet
parking requirement shall consist of the sum of the
spaces required for each individual use, unless it can be
demonstrated that staggered hours would permit modification
to the parking requirement in accordance with the shared
parking rules identified in § 223-8B(11).
(c) Fractional spaces. Whenever the application of Parking
Schedule I results in a fractional parking space in excess of 1/
2, a full space shall be required.
(d) No off-street parking or loading spaces need be provided for
nonresidential uses located on lots that are 2,500 square feet
or smaller.
(e) On-street parking located directly in front of a nonresidential
use shall count toward required off-street parking. A length of
23 feet per on-street parking space shall be used in calculating
the number of available on-street parking spaces.
§ 223-46 UNION CITY CODE § 223-46
1:506
(2) Minimum required off-street parking schedule for residential uses.
The number of off-street parking spaces required for residential
uses shall be determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21, as amended,
and by reference to Parking Schedule II below. Alternative parking
standards to those shown in the schedule below shall be accepted if
the applicant demonstrates these standards better reflect local
conditions. Factors affecting minimum number of parking spaces
include household characteristics, availability of mass transit,
urban versus suburban location, and available off-site parking
sources.
Parking Schedule IIa
Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses
Housing Unit Type/Sizeb Parking Requirement
One-family and two-family:
2-bedroom 1.5
3-bedroom 2.0
4-bedroom 2.5c
5-bedroom 3.0
Garden apartmentb
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.0c
3-bedroom 2.1
Townhouseb, d
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.3c
3-bedroom 2.4
Mid-riseb
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.0c
3-bedroom 2.1
High-riseb
1-bedroom 0.8
2-bedroom 1.3c
3-bedroom 1.9
Live/work space Values shall be commensurate
with the most appropriate
housing type and size noted
above that the unit resembles.
§ 223-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-46
1:507
Parking Schedule IIa
Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses
Housing Unit Type/Sizeb Parking Requirement
Retirement community Values shall be commensurate
with the most appropriate
housing type and size noted
above that the retirement
community resembles.
Assisted living 0.5
NOTES:
a. As amended from time to time.
b. Requirements for attached units (apartment/condominium/
townhouse) include provisions for guest parking (0.5 spaces
per dwelling unit). Guest parking must either be provided for
on street or in common parking areas.
c. If applicant does not specify the number of bedrooms per unit,
this parking requirement shall apply.
d. Three-family and four-family dwellings shall be subject to the
parking requirements for townhouse development.
(a) Garage and driveway combinations shall be counted as follows:
[1] Each garage car space shall be counted as 1.0 off-street
parking space regardless of the dimensions of the
driveway.
[2] A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as
2.0 off-street parking spaces, provided that the driveway
measures a minimum of 18 feet in length between the face
of the garage door and the right-of-way (16 feet for owneroccupied
one- , two- and three-family dwellings).
[3] A two-car garage and driveway combination shall count as
3.5 off-street parking spaces, provided that a minimum
parking area width of 20 feet is provided for a minimum
length of 18 feet as specified for a one-car garage and
driveway combination (16 feet for owner-occupied one- ,
two- and three-family dwellings).
(b) When housing is included in mixed-use development, a shared
parking approach to the provision of parking shall be
permitted.
(c) When, in the judgment of the Board, on-street parking is
available, then only that proportion of the parking requirement
which is not available on the street shall be provided in off-
§ 223-46 UNION CITY CODE § 223-46
1:508
street parking facilities. A length of 23 feet per on-street
parking space shall be used in calculating the number of
available on-street parking spaces.
(d) For projects containing dwelling units required by the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code's Barrier Free Subcode
(N.J.A.C. 5:23-7), to be accessible, parking spaces for people
with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode and shall be
considered part of the total number of required spaces.
(e) No off-street parking spaces shall be required for the first six
dwelling units in a building located on Bergenline Avenue
between 30th Street and 47th Street or on Summit Avenue
between 5th Street and 18th Street.
(3) Commercial vehicles in residential zones.
(a) In a residential zone only one commercial vehicle of a rated
capacity of one ton or less may be kept on the premises.
(b) Commercial trailers, tractors and mechanized equipment in
residential zones. Commercial and industrial trailers, tractors,
construction machinery and equipment, commercial trucks
and vehicles greater than 6,000 pounds, or any open trailer,
shall not be kept, placed or stored in any residence zone,
except that equipment and machinery used in connection with
the construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of any
buildings or structures or the excavation of any land may be
permitted to stand upon the premises where such work is
being undertaken while the same is in progress.
(4) Parking of mobile dwellings, recreational vehicles and equipment.
No mobile dwelling, trailer or any other recreational equipment
shall be stored or parked on any premises in any residential zone
district within the limits of the City, except as hereinafter provided:
(a) Mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment may be
stored or parked within an enclosed building or garage on the
premises.
(b) Mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment may be
stored or parked outdoors on any premises upon the following
terms and conditions:
[1] Not more than one mobile dwelling, trailer, or any other
recreational equipment shall be stored or parked on any
premises in any residential zone district within the limits
of the City, except as hereinafter provided. For purposes of
this chapter, premises shall include adjoining lots in
common ownership, unless said adjoining lots otherwise
conform to this chapter and other provisions hereof.
§ 223-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-46
1:509
[2] No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall
be stored or parked within any residential district other
than that lot upon which the principal residence structure
of the actual owner of the recreational equipment is
located.
[3] No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall
be stored or parked at any time when said premises are
not being occupied, except for vacation absences.
[4] No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall
be stored or parked in any district as an accessory building
or use, except as herein provided.
[5] No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall
exceed the following bulk requirements:
[a] A maximum height of 12 feet as parked, including
trailer, cradle or mount, but excluding mast in the case
of a boat.
[b] A maximum body length of 30 feet, excluding trailer
hitch, tongue and bumper.
[c] A maximum of eight feet in body width, excluding
hardware.
[d] A maximum gross weight of 12,000 pounds, including
trailer and mount.
(c) No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall be
stored or parked within any front yard or side yard required
under this chapter. These requirements shall apply to both
frontages on a corner lot. In addition, all recreational
equipment shall be stored or parked to the rear of the rear
building line of the principal building and shall comply with
accessory setbacks.
(d) All mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment must
be kept clean and in good repair at all times and shall carry a
current year's license or registration as required by law.
(e) The owner of any mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational
equipment shall have and display upon request to any
authorized officials of the City satisfactory proof of ownership
of such recreational equipment.
(f) All mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment shall
be maintained in mobile condition.
(g) No mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment shall
be used for sleeping or dwelling purposes while on said
premises and shall not be commercially stored or offered or
§ 223-46 UNION CITY CODE § 223-46
1:510
displayed for sale. Further, such recreational equipment shall
not be connected with any electric, water, gas or sanitary
sewer facilities.
(h) No construction or repair of any such mobile dwellings, trailers
or recreational equipment shall be carried on outdoors in any
residential district. For purposes of this chapter, construction
or repair shall not include essential maintenance.
(i) No mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment shall
be stored, parked or maintained so as to create a dangerous or
unsafe condition on the premises where parked.
(j) Loading and unloading of mobile dwellings, trailers or
recreational equipment at any location on the premises is
permitted, provided that said vehicle is not stored or parked
for a period longer than 48 hours in any seven consecutive
days.
(k) All mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment shall
be effectively screened with attractive plantings, shrubs and
trees or fencing so as not to be readily visible from the street or
from any adjoining or nearby properties. Said screening shall
not exceed six feet in height and shall be maintained and kept
in good condition.
B. Design standards.
(1) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be coordinated with the
public street system serving the area in order to avoid conflicts
with through-traffic, obstruction to pedestrian walkways and
vehicular thoroughfares.
(2) In the event hardship is proved in providing the required parking
on the same lot as the building served, the approving authority may
grant a conditional use for off-lot parking, provided that:
(a) Required spaces are within 500 feet of pedestrian access to the
building served, unless some lesser distance is required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
(b) The off-lot space is held by the same owner in fee simple title or
other acceptable form of land control.
(c) The land shall not be alienated from the parent parcel or
devoted to other use, and this restriction shall be reflected in
the deed.
(3) All parking and loading areas for nonresidential uses shall be
graded and paved and shall be adequately drained.
(4) Dimension of parking spaces. Every such space provided shall
measure at least nine feet in width and 18 feet in length (16 feet for
§ 223-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-46
1:511
owner-occupied one- , two- and three-family dwellings), exclusive
of access drives and aisles. Hairpin striping (i.e., two lines located
one foot apart and connected at one end separating parking
spaces) shall be provided where appropriate. End-to-end parking
spaces shall measure not less than eight feet in width by 23 feet in
length. Twenty percent of required parking spaces may be compact
spaces measuring 8 1/2 feet in width by 16 feet in length.
(5) Size of aisles. The width of all aisles providing direct access to
individual parking spaces shall be in accordance with the
requirements set forth below. Only one-way traffic shall be
permitted in aisles serving parking spaces placed at an angle other
than 90°.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0° (end-to-end parking) 12
30° 12
45° 13
60° 18
90° (perpendicular parking) 24
(6) Maximum grade of parking areas.
Areas
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Parking spaces and service aisles 5%
Main approach walkways to buildings 4%
Collector or other service walkways 6%
Swales 10%
Principal circulation aisles 6%
Driveway entrances and exits up to 25
feet from right-of-way line
2%
Driveway entrances and exits beyond
25 feet from right-of-way line
10%
(7) Access.
(a) There shall be adequate provisions for safe and convenient
ingress and egress to all parking areas.
(b) Every parking area shall have direct access to a street or alley.
(c) Curb cuts for one-way traffic shall not be less than 12 feet nor
more than 15 feet wide for nonresidential uses.
§ 223-46 UNION CITY CODE § 223-46
1:512
(d) Curb cuts for single-family and two-family uses shall not
exceed 10 feet in width.
(e) Driveways shall have a minimum width of 10 feet for one-way
traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
(8) All off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles. No commercial repair work, service or
storage of new or used motor vehicles, materials or merchandise of
any kind shall be conducted on such parking area.
(9) Landscaping, paving and drainage for parking areas.
(a) In outdoor parking lots with 10 or more spaces, not less than
10% of the parking area shall be suitably landscaped to
minimize noise, glare and other nuisance characteristics, as
well as to enhance the aesthetics, environment and ecology of
the site and surrounding area.
(b) All parking and loading areas abutting residential areas shall
be buffered about their periphery with landscaping and/or
fencing. The landscaping shall be located at the entrance of the
lots, in protected areas along walkways, center islands and at
the end of bays. In narrow islands, low spreading plants, such
as creeping juniper, English ivy, myrtle and pachysandra, are
appropriate.
(c) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as
not to obstruct sight distance.
(d) Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened by a fence
or wall not less than four nor more than six feet in height,
maintained in good condition; provided, however, that a
screening hedge or other natural landscaping may be
substituted for the required fence or wall if approved by the
approving authority. The screening, as required by this
subsection, may be waived by the approving authority if, in its
judgment, because of topographic or other unusual conditions,
said fence is not necessary to buffer adjoining property.
(e) Parking areas, loading areas and driveways, except for onefamily,
two-family or three-family residences, shall be curbed
with granite or concrete and paved.
(f) All parking areas shall be adequately drained in accordance
with a drainage plan to be approved by the enforcing agency.
(10) Location of parking.
(a) Required off-street parking shall be located only in those
locations as set forth below and shall meet all setback
requirements set forth in that subsection.
§ 223-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-46
1:513
(b) Off-street parking facilities as accessory to any use permitted
in a residential zone shall be provided on the same lot with the
permitted principal building.
(c) Off-street parking facilities as required by this chapter in
nonresidential zones shall be provided on the same lot as the
principal building or use, unless an applicant is granted
permission by an approving authority for shared parking per
the requirements of § 223-46B(11).
(d) Access to or egress from any property situated in a
nonresidential zone through the use of a driveway located on
property in a residential zone is prohibited.
(e) Bicycle racks. Bicycle racks shall be provided for all
multifamily and nonresidential developments at the ratio of
one bicycle space for each dwelling unit or one bicycle space
for each 20 off-street parking spaces or fraction thereof over
20 spaces.
(f) The minimum setback for any parking area or driveway shall
be five feet in all zones; however, there shall be no minimum
setback for parking areas or driveways in connection with
existing and proposed residences in the R Low Density
Residential District or for existing and proposed one-, two- and
three-family dwellings in any zone or district. Notwithstanding,
parking in these areas shall not obstruct any City sidewalks
and/or City right-of-ways. [Amended 3-18-2014]
(11) Shared parking. In all districts, except the R Zone, shared
accessory off-street parking shall be permitted in accordance with
the following:
(a) A use for which an application for shared parking is made shall
be located within 500 feet of the parking facility which is being
shared.
(b) An agreement providing for the shared use of parking,
executed by all the parties involved, shall be approved by the
approving authority's attorney and filed with the City Clerk.
Shared parking privileges shall continue in effect so long as the
agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If the
agreement is no longer in force, parking shall be provided as
otherwise required in this chapter.
(c) Shared parking for uses with different hours of operation.
Shared parking shall be permitted between two uses with
differing hours of operation, provided that the approving
authority shall have discretion in determining which uses are
daytime uses and which are nighttime or Sunday uses. The
following shall serve as general guidelines:
§ 223-46 UNION CITY CODE § 223-46
1:514
[1] The following uses may be generally considered daytime
uses:
[a] Offices.
[b] Retail sales and services, except restaurants, bars and
entertainment uses.
[c] Wholesale, storage and distribution uses.
[d] Manufacturing uses.
[e] Other similar primarily daytime uses as determined by
the approving authority.
[2] The following uses may be generally considered nighttime
or Sunday uses:
[a] Places of worship, clubhouses, and theaters.
[b] Bars.
[c] Other similar primarily nighttime or Sunday uses as
determined by the approving authority.
(d) The approving authority may authorize the use of up to 90% of
the required off-street parking for a daytime use to serve as the
required off-street parking for a nighttime or Sunday use and
vice versa. The applicant shall demonstrate that the hours of
operation of the two uses will not conflict, and the approving
authority shall place conditions limiting the hours of operation
to ensure that adequate parking is available to all users at the
appropriate times.
(e) Shared parking for uses with similar hours of operation. The
approving authority may approve shared parking
arrangements between two or more uses with the same or
overlapping operating hours by up to 20% of the total parking
that would be required for all of the uses calculated separately.
(f) In all shared parking situations, the approving authority may
require that an applicant for shared parking provide testimony
and/or a shared parking feasibility study in support of the
application from a licensed engineer in the State of New Jersey
with expertise in parking operations. A shared parking
feasibility report shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
[1] A site plan sheet depicting the parking spaces intended for
shared parking and their proximity to land uses they will
serve.
§ 223-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-46
1:515
§ 223-47. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
[2] A signage plan that directs drivers to the most convenient
parking areas for each particular use or group of uses as
appropriate.
[3] A pedestrian circulation plan that shows connections and
walkways between parking areas and land uses.
[4] A safety and security plan that addresses lighting and
maintenance of the parking areas.
C. Off-street loading.
(1) Application. In any building or building group or part thereof
hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of 20,000 square
feet or more of nonresidential space, there shall be provided and
maintained on the same zone lot with such building, off-street
loading berths.
(2) Required off-street loading facilities.
(a) No off-street loading spaces shall be required for buildings
located within the C-C, C-G, C-N and UTOD Districts, except
that loading spaces shall be required within the JFK Overlay
District.
(b) No off-street loading spaces shall be required for
nonresidential uses located on lots that are 2,500 square feet
or smaller.
(c) Location of loading berths. All loading areas shall be on the
same lot as the use to be served. Such areas shall be located
only in a side or rear yard. Such areas shall not encroach upon
any required open space, accessway, off-street parking area or
public right-of-way. Where located adjacent to any residential
district, they shall be set back a minimum of five feet from such
property line.
(d) Access. All required off-street loading areas shall provide
sufficient turning spaces and access.
(e) Calculation of required spaces. The number of off-street
loading berths required for any use shall be determined by
application of the standards set forth below:
Principal Building Size
(square feet)
Required Number of
Loading Berths
Up to 20,000 1
20,000 to 50,000 2
Each additional 100,000 One additional space
§ 223-46 UNION CITY CODE § 223-47
1:516
A. Nonconforming buildings or structures. A building or structure that is
conforming in use but does not conform to the lot dimension, yard
dimension, height, building coverage, floor area ratio, off-street
parking, loading, or similar dimensional requirements of the chapter
shall be deemed to be a nonconforming building or nonconforming
structure. No permit shall be issued that will result in the increase of
any dimensional nonconformity, but any building or structure or portion
thereof may be altered to decrease its dimensional nonconformity.
B. Continuance of existing nonconforming uses and structures. Any
nonconforming use or structure which lawfully existed at the time of
the passage of this article may be continued, and any existing legally
nonconforming building or structure may be reconstructed or
structurally altered, but only in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
C. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use ceases
for any reason for a period of 12 consecutive months, or is changed to a
conforming use, any future use of the land, building or structure shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Substantial
cessation of activities consistent with or required for the operation of
such nonconforming use or substantial vacancy of the building or
structure in which the nonconforming use was conducted, together
with substantial cessation of activities consistent with or required for
the operation of such nonconforming use shall be deemed to constitute
a discontinuation thereof within the meaning of this chapter,
irrespective of whether an intention to abandon the nonconforming use
may exist. On application, prior to the expiration of the twelve-month
period as specified herein, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may extend
the period for up to six additional months upon a finding that it is not
reasonable in its application to the particular premises, taking into
consideration the characteristics of the use, the investment which has
been made in it, the circumstances of the discontinuance and the
suitability of the building or structure for a permitted use or a use
granted by special use permit. If any building or structure in which any
nonconforming use is conducted or maintained is hereafter removed,
the subsequent use of the land on which such building or structure was
located and the subsequent use of any building or structure thereon
shall be in conformity with the standards specified by this chapter for
the district in which such land is located.
D. Alteration, extension or enlargement of nonconforming use or
structure.
(1) A nonconforming use of any building, structure or land shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or changed in any manner
whatsoever.
(2) No building in which a nonconforming use exists shall be enlarged,
extended or structurally altered in any manner; provided, however,
that:
§ 223-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-47
1:517
(a) Nothing herein shall prevent the repair and maintenance of
any building wherein there exists a nonconforming use,
provided that such maintenance and repair does not in any way
constitute or result in a further expansion of a nonconforming
use.
(b) Minor alterations and improvements which do not constitute or
require structural changes may be made in or to a building
wherein a nonconforming use exists, provided that such
nonconforming use will not be increased, extended or enlarged
thereby.
(c) Nothing herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoration
to a safe and lawful condition of any part of any building which
is nonconforming.
(3) Structural alterations, internal rearrangements and renovations
may be made in a building or structure which is nonconforming
because it fails to comply with height, area, yard, off-street parking
or other like requirements of this article, other than use, so long as
the structural alteration or increase, internal rearrangement or
renovation does not extend or enlarge the nonconformance of said
building or structure.
(4) A nonconforming use changed or altered to a conforming use may
not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
E. Restoration of existing building or structures nonconforming because of
use. Whenever a building or structure is nonconforming by reason of its
use, such building or structure may be restored or repaired in the event
of partial destruction thereof.
F. Restoration of existing buildings or structures nonconforming for
reasons other than use. Whenever a building is nonconforming because
it fails to comply with any height, area, yard, off-street parking or
requirements of this article, other than use, and such building is
partially destroyed, such building may be restored to its prior condition;
provided, however, that such restoration shall not enlarge the
previously existing nonconformance.
G. Nonconforming improved lot. When an improved lot in a residential
zone exists as a separate isolated lot under separate ownership and
does not adjoin any vacant land or vacant lot of the same owner, and
which said improved lot is nonconforming due to size, shape, area or
setback, any existing residential building or structure on the lot may be
further improved, provided that:
(1) The number of dwelling units shall not be increased even if such
increased number of dwelling units is allowed in the zone, unless
approved by the approving authority.
§ 223-47 UNION CITY CODE § 223-47
1:518
§ 223-48. Exemption of certain residential developments. [Added
12-17-2013]
Dwellings containing units that are exempt from site plan approval pursuant
to Subsection (1)(b) of the definition of "site plan, exempt" within Chapter
223, § 223-5, of the City Code shall also be exempt from all other land
development requirements of Chapter 223 thereof, without the need for
additional variance or other approval. These dwellings shall be exempt,
provided that the conversion, creation or legalization of the new units does
not result in the creation of additional building area. Notwithstanding the
language of this section and the exemption granted thereby, these dwellings
(2) Any existing nonconforming setbacks from streets, side lot lines or
rear lot lines shall not be made more nonconforming including any
vertical additions of any type.
(3) Any existing and proposed improvement on the nonconforming
improved lot shall not exceed the percentage of maximum building
coverage set forth in the Schedule of Bulk Regulations.32
(4) The Construction Code Official of the City of Union City is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue any necessary construction
permits in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
H. Nonconforming unimproved lot. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this article, any existing nonconforming lot in the R Zone not
adjoining any vacant land and which is nonconforming due to shape or
area may be improved with a new building or structure in accordance
with the use requirements of this article, provided that the minimum
setbacks shall be as required in the Schedule of Bulk Regulations,
except required side street setbacks on corner lots may be reduced six
inches for each foot the lot is under the minimum width required in the
zone district, but shall not be reduced below 1/2 the minimum required
setback.
I. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Billboards as defined herein and as previously permitted as
advertising signs shall be deemed to be distinct nonconforming
uses, as defined in this chapter.
(2) Any roof sign as defined in this chapter or any outdoor display sign
erected, constructed, maintained or painted on or over the roof of
any building or on or above any roof level of a parapet wall shall be
deemed to be distinct nonconforming uses as defined in this
chapter.
J. Any nonconforming structure located in the C-C, G-C or MU District can
be further developed, provided that the degree of nonconformity is not
further increased.
32.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Bulk Regulations is attached to this chapter.
§ 223-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-48
1:519
and units shall be required to comply with any and all provisions of the
Uniform Construction Code and the Uniform Fire Code, and all necessary
permits shall be obtained, and a certificate of occupancy shall be required
therefor.
§ 223-49. Outdoor sales. [Added 12-3-2013 by Ord. No. 29-2013]
A. Outdoor sales, as defined in § 223-5, shall be permitted on private,
residential property only, subject to the following:
(1) Goods and merchandise and ancillary items associated with the
outdoor sale thereof shall not be located within the City's public
right-of-way or on City streets or sidewalks.
(2) The outdoor sales of goods and merchandise is permitted on
Saturdays only from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and from May 1 through
October 31. The outdoor sales of goods and merchandise shall be
hereby prohibited on all other days, at all other times and during all
other months.
B. Violations of this section shall be subject to the imposition of any and all
monetary and other relief permitted by the provisions of this Code.
§ 223-48 UNION CITY CODE § 223-49
1:520
Chapter 234
LICENSING OF BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 64, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Fiber-optic systems — See Ch. 160.
Florists — See Ch. 180.
Games of chance — See Ch. 196.
Handbills — See Ch. 208.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 301.
Pool and billiard rooms — See Ch. 306.
Tattooing and body piercing — See Ch. 376.
Public telephones — See Ch. 391.
Towing — See Ch. 397.
Used car dealers — See Ch. 407.
§ 234-1. Purpose of license fees.
All license fees imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
imposed for revenue and for regulation and control.
§ 234-2. Duration of license.
All licenses granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be good
for the calendar year or any portion of the calendar year in which issued,
and shall be granted only upon full payment of the license fee as prescribed
specifically for the business or occupation, and is payable in advance, such
license fee to cover for a full calendar year or any portion of the calendar
year, it being the intention that where a license be issued for a full calendar
year or a period within the calendar year, the license fee shall be the full
amount as fixed for the specific business or occupation covered by this
chapter.
§ 234-3. Payment with application.
All applications for licenses must be accompanied by cash or by certified
check payable to the order of the City of Union City in the amount of such
license fee as fixed in the schedule of the fees as set forth in Chapter 155,
Fees, § 155-3.
§ 234-4. Form of application.
A. Before any license is issued, the applicant for the license must file an
application with the License Inspector upon a form supplied by the City
which may be obtained from the Department of Health with respect to
such licenses as are issued through the Department of Health and from
the Inspector of Licenses with respect to such licenses as are issued
through the License Inspector, which application shall be accompanied
by the license fee prescribed for such business or occupation in this
§ 223-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-4
1:521
§ 234-5. Contents of application.
All applications from the License Inspector shall contain the following
information: the type of business or occupation the license is applied for,
name under which and location at which the business is to be conducted,
name of applicant, place of birth, citizenship, permanent home residence,
place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding three years
and the number either of arrests or convictions for misdemeanors or crimes
and the nature of the offenses for which arrested or convicted and, if a
corporation, the names of the officers and directors of the corporation, the
principal office and agent of the corporation, the date of incorporation and
information concerning each of the officers and directors of the corporation
as is required of all individuals making applications.
§ 234-6. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, company, partnership or
corporation to engage in, carry on, pursue or conduct, within the limits of
the City, any business, trade, employment, vocation, occupation or purpose,
hereinafter specified, unless (s)he, they or it shall first obtain a license
from the Division of Health or License Inspector, in the manner herein
prescribed.
§ 234-7. No transfer or assignment of license. [Amended 4-19-2011]
Licenses are not transferable or assignable. All persons must apply to the
appropriate licensing agent in the City of Union City for a new license and
comply with the provisions of the license application.
§ 234-8. License fee receipts and accountancy.
All receipts for license fees shall be signed by either a Department of Health
official or by the License Inspector, as the case may be, and returns for such
license fees thus received shall be made to the City, showing the number
and kinds of licenses issued and the amount of license fees collected and
received.
§ 234-9. Display of license.
chapter and in the manner prescribed by this chapter. [Amended
5-21-2013]
B. Upon the granting of a license by the Board of Commissioners, the
applicant, upon notice from the City Clerk, shall obtain the license from
the Department of Health or from the License Inspector, as the case
may be, and no place, employment, vocation, occupation, premises or
vehicle shall be used or operated for any of the business, trades, or
purposes hereinafter specified, unless a license for that purpose is first
had and obtained in the manner hereinbefore and hereinafter
prescribed.
§ 234-4 UNION CITY CODE § 234-9
1:522
§ 234-10. Fee collection; investigation of applicants and premises.
There shall be appointed by the Health Officer an official of the Department
of Health whose duty shall be to collect the license fees to be processed
through that department, and there shall be appointed by the Director of
Revenue and Finance a License Inspector whose duty shall be to collect
all license fees to be processed through the office of the License Inspector,
which official and License Inspector shall be on duty at all times during the
business hours of the City, more particularly the hours during which the
office of the Collector of Taxes is open for the collection of taxes, to collect
such fees and issue such licenses according to requirements of this section
and Chapter 155, Fees. The official of the Department of Health and the
License Inspector, as the case may be, shall cause to be investigated the
qualifications of all applicants for licenses and shall cause to be inspected
the premises wherein the licenses are to be issued and to receive a report
of this investigation of each applicant and the premises where the license is
to be issued and to certify that such applicant and premises qualify for such
license.
§ 234-11. Purposes, businesses or occupations requiring licenses;
fee amount.
The purposes, businesses or occupations and their license fees are as set
forth in § 155-3, and are required to be licensed and processed through the
Department of Health.
A. Any person to whom any license is issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, is hereby required to display such license either in or on
the place or premises affected by such license, or upon the vehicle or
device used or operated pursuant to such license, or on his/her person.
To that end, the City will cause to be issued to each licensee either a
certificate of license or a metal license plate bearing the license number
and a statement of the purpose for which the license is issued. If, for
any reason, it is impossible to display the certificate or plate, as herein
provided, then it shall be incumbent upon the licensee to show the same
upon demand of any properly constituted authority of the City.
B. All applicants for licenses for businesses shall be required to submit
two photographs of the applicant measuring two inches by two inches
of a front view of the applicant's face and shoulders without head
covering. One of the foregoing photographs shall be placed on the
license certificate and shall be displayed pursuant to this chapter. If the
applicant for a license is designated as a business entity, two such
photographs of all owners of the business entity shall be submitted in
accordance with this section and displayed in accordance with this
chapter. [Added 2-20-2007]
§ 234-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-12
1:523
§ 234-12. Refusal of license.
The Board of Commissioners may refuse to issue a license if it deems, in
its best judgment, that the licensed premises are unsafe for habitation or
unsafe for business to be conducted in the premises, that the applicant is
disqualified, that the unsanitary condition of the premises creates a hazard
or that the business to be operated on the premises would constitute a fire
hazard.
§ 234-13. Legal limitation of license.
No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
construed as permitting the violation by the licensee of any law of the state,
of any chapter of the City Code or the regulation concerning the health
or safety of the community or in any other way regulating the particular
business, trade, employment, vocation, occupation or purpose licensed.
§ 234-14. Alcoholic beverage control excluded.
This chapter shall not in any manner whatsoever effect the provisions of
Chapter 58, Alcoholic Beverages, which fixes license fees, regulates the sale
and distribution of alcoholic beverages and provides penalties for violations
thereof.
§ 234-15. License cancellation or revocation.
All licenses issued hereunder may be canceled or revoked by the Board
of Commissioners at a hearing of the Board, whenever it appears that the
premises or the business licensed is used for any unlawful purpose, or if the
licensee is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
or of any other ordinance or regulation of the City relating to the business
or conduct of the licensee, or of any statute of the State of New Jersey or
of the United States, or where any criminal act is committed upon, about
or in connection with the business, place or person licensed or in the event
of a concealment of, omission or failure to state, or misstatement of any
material, fact or thing in connection with the person, place or business or
occupations to be licensed or whenever it appears necessary, proper and
expedient that the license may be canceled and revoked in the interest of
good government, the protection of persons and property, the preservation
and enhancement of the public health, morality, good order, safety and
prosperity of the people of the City. There shall be no refund of license fees
or portion thereof in the event of revocation of license.
§ 234-16. Payment of property taxes as condition of license.
A. 33Revocation or suspension; restoration. Any license or permit issued by
the City may be revoked or suspended by the Board of Commissioners
when any licensee who is the owner of the property affected by the
33.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, Conditions for issuance or renewal, which
immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 234-12 UNION CITY CODE § 234-16
1:524
§ 234-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined in a sum not to exceed $500 or, in the discretion
of the Municipal Court, shall be lodged in the county jail for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or may, by the Municipal Court, be subjected to both such
fine and imprisonment.
§ 234-18. Dealers in precious metals and other secondhand goods.
[Added 2-16-2016]
license or upon which the licensed business or activity is conducted has
failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three consecutive
quarters. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessments, the
license or permit shall be restored.
B. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or include
any alcoholic beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the New
Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., as set
forth in § 234-15, nor shall it apply to the issuance of building permits,
which are governed by the Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.).
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) The purpose and intent of this section is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals
and other secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification,
reporting, maintenance, and distribution criteria for licensed
dealers in these goods.
(2) No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or
occupation of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or
other secondhand goods without complying with the requirements
of this section in the exact number described herein.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCEPTABLE DEFINITION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another U.S. state, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable United States Government issued identification, which shall
be recorded on the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently
forwarded to the local police department on request.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Union City Police Department or
his/her designee.
CITY CLERK — The statutory officer whose duties are defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135 and may refer to the duly appointed Clerk of the City
(1972 Code Sec. 7-20.2).
§ 234-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-18
1:525
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability corporation,
corporation, or other entity who either wholly or in part, engages in
or operates any of the following trades or businesses: the buying for
purposes of resale of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand
good as defined herein; itinerant business as defined herein. For the
purposes of this section, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business
intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than
choses in action, securities, or printed evidence of indebtedness;
purchasing personal property on condition of selling it back at a
stipulated price; or doing business as a furniture storage
warehousemen and lending money on goods, wares or merchandise
pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their
alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between
a dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry,
or any other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or
pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift
cards, any tools, cellular telephones, smart phones, GPS devices,
computers, mobile computers, computer hardware and software,
television (except cathode ray tube type), radios, record or stereo sets,
electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods, automotive
equipment, collectibles, video game systems, game cartridges, DVDs,
CDs, and other electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras
and camera equipment, video equipment, and other valuable articles.
For the purposes of this section, secondhand goods shall not include
goods transacted in the following manner: 1) judicial sales or sales by
executors or administrators; 2) occasional or auction sales of household
goods sold from private homes; 3) auctions of real estate; 4) the
occasional sale, purchase, or exchange of coins or stamps by a person
at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned building who
is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps and who does not
solicit the sale, purchase or exchange of such coins or stamps to or from
the general public by billboard, sign, handbill, newspaper, magazine,
radio, television, or other form of printed or electronic advertising.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
§ 234-18 UNION CITY CODE § 234-18
1:526
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
C. License requirement for dealers.
(1) No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or
other entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or
pawning of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as defined
above, within the municipality, without having first obtained a
license therefor from the City Clerk, which license shall bear a
number issued by the City Clerk.
(2) The application for a license to the City Clerk shall set forth the
name, date of birth and address of the dealer, whether or not he/
she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he/she has
ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s),
or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the dates, thereof.
(3) Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of
those articles or secondhand goods referred to in Subsection A
above are being bought in any location within the municipality shall
constitute engaging in business as a dealer of secondhand goods
for the purpose of this chapter. No person, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation or other entity shall place or cause to
be placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles or goods
without stating in the advertising the license number issued to a
person or entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the
license number shall be visibly or audibly stated. Failure to state or
indicate the license number shall be in violation of this section and
shall be subject to penalties established in Subsection I.
(4) Licenses may not operate at any location other than the site
specified in the license. Licenses operating at multiple locations
must have each location separately licensed. Each location must be
permanent. Itinerant business and transient buyers, as defined in
Subsection B above, are not eligible for licensure and are
prohibited from operating in the City.
D. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
(1) Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall refer such
application to the Chief of Police who shall make an investigation of
the prospective licensee within 30 days for the purpose of
determining the suitability of the applicant for licensing. Such
investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(a) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase
and sale of those articles or goods referred to in Subsection A
above, although nothing in this section shall be construed to
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-18
1:527
warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of
experience.
(b) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the
community, which shall be made among credible sources,
which sources shall be disclosed to the applicant in the event of
a denial of any license.
(c) Any criminal record of the applicant including any past
convictions for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s) within this or any other
jurisdiction. The Chief of Police may, as part of the application
process, require a fingerprint criminal background check
through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice
Information Services Division, which may require an additional
fee from the applicant.
(d) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated
from a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a
location primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious
metals or other secondhand goods and other factors bearing on
whether the licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent
nature. This section shall not be construed to require denial of
any license solely on the grounds that the business is not from
a fixed location or that the applicant is a transient buyer or
itinerant business, however, applicants who fall under the
category of a transient buyer or itinerant business must state
with specificity on the license application the business address
where transaction records required by Subsection E(4) of this
section will be stored as well as the location where purchased
goods will be retained during the mandatory inspection period
required under Subsection F(1).
(2) The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to
this section within 30 days of the submission of the application to
the City Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not
been received from the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding the criminal
record.
(3) The Chief of Police, upon completion of the investigation, shall
recommend in writing to grant or deny the requested license to the
City Clerk, who shall grant or deny the license according to the
recommendation. In the case of recommending denial, the Chief of
Police shall state fully and specifically the reasons for the
recommendation. If the Chief of Police recommends denial of any
license, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant within 10 days of
§ 234-18 UNION CITY CODE § 234-18
1:528
such denial, and forward to the applicant a statement of the reason
or reasons for such denial.
(4) Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to
or similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied
if the investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons
offense(s) in which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or
any conviction of any crime(s) disorderly persons offense(s)
involving theft or the receiving of stolen goods, regardless of
whether the applicant was a principal, accessory before the fact,
after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any prior municipal ordinance
violation(s) by the applicant of any of its principal officers or
employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A license may be denied
if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to satisfactorily
comply with the electronic reporting requirements specified in
Subsection E, the retention and inspection requirements of
Subsection F, or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of
the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the City Clerk shall
issue or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt
of a bond as required by Subsection G of this section.
(5) Whenever any application for permit is denied, the applicant shall
be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by
the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted
to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such
denial. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a
written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice
of denial of a license to act as a dealer of secondhand goods.
(6) No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
E. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for dealers. For
every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
(1) Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
Subsection B.
(2) Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms
that I am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell
the goods being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain
and do not possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I
am the full age of 18 years and the identification presented is valid
and correct."
(3) Records.
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-18
1:529
(a) Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods
on a sequentially numbered receipt:
[1] A complete and detailed description of the items and the
manufacturer and model of the item(s) if known; in the
case of jewelry, the descriptions must include style, length,
color, design, and stones, if any; any identifying marks,
including numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials, names,
monograms, social security number engraved thereon,
serial numbers, series number, or any other information
appearing calculated to set apart the particular object sold
from others of like kind;
[2] If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds troy,
pennyweight (troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms
of karats for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
[3] The date and time of the transaction;
[4] The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
[5] The name, address and telephone number of the
purchaser, including the clerk or employee of the licensee
making the transaction;
[6] The permanent business address and license number of
the dealer;
[7] The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of
the seller or sellers;
[8] A photographed recording of the seller in a format
acceptable to the Chief of Police, along with a physical
description of the seller, including height and weight
(approximate), hair color, eye color, facial hair, if any, etc.;
[9] A photographed recording of the seller's acceptable
identification, as set forth in Subsection C, in a format
acceptable by the Chief of Police;
[10] A photographed recording of all items sold in a format
acceptable the Chief of Police. When photographing, all
items must be positioned in a manner that makes them
readily and easily identifiable. Items should not be
grouped together when photographing or imaging. Each
item should have its own photograph;
[11] The receipt number.
(b) These records shall be subject to inspection by any
representative of the Union City Police Department duly
authorized for this purpose by the Chief of Police.
§ 234-18 UNION CITY CODE § 234-18
1:530
(4) The information outlined in Subsection E(3)(a), above, must
additionally be electronically documented through the use of an
electronic database system authorized by the Chief of Police.
Installation and training in this software will be made mandatory as
of the effective date of this section and licensing will be conditional
upon compliance with proper use of the system as described
herein. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized police officer of any sworn law enforcement officer
acting in the performance of their duty as set forth in Subsection
E(6) below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief
of Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the
same date as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or
consignment. The information entered must contain all pertinent
information in Subsection E(3)(a) above.
(5) In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted
on paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours
from the date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used,
the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction information set
forth in Subsection E(3)(a) above into the database as soon as
possible upon the dealer's equipment being repaired or replaced,
or the database coming back into service. Failure by the dealer to
properly maintain computer equipment in a reasonable fashion, or
failure by the dealer to replace faulty computer equipment, may
result in the dealer being cited for a violation of this section and
subsequently being subject to the penalties for doing so including
revocation of the dealer's license as described in Subsection F.
(6) It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in
the dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours
any member of the Police Department to examine any database,
book, ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the
reportable transaction of precious metals or other secondhand
goods, as well as the articles purchased or received, and where
necessary, relinquish custody of those articles as provided in
Subsection F. Itinerant business and transient buyers will be
responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the address where
these records and articles will be stored.
F. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
(1) All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased,
received for pawn, or received for consignment as described above,
are to be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or
designee thereof at the designated business address for a period of
at least 10 calendar days from the date the transaction information
is actually reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner
described above in Subsection D. Jewelry also must be maintained
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-18
1:531
for at least 10 business days, the statutory period provided in
N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36(d). All precious metal or other secondhand goods
subject to inspection must remain in the same condition as when
purchased or received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed
of, changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the ten-day
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient
buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the
location where the purchased item(s) are being held.
(2) Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
provided that the seller signed the mandatory statement required
by Subsection E(2) upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by
deception under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall
be considered the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of
N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer shall seize the goods, provide the
dealer with a receipt and issue a criminal complaint against the
seller for theft by deception and any other criminal charges for
which the officer has probable cause that the seller has committed.
If convicted of theft by deception and if so found by an order of a
court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible for
providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
(3) If market conditions would create a hardship on the dealer by
holding precious metals or other secondhand goods for such
period, the dealer may present the property to the Chief of Police in
order that it may be photographed and, if deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police, an investigation may be implemented. The Chief of
Police shall have the authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the
requirement under this section.
(4) In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand good in the form prescribed
in Subsection E(3)(a).
(5) No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business
designee identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to
be made and the item to be purchased.
(6) Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license
and rights to operate thereunder. The penalty shall be in addition to
any fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to
Subsection I.
(a) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds
for suspension: violation of any provisions of this section,
§ 234-18 UNION CITY CODE § 234-18
1:532
including failure to comply with any training or fees associated
with the electronic database software system in use by the
municipality; violation of any other statute, regulation, or local
ordinance; or any other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(b) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that
appropriate grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted,
the Chief of Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written
notice of suspension of license to the offending dealer and to
the City Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the
suspension and notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal
pursuant to Subsection F(8). A temporary suspension shall
issue immediately, pending the outcome of any appeal taken.
Suspended dealers must immediately cease engaging in the
business of purchasing for resale, receiving for pawn, and/or
selling of precious metals and/or other secondhand goods in
the municipality until reinstatement.
(c) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only
when the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the
determination of the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee,
been cured, corrected, or appropriately rectified; or if
reinstatement is deemed appropriate by the three-person
panel appointed by the Chief of Police, upon the timely filing of
an appeal as provided in Subsection F(8).
(7) Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by
the City Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified,
capable or competent to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. This penalty shall be in addition to any fines and penalties
the dealer may incur under Subsection I.
(a) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds
for revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second
violation under this chapter less than one year after an earlier
violation under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense
within this or any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any
other regulations or local ordinances within this or any
jurisdiction.
(b) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that
appropriate grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted,
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the
City Clerk in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately
and automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending
the outcome of the charge. A three-person panel appointed by
the Chief of Police, shall review the stated ground for
revocation, and the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition
of suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel
determines that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-18
1:533
shall set forth the grounds for the same in writing in the
form of a notice of revocation, which shall be provided to the
dealer. The notice shall advise the dealer to the right appeal.
If the panel determines that suspension is the appropriate
disposition, it shall provide the dealer with a notice of
suspension that shall advise the dealer of the right to appeal.
Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish his or her
license and must immediately and indefinitely cease operating
as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
(8) Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a
suspension or revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a
three-person panel, appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time
the applicant shall be permitted to introduce such evidence as may
be deemed relevant to such suspension or revocation. Any
applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of
appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice of revocation or
suspension of license.
(9) A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business provided that he or she notifies the City Clerk, in writing,
of the street address of said new location.
G. Bond requirement. Each dealer covered under this section shall deliver
a bond to the City Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and
executed by a surety company authorized to do business under the laws
of the State of New Jersey as surety. The bond, to be approved by the
City Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, shall in the penal sum of
$10,000 conditioned for the due and proper observance of and
compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the
conduct of this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and
remain for the benefit of any person or persons who shall have received
judgment against the dealer licensed under this section, which damage
shall be established by a judgment or a court of proper jurisdiction. This
bond shall contain the following language: "The obligation of this bond
shall, in addition to the City of Union City, be and remain for the benefit
of any person who shall obtain a judgment against the obligor as a
result of damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license granted
under this chapter" (1972 Code Sect. 7-20.6). Said bond shall be kept
for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license and must
be renewed annually along with the license.
H. Fees; period of license validity. A nonrefundable fee for initial
application and license for a pawnbroker or a dealer in precious metals
or other secondhand goods, as covered under this section, is $300. The
annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees are separate from
and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation to the
mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of
Police, as provided by Subsection E(4). Payments are to be made in the
§ 234-18 UNION CITY CODE § 234-18
1:534
manner directed by the City Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year
period from the date of its issuance.
I. Violations and penalties. Violation of any provision of this section by a
dealer shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in
excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of
imprisonment or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days
in addition to a suspension or revocation of operating license as
provided in Subsection F(6) and (7) above. Each and every violation
shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result in an
additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in
addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
Subsection F(7). The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall
not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided
herein, and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed
for the violation of this section.
J. Time limit for conformance; repealer; severability.
(1) Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or
other entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer
in precious metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the
provisions of this section within 90 days following the effective date
of this section.
(2) All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
(3) Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any
preexisting statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in
N.J.S.A. 45:22-1, et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A.
51:6A-1 et seq. the sale of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A.
2C:31-36 et seq., of any other statutory provision regarding any
subject matter discussed herein.
(4) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of
this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed
a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
K. Exemptions. Exemptions shall include:
(1) Sales conducted by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal,
educational, religious or benevolent organizations which have been
in active and continuous existence for at least one year prior to the
holding of the sale or which are incorporated as a not-for-profit
corporation by the state.
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-18
1:535
Chapter 239
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills — See Ch. 208.
Nuisances — See Ch. 266.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
Solid waste — See Ch. 359.
§ 239-1. Littering prohibited.
No person shall litter, sweep, throw or cast, or direct, suffer or permit any
servant, agent, employee or other person under his/her control, to litter,
sweep, throw or cast any garbage, paper, dust or other rubbish and refuse
of any kind whatsoever, in or upon any street or public place, vacant lot, air
shaft, areaway, backyard, court or alley.
§ 239-2. Responsibilities of abutting property owners.
§ 239-3. Additional littering regulations.
No dry sand, hair, wastepaper, feathers or other substance that is in a
similar manner liable to be blown by the wind shall be sieved, agitated or
exposed, nor shall any mat, carpet or cloth be shaken or beaten, nor shall
any cloth, yarn, garment, material or substance be scoured or cleaned, nor
shall any rags, damaged merchandise, barrels, boxes or broken bales of
merchandise or goods be placed, kept or exposed in any place where they
or particles therefrom will pass into any street or public place or into any
occupied premises, nor shall any usual or any reasonable precautions be
omitted by any person to prevent fragments or any substances from falling
to the detriment or peril of life or health, or dust or light material flying
(2) Sales or purchases which are regulated by the licensing laws of the
state, including automobile dealers, used parts dealers and
automotive parts recyclers.
A. Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any
building or premises shall keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk,
flagging and curbstone abutting the building or premises free from
obstructions and nuisances of every kind, and shall keep the sidewalks,
air shafts, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys free from garbage,
refuse, rubbish, litter and other offensive material.
B. Sidewalks abutting commercial property shall be kept broom clean at
all times. All persons owning or occupying commercial property shall
remove any litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish or other offensive material
from the sidewalk in front of their premises prior to 11:00 a.m. each
day.
§ 234-18 UNION CITY CODE § 239-3
1:536
into any street, place or building, from any building or erection, while the
same is being altered, repaired, demolished or otherwise. In demolishing
any building or part thereof, the material to be removed shall be properly
wet in order to lay dust incident to its removal.
§ 239-4. Litter from vehicles.
No one, being the owner or in charge or control of any vehicle or of any
receptacle, shall litter, drop or spill or permit to be littered, dropped or
spilled any dirt, sand, gravel, clay, loam, stone or building rubbish, sawdust,
shavings or other light materials of any sort, or manufacturing, trade or
household waste, refuse, rubbish of any sort, or manure, garbage or other
organic refuse or other offensive matter, in or upon any street or public
place.
§ 239-5. Distribution of printed matter.
No person shall throw, cast or distribute, or cause or permit to be thrown,
cast or distributed, any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other
advertising matter whatsoever in or upon any street or public place, in a
front yard or courtyard, on any stoop, in the vestibule of any hall in any
building or in a letter box therein, provided that nothing herein contained
shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery of any such
matter by the United States Postal Service, or prohibit the distribution
of sample copies of newspapers regularly sold by the copy or by annual
subscription. This section is not intended to prevent the lawful distribution
of anything other than commercial and business advertising matter.
§ 239-6. Noxious liquid or other filthy matter.
No noxious liquid or other filthy matter of any kind shall be allowed by any
person to fall upon or run into any street or public place or be taken to or
put therein.
§ 239-7. Interference with Department of Sanitation.
No person shall prevent or interfere with any employee of the Department
of Sanitation in the sweeping or cleaning of any street or in the removal of
sweepings, garbage, rubbish, snow, ice or other refuse material.
§ 239-8. Garbage placed by householders.
No person, other than an authorized employee or agent of the Department
of Sanitation, shall disturb or remove any garbage or light refuse or rubbish
placed by householders or their tenants, or by occupants or their servants
within the stoop or area line, or in front of houses or lots, for removal, unless
requested by residents of such houses.
§ 239-9. Restricted use of public receptacles; penalty.
§ 239-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-9
1:537
§ 239-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-18-2014]
Chapter 244
LOTS, VACANT
§ 244-1. Inspection. [Amended 5-21-2013]
The Health Officer, Construction Code Official or the Director of the
Department of Public Works, or such subordinate officials as may be
designated to act in his/her behalf, are hereby authorized and empowered
to enter and to inspect each and every vacant lot in this City which has
been vacant for a period of more than 30 days or any lot which may become
vacant as a result of demolition.
§ 244-2. Certificate of danger; complaint; notice of hearing.
When any lot has been vacant for a period of 30 or more days, or becomes
vacant as a result of demolition, and the Health Officer, Construction Code
Official or the Director of Public Works or his/her designee certifies that
such lot constitutes a danger and a threat to the health, welfare or safety of
A. Purpose. The City provides numerous litter and recycling receptacles
throughout the City in an effort to maintain clean streets and sidewalks
throughout the City and not to be used for household or commercial
garbage.
B. Notice. Notice to the public giving the restricted use of the receptacles
and the possible fine to be imposed for misuse shall be posted securely
upon each and every receptacle provided by the City for litter.
C. Violations and penalties.
(1) The use of litter receptacles provided by the City to its residents
shall be strictly limited to litter only, disallowing any use thereof for
household or commercial garbage deposits.
(2) Any person who misuses the City litter receptacles is subject to a
fine of $100.
A. Any person who violates § 239-6 of this chapter shall be subject to the
following fines:
(1) First offense: $500.
(2) Second offense: $750.
(3) Any subsequent offense: $1,000.
B. Any person who violates any other part of Chapter 239 shall be subject
to a fine of $50.
§ 239-9 UNION CITY CODE § 244-2
1:538
persons in the area, a complaint shall be served upon the owner or parties
in interest. The complaint shall contain:
§ 244-3. Determination after hearing. [Amended 5-21-2013]
After the complaint, notice and hearing, the Health Officer, Construction
Code Official, Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall determine
whether a vacant lot under consideration constitutes a danger and a threat
to the health, welfare or safety of persons in the area.
§ 244-4. Order for abatement. [Amended 5-21-2013]
If positive determination is made, the Health Officer, Construction Code
Official or Director of Public Works, or his/her designee, shall, within 15
days after the hearing, state, in writing, his/her findings of fact and support
his/her determination. Within such fifteen-day period, an order to protect
and secure the vacant lot against intrusion, garbage dumping, unlawful
entry or unlawful use or use inimical to the public health, safety and/or
welfare shall be issued and served on the owner and all parties in interest.
§ 244-5. Abatement by owner; construction of fence.
Within 30 days such lot shall be secured in the following manner:
A. A description of the premises.
B. Notice that a hearing will be held before the Health Officer,
Construction Code Official, or the Director of Public Works or his/her
designated agent at a time fixed not less than 10 days after service of
the complaint. The notice shall state that the owner or parties in
interest may file an answer no less than three days prior to the
scheduled hearing and may appear in person. [Amended 5-21-201334]
A. The owner or parties in interest shall have removed therefrom all
debris, ashes, rubbish, refuse, junk, slop, wood, papers or any other
materials which are or may constitute a hazard to health, safety or
welfare or be the cause of an accident from such vacant lot.
B. The owner or parties in interest shall protect and secure the lot by
constructing a fence around the property.
(1) Specifications for the fence shall be:
(a) Maximum height shall be four feet on street frontage, except in
commercial areas, which shall be six feet, and in the side and
rear at the discretion of the Zoning Officer. [Amended
5-21-2013]
(b) Fencing material shall be of galvanized metal.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original ordinance section 3, service of notice
and orders, which immediately followed this section.
§ 244-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-5
1:539
§ 244-6. Failure to protect lots; abatement by City; costs to be lien.
§ 244-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
Chapter 249
MACHETES, SALE OF
(c) Galvanized pipe for all line posts shall have a minimum twoinch
outside diameter.
(d) All terminal posts, gates, ends and corner posts shall have a
minimum outside diameter of 2 1/2 inches.
(e) All terminal posts shall be set in concrete footings, at a
minimum of 30 inches in the ground.
(f) All line posts shall be driven a minimum of 30 inches into the
ground.
(g) Fencing material shall be of minimum number nine-gauge
galvanized wire with a two-inch mesh.
(h) Coil spring shall be a minimum number seven-gauge wire to
provide proper tension.
(2) In no case should barbed wire, wood or similar materials
dangerous to children be used.
C. It shall be the continuing responsibility of the owner or parties in
interest to maintain the fence and protect the property as hereinabove
set forth so long as same remains vacant.
A. Upon the failure of the owner or owners to protect the lot within the
time period specified in § 244-6 herein, immediate notice shall be given
by the Health Officer, Construction Code Official, Director of Public
Works or his/her designee to the City Building Inspector. Upon receipt
of such notice, the Building Inspector shall forthwith protect the
property as hereinabove set forth. [Amended 5-21-2013]
B. The costs thereof shall be certified by the Director of Public Works to
the Law Department for collection from the owner in whatever manner
allowable under the law. In the alternative, the costs shall constitute a
lien upon the property upon the filing of a notice of lien with the Hudson
County Register of Deeds and Mortgages and a true copy thereof with
the City Tax Collector.
§ 244-5 UNION CITY CODE § 249-1
1:540
§ 249-1. Sale prohibited.
Sale of machetes in any store or facility or by any individual or other entity
in the City of Union City is prohibited.
§ 249-2. Violations and penalties.
Any store or facility in which a machete is sold or any individual or entity
who sells a machete shall be subject as the owner or operator of the store
or individual or entity to the penalty provisions of the Code of the City of
Union City.35
Chapter 254
MASSAGE PARLORS
§ 254-1. Findings.
The Mayor and the Board of Commissioners hereby find as a fact that the
operation of any establishment, public or private, as a massage parlor or
bath parlor, or any similar or combination type of business where physical
contact with the recipient of the services provided is by a person of the
same or opposite sex, which physical contact induces or results, or may
induce or result, in sexual contact, behavior or conduct, proscribed or
otherwise, is a matter of public concern in view of the fact that the same
affects the general health and welfare of the citizens of this City. The
provisions hereinafter enacted and described are deemed to be a necessity
in the public interest, and these findings of fact and description of
legislative intent are hereby declared as a matter of legislative
determination.
§ 254-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
MASSAGE PARLOR and/or BATH PARLOR — Any room, place or
establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital or dispensary, where
nonmedical and nonsurgical manipulative exercises are practiced upon the
human body for other than cosmetic or beautifying purposes, with or
without the use of mechanical or bathing devices, by anyone not a physician
or chiropractor or of a similarly licensed status.
§ 254-3. Certain acts prohibited.
No person shall:
A. Operate any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or
private facility, as a massage parlor or bath parlor, or any similar or
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. IV, General Penalty.
§ 249-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-3
1:541
§ 254-4. Exceptions.
§ 254-5. Revocation of license; violations and penalties.
A violation of the provisions of § 254-3 shall constitute grounds for the
revocation of any license, permit or certificate issued by the City relating to
the premises in question. In addition, any person who violates the provisions
of § 254-3 shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalties as set forth in
Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty. Each day that the violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and violation of this chapter.
Chapter 261
(RESERVED)
Chapter 266
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Lien for abatement of nuisances — See Ch. 1,
Art. III.
Right of entry to abate nuisance — See Ch. 4,
Art. XIV.
§ 266-1. Notice to abate nuisance.
combination type of business, where physical contact with the recipient
of the service offered is provided by a person of the same or opposite
sex, which physical contact induces or results, or may induce or result,
in sexual contact, behavior or conduct, proscribed or otherwise.
B. Permit the use or occupation of any building, structure or premises for
the prohibited purposes described in Subsection A above.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any duly licensed
physician, chiropractor, optometrist, nurse, physical therapist or
beautician.
B. This chapter shall not apply to massage or physical therapy treatments
given by a registered massager RMT or AMTA and:
(1) In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical
therapist.
(2) In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitarium
having a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors
and/or physical therapists.
(3) By any licensed physician, registered nurse, chiropractor or
physical therapist in the residence of his/her patient.
§ 254-3 UNION CITY CODE § 266-1
1:542
§ 266-2. Abatement. [Amended 5-21-2013]
If the owner or person in control of the premises, upon being notified
as provided by § 266-1, does not comply with the notice within the time
specified and fails to remove or abate the nuisance or condition, the Health
Officer or Construction Code Official shall proceed to abate the nuisance or
condition, or may cause it to be removed or abated, in a summary manner
by such means as shall be deemed proper.
§ 266-3. Recovery of costs.
A. Whenever anything is declared by this chapter to be a nuisance or any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any premises within the
City, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control of the
premises to remove or abate it immediately from the date of service in
this notice. [Amended 4-1-2008]
B. Whenever anything declared by the enforcing agency in Union City to
be a nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any
public property, highway or other public premises or place, notice shall
be given to the person in charge to remove or abate the same within the
time specified. If that person fails to comply with the notice within the
time specified, the Health Officer or Construction Code Official may
remove or abate such nuisance or condition in the manner provided for
a like condition existing on a private premises or place. [Amended
5-21-2013]
C. Whenever anything declared by the enforcing agency in Union City to
be a nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any
premises within the City which shall cause an immediate threat to the
occupants of such premises or to the inhabitants of the City, the Health
Officer or Construction Code Official shall have the authority to order
an immediate abatement of such condition. In the event the owner or
person in control of the premises has not abated same within a twentyfour-
hour period, the Health Officer or Construction Code Official may
remove or abate such nuisance or condition in the manner provided for
in § 266-2. [Amended 5-21-2013]
A. Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the City as a result of
abating or removing, or causing to be abated or removed, any nuisance
or unsanitary or unhealthy condition, such costs and expenses may be
recovered in the following manner:
(1) In all cases where practical and permitted by law, such costs shall
be certified to the tax assessment authority and shall be a part of
the taxes next assessed against the premises upon which the
nuisance or unsanitary condition was located.
(2) Where it is impossible or impractical to proceed under Subsection
A, the cost or expense shall be recovered in an action at law in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-3
1:543
§ 266-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty.
Chapter 273
PAINT, LEAD-BASED
§ 273-1. Definitions.
§ 273-2. Hazardous conditions. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Where the Department of Health determines that the presence of lead
paint upon any premises creates a health hazard to children, it shall issue
an order to the owner or occupant to eliminate the hazard in accordance
with methods prescribed by regulations issued by the Department. The
property owner shall be completely financially responsible for the costs
of the appropriate lead abatement process, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:23 et
seq. These costs include lead hazard abatement evaluation, relocation of
occupants, and immediate evacuation of occupants. Any costs that the City
incurs to enforce this provision, including costs and legal fees, shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
B. Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in addition
to, and shall not affect the imposition of, any penalties for the violation
of this chapter.
A. In these regulations, the following definitions apply:
APPROVED — Satisfactory compliance as determined and recorded by
the Department of Health.
DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE AND ROOMING
UNIT — A building or structure which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping or cooking by human occupants.
FACILITY — Any building or structure and equipment therein.
LEAD PAINT — Any pigmented, liquid substance applied to surfaces by
brush, roller or spray in which the total nonvolatile ingredients contain
more than 1% of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic lead.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including all facilities thereon.
B. Proprietary day-care facilities. No not-for-profit corporation shall fall
within these definitions for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 266-3 UNION CITY CODE § 273-3
1:544
§ 273-3. Use of lead paint prohibited.
No person shall apply lead paint to toys, furniture or the interior surfaces
of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or facility
occupied or used by children. Such interior surfaces include, but are not
limited to, window sills, window frames, doors, door frames, walls, ceilings,
stair rails and spindles or other appurtenances. No person shall sell,
transfer or deliver toys or furniture to which lead paint has been applied.
§ 273-4. Labeling of lead paint.
§ 273-5. Removal of lead paint.
A. No person shall store, sell or transfer for retail purposes a lead paint
unless the container used in retail trade bears a warning statement
which shall be an integral part of the label and shall be placed in a
conspicuous place on the immediate container of such paint and shall
be printed in letters which are legible and in conspicuous contrast with
other printing appearing on the container. The statement shall be in
substantial conformance with state and federal laws and regulations
and recommended standards of the Federal Hazardous Substances
Labeling Act and shall further conform in wording and type style and
size as follows or shall be an approved equivalent:
WARNING!
CONTAINS LEAD
HARMFUL IF EATEN
Do not apply on toys, furniture, window sills or other interior surfaces
of any dwelling or facility which may be occupied or used by children.
Keep away from heat and open flame. Avoid prolonged contact with
skin and breathing of vapor or spray mist. Close container after each
use.
Use with adequate ventilation.
KEEP OUT OF THE REACH OF CHILDREN
B. This warning statement shall also be required on accompanying
literature including directions for use. Where tinting or coloring added
to paint at the point of sale produces a final paint product with more
than one percent lead, the labeling requirements of this chapter shall
apply.
C. Labels on containers of lead paint manufactured prior to the effective
date of this regulation shall be made to conform with the above labeling
requirements by the application of a separate warning label which shall
be affixed directly upon the existing label. However, after one year from
the effective date of these regulations the warning shall be an integral
part of the label on the container.
§ 273-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-5
1:545
§ 273-6. Rules and regulations.
The Health Officer of the City is hereby authorized and empowered to
make and adopt such rules and regulations as (s)he may deem proper and
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and for the better protection
of the health of the inhabitants of the City.
§ 273-7. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other sanction or remedy procedure provided, any person
who shall violate any provision of this chapter, any regulation adopted
under it, any order of the Department of Health issued thereunder, or any
condition of any license required thereunder and any person who knowingly
participates in any such violation by any other person or who has reason
to know that his/her participation will materially contribute to any such
violation by another person shall be subject to the penalty provided in
Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty.
Chapter 278
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 278-1. Definitions.
The following words, as used herein, shall have the definitions and
meanings set forth herein:
A. Where the Department of Health determines that the presence of lead
paint upon any premises creates a health hazard to children, it shall
issue an order to the owner or occupant to eliminate the hazard. Lead
paint shall be completely removed from any surface which can be
chewed or eaten by children. Cracked, chipped, blistered or peeling
lead paint shall be completely removed. The lead paint ordered to be
removed shall be completely removed to the base surface under such
safety conditions as may be approved by the Department. In lieu of
removal of the lead paint, the accessible surface shall be covered with
an approved durable material. Repainting a surface with a nonlead
paint without the complete removal of the existing lead paint shall not
deemed to be satisfactory compliance with this chapter.
B. The methods used for the removal of lead paint shall not present a
hazard to health from fumes, dust or vapors by inhalation or absorption
through the skin and mucous membranes and shall be in accordance
with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and safety standards
and practices of the State of New Jersey and federal agencies.
§ 273-5 UNION CITY CODE § 278-1
1:546
MOTORCADE — An organized procession containing 10 or more vehicles,
except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley.
PARADE — Any procession or march intended to proceed along any street
or in any public place in an orderly fashion.
§ 278-2. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 278-3. Permit application.
A. Required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start
any parade unless a parade permit shall have first been obtained from
the Director of Public Safety, or his/her designee.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
(3) Any procession or parade of any body of police or firefighters of the
City, militia of the state or troops of the United State of America.
(4) Any parade planned and sponsored by the City.
A. Filing with Director of Public Safety. A person seeking issuance of a
parade permit shall file an application with the Director of Public
Safety, or his/her designee, on forms provided by the Director.
B. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Director of Public Safety, or his/her designee, not less than 30 days
before the proposed date of the parade.
C. Contents of application.
(1) The application for parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct such parade.
(b) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of
the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(c) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for
its conduct.
(d) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-3
1:547
§ 278-4. Fee.
There shall be a fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 278-5. Standards for issuance.
The Director of Public Safety, or his/her designee, shall issue a permit as
provided for hereunder when (s)he finds that:
(e) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(f) The approximate number of persons, animals, vehicles and
floats which will constitute such parade and a description of
the vehicles and floats.
(g) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(h) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(i) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade
and of any stages or reviewing stands to be used by parade
participants or parade spectators.
(j) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas.
(k) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(l) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such
permit shall file with the Director of Public Safety, or his/her
designee, a communication, in writing, from the person
proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his/her behalf.
(m) Any additional information with the Director, or his/her
designee, shall find reasonably necessary with regard to the
health, safety and welfare of the participants of the parade or
the citizens of the City to make a determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
(2) The Director, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to
consider any application hereunder with is filed less than the time
required under Subsection B above.
D. Date and time stamped. Applications for permits shall be date and time
stamped. Applications will be reached in order of filing.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
§ 278-3 UNION CITY CODE § 278-5
1:548
§ 278-6. Time limit for action on application.
The Director of Public Safety, or his/her designee, shall act upon the
application for a parade permit within 72 hours after the filing thereof. If
the Director, or his/her designee, disapproves of the application, (s)he shall
immediately notify the applicant within 24 hours after the date upon which
the application was filed. The Director, or his/her designee, shall state the
reasons for the denial of the permit.
§ 278-7. Alternate parade permits.
The Director, or his/her designee, in denying an application for a permit,
shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a
time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An alternate
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the
effect of, a parade permit.
§ 278-8. Notice of issuance.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Director, or his/her
designee, shall send a copy thereof to the following:
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the City to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the City.
C. The concentration of persons and vehicles at assembly points of the
parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas.
D. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
E. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
F. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for
private profit; provided, however, that the prohibition against
advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs
identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring floats or
transportation for the parade.
A. The Chief of Police.
B. The Fire Chief.
C. The Director of the Department of Public Works.
D. The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation
utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route
of the proposed parade.
§ 278-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-9
1:549
§ 278-9. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
§ 278-10. Duty to carry permit during parade.
The parade chairperson, or other person heading or leading such activity,
shall carry the parade permit upon his/her person during the conduct of the
parade.
§ 278-11. Public conduct during parade.
§ 278-12. Revocation of permit.
The Director, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to revoke a
parade permit issued hereunder upon his/her determination that there are
A. The date of the parade.
B. The parade route.
C. The starting time.
D. The ending time.
E. The maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of
the parade.
F. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
G. The number of persons, motor vehicles and floats that will be in the
parade.
H. Such other information as the Director, or his/her designee, shall find
necessary for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
B. Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless
trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade
when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
C. Parking on parade route. The Director, or his/her designee, shall have
the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the
parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting a part of
the route of a parade. The Director, or his/her designee, shall post signs
to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for
parking on a street not posted in violation of this chapter.
§ 278-9 UNION CITY CODE § 278-12
1:550
material differences between the conditions set forth in the application and
the conditions of the actual parade which adversely effect the ability of law
enforcement and fire-fighting personnel to protect the public safety and
welfare.
Chapter 284
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 16.
Towing — See Ch. 397.
Traffic signal monitoring system — See Ch.
402.
§ 278-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-12
1:551

ARTICLE I
Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-12 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 284-1. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
§ 284-2. Parking detached trailer, semitrailer or tractor.
No person shall park any trailer, semitrailer or tractor upon any public
street while such trailer, semitractor or tractor is detached from its
component unit, except when such trailer or semitrailer is in a continual
process of loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise.
A. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
B. Greasing or repairing such vehicle, except necessitated by an
emergency.
§ 284-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-2
1:553

ARTICLE II
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-22 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 284-3. Statutory authority.
Restricted parking spaces for handicapped persons in all parking facilities
under the jurisdiction of the City are hereby provided pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-138, as amended.
§ 284-4. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — A physical impairment which confines a person to
a wheelchair, causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity, affects
the sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas
is insecure or exposed to danger, causes faulty coordination or reduces
mobility, flexibility, coordination or perception to the extent that facilities
are needed to provide for the safety of that person.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building, structure, facility or complex used by
the general public or to which the general public is invited, including,
but not limited to, theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools,
libraries, recreation facilities, public transportation, terminals and stations,
factories, office buildings, businesses, shopping centers, hotels or motels
and public eating places, whether privately or publicly owned, except that
this term shall not include private family residences, warehouse storage
areas and all buildings conducting hazardous occupations that involve
highly combustible, highly flammable or explosive material.
§ 284-5. Compliance required; exceptions.
The owners of all public buildings which provide parking spaces adjacent to
or used in conjunction with the public building shall provide parking spaces
for handicapped persons in accordance with the guidelines herein set forth
and in a location and manner as determined by the Chief of Police. Any
parking facility with less than 20 existing spaces shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
§ 284-6. Lots maintained by City.
The City shall have the authority to provide parking spaces for handicapped
persons in all parking lots or areas maintained by it, pursuant to the
applicable standards set forth herein.
§ 284-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-7
1:555
§ 284-7. Guidelines.
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be constructed
according to the following guidelines:
§ 284-8. State identification card and certificate.
No persons shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and
marked as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking
facility unless the operator of the vehicle is the holder of an identification
card issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, and such operator's vehicle shall
have affixed thereto an identification certificate or marker issued either
by the Director of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles or a local
certificate issued by the City. Parking in a handicapped space without the
aforesaid vehicle identification shall create a rebuttable presumption that
use of the space was not for the physically handicapped.
§ 284-9. Union City identification card.
The Director of Public Safety of the City, subject to review and approval
by the Commissioners, shall issue, free of charge, a City special vehicle
identification card to any physically disabled person, resident or
nonresident, who may not qualify for such identification card under N.J.S.A.
39:4-204, but who does qualify under the definition of physical handicap
A. A minimum of one percent of the total number of parking spaces in the
parking facility shall be used for handicapped parking; but there shall
be not less than one parking space in each such facility.
B. The location of spaces for the physically handicapped shall be in an area
of the parking facility which is most accessible and proximate to the
building or buildings which the facility serves. The determination of
such location shall be made by the Chief of Police. In shopping centers
and other multistore facilities, the spaces for the handicapped shall be
as near to the flagship store as possible and/or at such other locations
as designated by the Chief of Police.
C. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the international symbol of access. The lines
designating the area shall be painted with fluorescent yellow paint.
D. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of an
automobile. The parking space shall be located on a level, paved
surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
E. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
F. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from the parking area to the sidewalk.
§ 284-7 UNION CITY CODE § 284-9
1:556
in § 284-4 of this article. A physician's certification shall be necessary to
establish the qualifying status of each applicant.
§ 284-10. License plates.
When the City designates a handicapped parking space in front of a
residential structure on thoroughfares within the City, the sign designating
the existence of such handicapped parking shall have placed upon it the
New Jersey motor vehicle license plate number of the vehicle used by the
handicapped person whom the City has approved handicapped parking for.
It shall be the responsibility of the person seeking to have such handicapped
parking to advise the City Clerk, Director of Public Safety and Police Chief
of any change in the New Jersey motor vehicle license plate number from
that on the original designation. Failure to so advise shall leave the person
subject to the violations provisions of article, the City shall endeavor, to
the best of its ability and without promise, to place such New Jersey
motor vehicle license plate number on existing handicapped parking space
designations.
§ 284-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article, or any
amendment or supplement thereto, shall be subject to the penalty as set by
the state for illegal parking in a handicapped parking space.
§ 284-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-11
1:557

ARTICLE III
Parking Meters
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. XVII of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended through Ord. No. 2000-02]
§ 284-12. Definitions.
§ 284-13. Parking meter zones established.
A. Words and phrases defined. Whenever any words and phrases are used
in this article, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply
to such words and phrases used herein.
B. Additional definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
PARKING LOT, PUBLIC — All areas, lots or facilities owned, operated
or conducted by the Parking Authority and used for public parking.
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent
with this article placed or erected for the regulation of parking by
authority of this article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by
proper legend the legal parking time established by the City, and when
operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time
and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime
parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone
adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the
parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably
marked on the curb or on the surface of the street or parking lot
adjacent to a street and adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any restricted street or parking lot
contiguous to a street upon which parking meters are installed and in
operation.
A. On-street. Parking meter zones are hereby established in and upon the
streets or parts of streets named in Schedule I attached to and made a
part of this article.
B. Off-street. Parking meter zones are hereby established in and upon the
off-street parking area described below, where parking will be
permitted for a period not exceeding 180 minutes:
(1) 38th – 39th Streets. All that certain lot, tract or parcel of land and
premises, hereinafter particularly described, situate, lying and
being in the City of Union City, in the County of Hudson and State
of New Jersey: Beginning at a point in the northeasterly side of
38th Street (formerly Lewis Street) distant 96.74 feet
northwesterly from the corner formed by the intersection of the
northeasterly side of 38th Street with the northwesterly side of
§ 284-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-13
1:559
Bergenline Avenue and from the point of beginning running thence
(1) north 30 degrees 44 minutes 33 seconds east 200 feet to a point
in the southerly side of 39th Street; thence (2) north 59 degrees
15 minutes 20 seconds west and along the southerly side of 39th
Street 150 feet to a point; thence (3) south 30 degrees 44 minutes
33 seconds west 100 feet to a point; thence (4) north 59 degrees
15 minutes 27 seconds west 5.50 feet to a point; thence (5) south
30 degrees 44 minutes 33 seconds west 100 feet to a point in
the northerly side of 38th Street; thence (6) south 59 degrees 15
minutes 27 seconds east and along the northerly side of 38th Street
155.50 feet to the point or place of beginning.
(2) 36th – 37th Streets.
(a) All that certain tract or parcel of land and premises,
hereinafter particularly described, situate, lying and being in
the City of Union City, County of Hudson and State of New
Jersey.
(b) Beginning at a point in the northerly side of 36th Street
(formerly Blum Street) the point being distant 191.08 feet
westerly from the intersection of the northerly side of 36th
Street, and the westerly side of Bergenline Avenue and running
thence; (1) north 58 degrees 58 minutes 27 seconds west and
along the northerly side of 36th Street, 200 feet to a point, the
point being the southwesterly corner of hereinbefore
mentioned Lot 17, thence (2) north 29 degrees 52 minutes 33
seconds east along and beyond the westerly side of Lot 17
149.54 feet to a point in the southerly side of 37th Street,
formerly known as Union Street, thence (3) South 58 degrees
35 minutes 27 seconds east and along the southerly side of
37th Street, 206.14 feet to a point, the point being in the
northeasterly corner of hereinbefore mentioned Lot 52, thence
(4) south 32 degrees one minute 24 seconds west and along the
easterly side of the Lot 52, 75 feet to a point, thence (5) north
58 degrees 35 minutes 27 seconds west 3.33 feet to a point, the
point being the northeasterly corner of hereinbefore
mentioned Lot 24, thence (6) south 29 degrees 52 minutes 33
seconds west and along the easterly side of the aforesaid Lot
24, 73.20 feet to the point or place of beginning.
(3) 35th – 36th Streets. All those certain lots, tracts or parcels of land
lying and being in the City of Union City, County of Hudson and
State of New Jersey, which on a certain map on file in the Hudson
County Register's Office entitled Assessment Map of the City of
Union City, Hudson County, New Jersey, 1899, is known and
designated as Lots 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66 and 67
in Block 21 and more particularly described as follows: Beginning
at a point in the northerly side of 35th Street (formerly Jefferson
Street) distant 189.55 feet westerly from the intersection of the
westerly side of Bergenline Avenue and the northerly side of 35th
§ 284-13 UNION CITY CODE § 284-13
1:560
§ 284-14. On-street and off-street parking meter zones.
Street, the point being the southeasterly corner of hereinbefore
mentioned Lot 33, and running, thence (1) north 58 degrees 58
minutes 27 seconds west and along the northerly side of 35th
Street 150 feet to a point, the point being the southwesterly corner
of Lot 28 thence (2) north 29 degrees 48 minutes 33 seconds east
and along the westerly side of Lot 28 and 62, 200 feet to a point
in the southerly side of 36th Street (formerly Blum Street) thence
(3) south 58 degrees 58 minutes 27 seconds east and along the
southerly side of 36th Street 150 feet to a point, the point being
the northeasterly corner of Lot 67, thence (4) south 29 degrees 48
minutes 33 seconds west and along the easterly side of Lots 67, and
33,200 feet to the point or place of beginning.
(4) 41st – 42nd Streets.
(a) All that certain lot, tract or parcel of land lying and being in the
City of Union City, County of Hudson and State of New Jersey,
which on a certain map on file in the Hudson County Register's
Office entitled Map of City of Union City, Hudson County, New
Jersey, 1899, is known and designated as Lots 21, 22, 23, 51
and 52 in Block 47 and more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the southerly side of 42nd street
(formerly Liberty Street) the point being distant 100 feet
westerly from the intersection of the southerly side of 42nd
street and the westerly side of Bergenline Avenue, running
thence (1) southerly and parallel to the westerly side of
Bergenline Avenue 100 feet to a point thence (2) westerly and
parallel to the southerly side of 42nd Street, 25 feet to a point;
thence (3) southerly and parallel to the first course 100 feet to
a point in the northerly side of 41st Street, formerly known as
Humboldt Street, the point being distant 125 feet westerly
from the intersection of the northerly side of 41st Street and
the westerly side of Bergenline Avenue; thence (4) westerly
and along the northerly side of 41st Street, 75 feet to a point;
thence (5) northerly and parallel to the first course, 100 feet to
a point, thence (6) easterly and parallel to the northerly side of
41st Street, 50 feet to a point; thence (7) northerly and parallel
to the first Course 100 feet to a point in the southerly side of
42nd Street; thence (8) easterly and along the southerly side of
42nd Street, 50 feet to the point or place of beginning.
(b) The ingress and egress for the off-street parking area are
shown on the plans of the parking areas which are annexed
and made a part of this article.
(5) Additional off-street parking facilities. Any and all additional offstreet
parking facilities owned or operated by the City parking
authority.
§ 284-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-14
1:561
A. On street.
(1) When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with
the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in the parking
space shall be parked so that the foremost part of the vehicle shall
be nearest to the parking meter; when a parking space in any
parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle
parked in the parking space shall be parked with the foremost part
of the vehicle nearest to the meter.
(2) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to permit
parking of vehicles in those spaces within any zone in which, by
other regulations of the City, parking is prohibited; nor shall
anything contained in this article be construed as prohibiting the
City from providing free parking spaces for loading and unloading,
for bus stops, taxicab stands or for other matters of a similar or
emergency nature.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with,
open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed under the provisions of this article.
B. Off street.
(1) Parking meters shall be so constructed and installed as to conform
to the provisions of § 284-17, except that parking time shall be
restricted to a period not to exceed 180 minutes in the off-street
zones.
(2) No truck, tractor, trailer or vehicle in excess of 2 1/2 tons gross
weight, whether moved by motor, human or animal power, shall
park in or use any parking area owned, operated or maintained by
the Authority. Trucks up to 2 1/2 tons gross weight, whether having
commercial or passenger registration, may park in a parking area
owned, operated or maintained by the Authority with the
permission of and at the discretion of the Authority.
(3) No vehicle shall be parked in these areas when it does not fit
between the lines designated as a single parking meter unit.
(4) No vehicle not equipped with pneumatic tires properly inflated
shall park in or use any parking area owned, operated or
maintained by the Authority.
(5) The municipal parking areas shall not be used as through streets,
but shall be used only ancillary or incidental to the parking of
vehicles or moving of vehicles on, to or from these parking areas.
(6) Upon payment to the Authority of a fixed fee not exceeding $40, a
person shall be permitted to park a designated vehicle in a public
parking area for a period of one month or a major fraction thereof.
§ 284-14 UNION CITY CODE § 284-14
1:562
§ 284-15. Time limit parking in on-street and off-street zones.
(a) Upon acceptance of the fee the Authority shall issue to the
applicant a sticker, sign, permit or meter cover for a meter
installed at the designated area to permit the parking of his
vehicle for a calendar month. A vehicle bearing a sticker, sign
or permit, during the calendar month shown thereon, may park
in the public parking area adjacent to the covered meter. The
authority is extended the right to reasonably limit the extent of
monthly parkers in the public parking areas. No other person
is to park any car or vehicle contrary to the time permitted in a
public parking area on Sundays or the legal holidays named.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit a vehicle
to be parked or remain in a public parking area at any time,
except within the hours specified on the legend attached to
each meter and parking signs in the public parking area
adjacent to the covered meter without a sticker, sign or permit.
(c) No vehicle shall be parked on a public parking area between
the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day without a
sticker, sign or permit, and without being entitled to park
adjacent to a covered meter by reason of his having prepaid
the monthly fee fixed by the Authority.
A. Sixty-minute parking meter zones. Parking meter zones are hereby
established which are restricted to sixty-minute metered parking
periods, as described in Schedule II attached to and made a part of this
article. Each parking meter installed in this metered zone shall be set to
show or display a signal showing legal parking for the space alongside
for a period not exceeding 60 minutes, upon deposit therein of coins of
the United States of America at the rate of $0.25 for each thirty-minute
period in accordance with the directions appearing on the legend
affixed to the meter.
B. One-hundred-and-twenty-minute parking meter zones. Parking meter
zones are hereby established which are restricted to one-hundred-andtwenty-
minute metered parking periods as described in Schedule III
attached to and made a part of this article.
C. Twelve-hour parking meter zones. Those streets which border on the
Tunnel Cut are hereby established as twelve-hour parking meter zones
and described in Schedule IV, attached to and made a part of this
article, parking shall be permitted for a period not exceeding 12
consecutive hours. Each parking meter installed in the metered zone
shall be set as to show or display a signal showing legal parking for the
space alongside for a period not exceeding 12 consecutive hours, upon
deposit therein of coins of the United States of America at the rate of
$0.25 for each thirty-minute period in accordance with the directions
appearing on the legend affixed to the meter.
§ 284-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-16
1:563
§ 284-16. No parking certain hours and days.
§ 284-17. Installation and operation of off-street and on-street
meters.
A. Daily; certain hours. The hours of metered legal parking on the streets
or parts of streets as described in Schedule V, attached to and made a
part of this article, shall be 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., every day except
Sundays and legal holidays.
B. Certain days; certain hours. The hours of metered legal parking on the
streets or parts of streets as described in Schedule VI attached to and
made a part of this article shall be 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m., Monday,
Thursday and Friday; 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Tuesday, Wednesday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m., every day except Sundays three weeks
before Christmas.
C. Certain days; certain hours; additional. The hours of metered legal
parking on the streets or parts of streets as described in Schedule VII,
attached to and made a part of this article, shall be 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m., Monday, Thursday and Friday; 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Tuesday,
Wednesday and Saturday; 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m., every day except
Sundays three weeks before Christmas.
A. Meters required. Parking meters shall be installed in all zones
established as parking meter zones in this article, provided that no
parking meters shall be installed in any of the areas where parking is
prohibited by statute pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
B. Placement and setting of meters. Parking meters installed in the
parking meter zones established as provided in this article shall be
placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the parking places as
described. Each parking meter shall be set to display by a signal that
the parking space adjacent to the meter is or is not legally in use. Each
parking meter shall be set to display a signal showing legal parking for
the space alongside the meter for a period not exceeding 120 minutes,
upon the deposit therein of a twenty-five-cent coin of the United States
of America for each 30 minutes, in accordance with the directions
appearing on the legend affixed to the meter and for a time not to
exceed 60 consecutive minutes set in operation. The timing mechanism
on the meter shall not permit a vehicle to be parked in the zone beyond
two consecutive 60 minute periods.
C. Legal parking time indicator. Each parking meter installed shall
indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the
City, and when operated shall indicate on its dial and pointer the
duration of the periods of legal parking, and on the expiration of such
period shall indicate illegal overparking.
D. Time limits; prohibitions.
§ 284-16 UNION CITY CODE § 284-17
1:564
§ 284-18. Enforcement.
(1) When a vehicle is parked in a space adjacent to a parking meter,
the operator of the vehicle shall immediately deposit or cause to be
deposited a twenty-five-cent coin of the United States, in the
parking meter for each 30 minute period in accordance with the
directions appearing on the legend affixed to the meter and for a
time not to exceed 60 consecutive minutes. Failure to move the
vehicle from the parking area after the expiration of the legal limit
for the zone shall constitute a violation of this article. The timing
mechanism on the meter shall not permit a vehicle to be parked in a
zone beyond two consecutive 60 minute periods. Notice of this
restriction shall be affixed prominently to each parking area when
such restriction is in effect.
(2) It shall be a violation of the provisions of this article to deposit or
cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or
substitute for any coin of the United States.
E. Designation of spaces. The Director is instructed to have markings
placed upon the curb and the street adjacent to each parking meter for
the purpose of designating the parking space for which the meter is to
be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall
park within markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle across any such marking or to park any vehicle in a position that
shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such markings.
A. Reporting of violations. It shall be the duty of the police officers to
inspect and check the use of parking meters and to note and record the
following:
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The state license number of the vehicle.
(3) Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. Notice; penalty. Each police officer shall also attach to the vehicle a
notice to the owner that his/her vehicle has been parked in violation of a
provision of this article and instructing the owner to report to the
Municipal Court in regard to the violation. Each owner, within the time
prescribed by law, may pay to the Municipal Court, as a penalty and in
full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $10. The failure of the
owner to make this payment at the Municipal Court within 48 hours,
exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays, shall render the owner subject
to the penalties provided for violation of the provisions of this article.
C. Serial numbering of notices; report to Board of Commissioners. The
report and notice referred to in this section shall bear corresponding
§ 284-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-18
1:565
§ 284-19. Violations and penalties.
serial numbers, and all reports issued hereunder shall be accounted
for by the respective police officers to the Municipal Court, and the
Municipal Court shall render written report thereof to the Board of
Commissioners once a month or as often as the Board shall require.
D. Towing away. In the event an operator shall fail to move his/her vehicle
after the expiration of the legal parking period, the vehicle shall be
deemed to be illegally parked within the parking zone and may be taken
into possession by the City, towed to some proper storage place and
where not released until the penalty provided in § 284-18 is paid, and
until all reasonable towing and storage charges are paid. The City, its
agents or employees shall not be responsible or liable in any manner for
damages incurred in the towing, storage, possession or disposition of
any vehicle.
A. Provisions covered by state statute. For any violation of any portion of
this article the enactment of which derives its authority from N.J.S.A.
39:4-197, the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $50 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. All other provisions. For all other violations of this article the penalties
shall be as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty.
§ 284-18 UNION CITY CODE § 284-19
1:566
Chapter 290
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Parks and Public
Property — See Ch. 4, Art. X.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 58, Art. I.
Animals — See Ch. 70.
Bicycles — See Ch. 81.
Carnivals, street fairs and festivals — See Ch.
113.
Food vendors at street fairs, festivals or
special events — See Ch. 185, Art. III.
Littering — See Ch. 239.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 296.
§ 290-1. Prohibited activities.
No person in a public park or recreation area shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, tables, benches, chains, railings, pavings or
paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities, or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary
or permanent, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the
rest rooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
C. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs, plants or other
wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting
or other means or agency.
D. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across such lands, except on special written permit issued
hereunder.
E. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the
bark, or pick flowers or seeds off any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise
disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area.
F. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters,
fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
G. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
§ 284-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-1
1:567
H. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or
throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird, nor shall any
person remove or have in his/her possession the young of any wild
animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird.
I. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park, or any tributary stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into
such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or
may result in the pollution of the waters.
J. Have brought in or dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other
trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but
shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided.
Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
K. Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
L. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees or in
any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by
it.
M. No person shall carry or possess firearms of any description or air
rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other form of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any kind
of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park
boundaries is forbidden.
N. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose.
Attendants shall have the authority to regulate activities in such areas
when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use
for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any
directions given to achieve this end.
O. Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing
hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could
be used for such purpose, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp
wagon or the like, except in those areas designated by the Park
Commission for those purposes.
P. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins,
horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes, except in those areas set apart
for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively
dangerous games such as football, baseball and lacrosse is prohibited,
except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller-
§ 290-1 UNION CITY CODE § 290-1
1:568
§ 290-2. Proper conduct.
While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and, in particular, no person
shall:
skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designed for such
pastime.36
A. Bring alcoholic beverages, drink same at any time, nor shall any person
be under the influence of intoxicating liquor in a park.
B. Have in his/her possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other fireworks,
firecrackers or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them
or throw them into any such areas from lands or highways adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or
article that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound,
would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. At the
discretion of the Director of Parks and Public Property, permits may be
given for conducting properly supervised fireworks in designated park
areas.
C. Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals
Prohibited in this Area." Nothing herein shall be construed as
permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where
such animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate
leashes not greater than six feet in length.
D. Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into, loiter or remain in any pavilion
or any other park structure or section thereof which may be reserved
and designated by the Department of Parks and Public Property for the
use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under six years
of age.
E. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
F. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private,
without prior written consent of the Department of Parks and Public
Property.
G. Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated by the Department of Parks and
Public Property. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter
lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper or other
inflammable material within any park or on any highways, roads or
streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
36.Editor's Note: Original section 2, Carnivals at Roosevelt Stadium, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-2
1:569
§ 290-3. Hours.
§ 290-4. Special event permits.
H. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use
or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
I. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance, except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director
of Parks and Public Property.
J. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas or
engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to
breach the public peace.
K. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Department of Parks
and Public Property he/she claims to have upon request of any
authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose
of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
L. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
M. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he/she station or
place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of
any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Department of Parks and Public Property.
N. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or
inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads
adjacent to a park.
A. Hours parks to be open. All City parks and playgrounds shall be open to
the public from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted. Each
park or playground shall be considered closed at all other times,
regardless of whether or not a physical barrier is present to impede or
prohibit access. No person shall enter or remain in any park or
playground during the hours when such park or playground is closed.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the following
parks and playgrounds shall be open to the public during the
following hours: during the months of November, December,
January, February and March, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(2) The Commissioner of Parks and Public Property may extend the
hours of any park or playground for special events or activities of
the Recreation Department.
§ 290-2 UNION CITY CODE § 290-4
1:570
A. Special events permits. Permits for special events in parks shall be
obtained by application to the Department of Parks and Public Property
in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Department of Parks and Public Property
stating:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(e) Any other information which the Department of Parks and
Public Property shall find reasonably necessary for a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued
hereunder.
(2) Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Department of Parks
and Public Property shall include the following findings:
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
public's enjoyment of the park.
(b) That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation.
(c) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably
anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly
conduct.
(d) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City.
(3) A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in the
permits.
(4) The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable
for all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever
by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such
permit shall have been issued. The Department of Parks and Public
Property shall have the right to require any permittee to submit
evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to members of the
general public arising out of such permitted activities in such
amounts as may be from time to time determined by the Director
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:571
§ 290-5. Enforcement.
§ 290-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 296
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 58.
Amusements — See Ch. 64.
Curfew — See Ch. 137.
Graffiti — See Ch. 203.
Noise — See Ch. 261.
Nuisances — See Ch. 266.
prior to the commencement of any activity or issuance of any
permit.
(5) The Department of Parks and Public Property shall have the
authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule
or ordinance or upon good cause shown.
A. The Department of Parks and Public Property and park attendants shall,
in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Department of Parks and Public Property
and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the park
area any person or persons acting in violation of this chapter.
B. The Department of Parks and Public Property and any park attendant
shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or
device in the park or used in violation of this chapter. This chapter shall
also be enforced by the Police Department of the City.
§ 290-4 UNION CITY CODE § 290-6
1:572
ARTICLE I
Tampering With Fire Hydrant Apparatus
[Adopted 1-7-1997 (§ 4-20 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 296-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATER SYSTEM — Any fire hydrant, gate valve or appurtenance belonging
to or forming part of the publicly owned water distribution system which is
operated by the Hackensack Water Company pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:62-108 et seq.
§ 296-2. Prohibited conduct.
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he/she:
§ 296-3. Exemptions.
This article shall not be construed to apply to any duly authorized employee
of the City of Union City who shall:
A. Shall at any time or in any manner open or operate any fire hydrant,
gate valve or other appurtenance of the water system, tamper with or
damage any part of the water system, or destroy or cause to be removed
any part of the water system.
B. Has in his/her possession or on his/her person any hydrant or hydrant
part belonging to the United Water Company.
C. Opens or operates, turns on, turns off, interferes with, attaches any
pipe or hose to, or connects anything with any fire hydrant, gate valve
or other appurtenance of the water system, or in any manner molests or
interferes with the same.
D. Causes or directs water from the hydrants on to passing motor vehicles
or in any other way interferes with moving motor vehicles.
A. Open or operate any fire hydrant, gate valve or other appurtenance of
the water system or remove any part of the water system.
B. Have in his/her possession or on his/her person any hydrant or hydrant
part belonging to the United Water Company.
C. Turn on, turn off, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with
any fire hydrant, gate valve or other appurtenance of the water system.
D. Remove any part or parts of the fire hydrant, gate valve or other
appurtenance of the water system in the performance of his/her duties
as such employee.
§ 296-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-3
1:573

ARTICLE II
Lewd and Indecent Behavior
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1999-8 (§ 4-25 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 296-4. Public nudity; indecent exposure.
No person shall appear on any street, road, avenue, park or any other public
place within the City in a state of nudity or make any indecent exposure of
his/her person.
§ 296-5. Public urination.
No person shall urinate on any street, road, avenue, park or any other public
place within the City.
§ 296-6. Standards for establishments selling alcoholic beverages.
[Added 8-16-2005]
§ 296-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to comply
therewith, upon conviction for each and every violation and noncompliance,
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment of no
more than 90 days in the county jail or community service for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or some combination thereof, at the discretion of the
Municipal Court, with a minimum fine of $100 for the first offense.
A. No licensee who possesses a license under the Alcoholic Beverage
Law37 shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed
premises:
(1) Any lewd or immoral activity; or
(2) Any brawl, act of violence, disturbance, or unnecessary noise.
B. Every licensee shall operate its business in an orderly and lawful
fashion, so as not to constitute a nuisance. A licensee's responsibility
under this section includes the conduct of the licensee, its employees
and patrons, if such conduct is contrary to the public health, safety and
welfare.
C. "Immoral activity" shall be defined as including, but shall not be limited
to, compelling females to dance with patrons and/or employees in
establishments in exchange for any form of compensation or money.
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 296-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-7
1:575

ARTICLE III
Entertainment Venues
[Adopted 3-15-2011]
§ 296-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the business hours for
entertainment venues in the City of Union City in order to:
§ 296-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENTERTAINMENT-RELATED ACTIVITIES — Includes any dancing, any
music, any performance or any other activity whose primary purpose is to
entertain.
ENTERTAINMENT VENUE — Any dance hall, dance club, social club,
catering hall, or any business, whether open to the general public or by
membership, occurring in a room, place or establishment where
entertainment is the primary activity intended. Entertainment venues shall
not include ABC-licensed establishments.
§ 296-10. Hours of operation.
No person, entity or organization shall:
§ 296-11. Violations and penalties.
A. Decrease the noise and disturbances associated with large crowds of
persons congregating on the streets around entertainment venues
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., in order to benefit the
public health, welfare and quality of life of the residents of the City of
Union City.
B. Discourage criminal activities, especially drug-related criminal activity,
and excessive noise, disturbances and injured persons within the City.
A. Operate an entertainment venue, regardless of whether it is public or
private, as a dance hall, dance club, social club, or catering hall for the
purpose of encouraging or facilitating the gathering of persons for
entertainment-related activities between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m.
B. Permit the use of any building, structure or premises as a dance hall,
dance club, social club, or catering hall for entertainment-related
activities between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A. A violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute grounds for a
suspension or revocation of any dance hall license or any other
entertainment-related license issued by the City of Union City.
§ 296-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-11
1:577
B. Any person, entity or organization charged with violating this article
shall be subject to the hearing provisions set forth in Chapter 234,
Licensing of Businesses and Occupations, of the Code of the City of
Union City.
C. Any person, entity or organization violating this article is subject to the
penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty, of the Code
of the City of Union City.
§ 296-11 UNION CITY CODE § 296-11
1:578
ARTICLE IV
Nuisances Prohibited
[Adopted 10-6-2015]
§ 296-12. Noise.
A. Noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person or entity to make,
continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise or any noise which does or is likely to annoy, disturb,
injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others. Specifically exempted hereunder is noise presumed not to be a
nuisance pursuant to the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq. This
section mirrors the municipal nuisance ordinance which was reviewed
and found to be enforceable by the New Jersey Superior Court,
Appellate Division, in State v. Clarksburg Inn, 375 N.J. Super. 624 (App.
Div. 2005).
B. Examples. Without intending to limit the generality of Subsection A of
this section, the following acts are hereby declared to be examples of
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this section:
(1) Radios; televisions; phonographs: the playing, use or operation of
any radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device so that it is clearly audible at a
distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which
it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
(2) Yelling; shouting: yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel,
motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
(3) Animals; birds: the keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity; but nothing herein contained is intended
to apply to a dog pound or kennel licensed in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article IV, of this Code.
(4) Horns: the sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law, or
when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the
vehicle, or as a warning of impending danger to persons driving
other vehicles or to persons on the street. No person shall sound a
§ 296-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-12
1:579
horn or warning device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle which emits an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for an
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
C. Violations and penalties.
(1) Violation of any provision of this section shall be cause for a
Municipal Court summons to be issued by the Police Department,
Code Enforcement Official, Health Officer, or any member of the
general public who is affected by excessive noise.
(2) Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General
Penalty, except that with each violation there shall be a minimum
fine of $250 payable through the Municipal Court Violations
Bureau.38
38.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Effect on other provisions, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 2-16-2016.
§ 296-12 UNION CITY CODE § 296-12
1:580
ARTICLE V
Short-Term Vacation Rentals
[Adopted 12-15-2015]
§ 296-13. Short-term vacation rentals in residential properties
prohibited.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HOSTING PLATFORM — A marketplace in whatever form or format
which facilitates the vacation rental, through advertising, matchmaking
or any other means, using any medium of facilitation, and from
which the operator of the hosting platform derives revenues, including
booking fees or advertising revenues, from providing or maintaining the
marketplace.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — A person who occupies a dwelling unit or
accessory building or structure for at least 60 consecutive days with
intent to establish that unit as his or her primary residence; and may be
an owner or a lessee.[Added 3-1-2016]
VACATION RENTAL — Rental of: 1) any dwelling unit, accessory
building or structure, garage, attic, or basement, in whole or in part;
or 2) any furniture within any dwelling unit, accessory building or
structure, garage, attic, or basement, within the City of Union City, to
any person(s) for exclusive transient use of 30 consecutive days or less,
regardless of whether one of the dwelling unit's permanent residents is
on-site, in the dwelling unit, throughout the visitors' stay, and whereby
the unit is only approved for permanent residential occupancy and
not approved for transient occupancy by this article. Rental of units
within City-approved hotels, motels and bed and breakfasts shall not be
considered vacation rentals.[Amended 3-1-2016]
B. Prohibitions. No person, including any hosting platform operator, shall
undertake, maintain, authorize, aid, facilitate or advertise any vacation
rental activity that does not comply with this Code.
C. Regulations.
(1) The Board of Commissioners of the City may promulgate
regulations, which may include but are not limited to permit
conditions, reporting requirements, inspection frequencies,
enforcement procedures, advertising restrictions, disclosure
requirements, or insurance requirements, to implement the
provisions of this article. No person shall fail to comply with any
such regulation.
(2) The Board of Commissioners of the City may establish and set by
resolution all fees and charges as may be necessary to effectuate
the purpose of this article.
§ 296-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-13
1:581
D. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(1) Violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for a
Municipal Court summons to be issued by the Police Department,
Code Enforcement Official, or Health Officer.
(2) Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General
Penalty, except that with each violation, there shall be a minimum
fine of $250 payable through the Municipal Court Violations
Bureau.
(3) Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article in a
criminal case or found to be in violation of this article in a civil case
brought by a law enforcement agency shall be ordered to
reimburse the City and other participating law enforcement
agencies their full investigative costs and remit all illegally
obtained rental revenue to the City so that it may be returned to the
victims of illegal short term rental activities.
(4) Any interested person may seek an injunction or other relief to
prevent or remedy violations of this article. The prevailing party in
such an action shall be entitled to recover reasonable costs and
attorney's fees.
(5) The remedies provided in this section are not exclusive, and
nothing in this section shall preclude the use or application of any
other remedies, penalties or procedures established by law.
§ 296-13 UNION CITY CODE § 296-13
1:582
Chapter 301
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Artifact sales — See Ch. 75.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Handbills — See Ch. 208.
Licensing of businesses and
occupations — See Ch. 234.
Sale of machetes — See Ch. 249.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366.
§ 296-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-13
1:583

ARTICLE I
Soliciting Business on Streets
[Adopted 1-7-1997 (§ 4-10 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 301-1. Prohibited activities.
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting employment
or business from the occupant of any vehicle or shall stand on or in
proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching
or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked.
§ 301-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-1
1:585

ARTICLE II
Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors
[Adopted 1-7-1997 (§ 8-2 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 301-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER — See "peddler."
PEDDLER —
VENDOR — See "peddler."
§ 301-3. Location restrictions. [Amended 5-21-2013]
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location, nor shall he/she
be permitted to operate in any congested area where his/her operations
might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section,
the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced. Peddlers shall be able to reserve parking spaces for a
stand.
§ 301-4. Time restrictions.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, hawk or peddle in the City any of the
items listed in § 301-2 unless the time for sale is found to be reasonable and
within the constitutional guidelines for the sale of these items.
§ 301-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City to require any person
seen peddling and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed
to produce his/her peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of this
article against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 301-6. Exceptions.
Any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling from place
to place by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
transporting merchandise, foodstuffs or beverages, offering and
exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to
purchasers. Hawkers, hucksters and vendors are included.
A.
"Peddler" shall also include all transient merchants and itinerant
vendors, as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 and N.J.S.A. 45:24-8.
B.
A. This article shall not be construed to include:
§ 301-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-6
1:587
§ 301-7. Maintenance and inspection of equipment.
The equipment used or employed by peddlers of foodstuffs, beverages,
confections and other related commodities shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary manner and be subject to the inspection of the Department of
Health or its authorized agents. Any violation found and not immediately
corrected shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
§ 301-8. Transient vendors.
(1) The delivery of perishable articles of food or of merchandise of the
type commonly delivered on a house-to-house basis at intervals of
less than one week.
(2) Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to
federal, state or local laws.
B. Any veteran or volunteer firefighter who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from application for a
license, but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
sections of this article.
A. All transient merchants and itinerant vendors, as defined in N.J.S.A.
45:24-1 to 45:24-8, before offering for sale any merchandise or
bankrupt stock, shall comply with the provisions of the governing
statute and shall apply for and receive a license, which shall continue in
favor of that person to whom it is issued for a period of 180 days from
the date of issuance. The fee for a transient license shall be as set forth
in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. Peddlers' licenses shall not be transferable, assignable or rented
without approval of the issuing authority. [Added 5-21-2013]
C. All transient vendors shall operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. [Added 5-21-2013; amended 7-14-2015]
§ 301-6 UNION CITY CODE § 301-8
1:588
ARTICLE III
Soliciting and Canvassing
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3935-36 (§ 8-3 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 301-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — A person who, through his/her physical
presence in the City, attempts to gain access to the residents, merchants,
business people or any other occupant of the City in order to address such
parties to impart or receive communications, information, goods, services,
monies or materials of any type. It is not a requirement that the solicitor
be seeking compensation or remuneration from the resident, merchant,
business person or occupant.
§ 301-10. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to those individuals, groups or businesses not
covered by Article II, Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors. If a question exists as
to the applicability of this article or Article II, any inquiry is to be made by
the party seeking clarification to the Chief of Police.
§ 301-11. Permit required; fee.
§ 301-12. Application for permit.
A person desiring a solicitor's permit from the City shall make an
application to the Chief of Police at the office of the City Clerk. Such
application will require any information the Chief of Police requires to make
a full and complete background search of the applicant. Such information
shall include, but not be limited to, name, address, age and birth date,
social security number, height, weight, physical characteristics, group(s)
affiliated with pertaining to the solicitation and a brief description of the
purpose of the solicitation. Two passport-size photographs shall be included
with the application. An applicant shall provide the Chief of Police with any
additional information necessary for the applicant's background search to
be fully and adequately completed.
§ 301-13. Grant or refusal of permit.
The Chief of Police shall:
A. Permit required. No person shall solicit or canvass in the City without
first securing a permit from the City Clerk through the Police
Department and the office of the Chief of Police.
B. Fee. There shall be an application fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees,
for a permit for solicitation in the City.
§ 301-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-13
1:589
§ 301-14. Reconsideration of permit application.
§ 301-15. Appeals.
§ 301-16. Numbering of permit; display; revocation; expiration.
A. Have the power to deny an application for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
permit application.
(2) Conviction of the applicant for any indictable offense or disorderly
persons offense involving moral turpitude, fraud or dishonesty.
B. Provide an explanation to the applicant concerning the refusal of the
permit in the form of a letter to the applicant.
C. Forward all approved applications to the City Clerk for issuance and
calendaring. The City Clerk shall provide the Chief of Police with a twomonth
calendar of all permits valid during that time period on the first
and 15th of each month.
A. An applicant may resubmit his/her application with a written
explanation, qualifying documents or other papers expressing why the
application should be approved.
B. The Chief of Police shall have seven days to reconsider the application.
At the end of this period, the Chief shall provide the applicant with a
final approval or denial. If no response is received by the applicant, the
application should be deemed denied.
A. An applicant may appeal the final decision of denial to the Board of
Commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal. No appeals will be
heard by the Board of Commissioners until a final disposition is issued
pursuant to § 301-14 above.
B. The appeal will be heard at the next regular Board of Commissioners
meeting, provided that three days' notice exists to the Clerk prior to the
regular meeting. The decision of the Board will be deemed final.
A. Numbering. Each issued permit shall be given an identification number
solely for use on that permit.
B. Display. A permittee shall exhibit his/her permit to any police officer or
other person upon request.
C. Revocation. The Chief of Police shall revoke a permit for the following
causes:
(1) A violation which would fall under § 301-13A.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
the solicitation.
§ 301-13 UNION CITY CODE § 301-16
1:590
§ 301-17. Hours of operation.
No person shall solicit or canvass within the City except between the hours
of 9:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. No person shall canvass within 1,000 feet of
a school for the 15 minutes prior to and the 1/2 hour subsequent to the
dismissal of the school for the day.
§ 301-18. Exceptions; fee discounts.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Any violation of the Code of the City, the laws of the State of New
Jersey or the laws of the United States of America during the
course of the solicitation activities in the City.
D. Duration. A permit shall be valid for 14 days from the starting date
requested by the applicant on the application. Any permits of longer
duration shall be sought by the applicant from the Board of
Commissioners. Such permission shall be sought in the manner set
forth in § 301-15 once the permit has been granted.
E. Surrender. The permittee shall surrender the permit to the Chief of
Police upon the expiration of the permit.
A. This article shall not be construed to affect any person engaged in the
delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or other articles or things in
the regular course of business to the premises of persons ordering or
entitled to receive same.
B. The applicant may petition the Board of Commissioners for a discount
of the applicable fees if the applicant shows the Commissioners that it is
a charitable or philanthropic, not-for-profit organization. At no time
shall the discount make the applicable fee less than $15.
§ 301-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-18
1:591
Chapter 306
POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 64.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Games of chance — See Ch. 196.
Licensing of businesses and
occupations — See Ch. 234.
§ 306-1. Hours of operation. [Amended 5-21-2013]
The hours of operation of pool or billiard rooms shall be between 9:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight.
Chapter 311
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 87.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 107.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Land development — See Ch. 223.
Littering — See Ch. 239.
Nuisance abatement — See Ch. 266.
Solid waste — See Ch. 359.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366.
§ 301-18 UNION CITY CODE § 306-1
1:592
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 13-12 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended through Ord. No. 1999-9]
§ 311-1. Adoption of standards.
A code is hereby adopted by the City governing the conditions and
maintenance of all structures and dwellings; establishing minimum
standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to insure that structures are safe, sanitary
and fit for occupation and use; establishing minimum standards governing
the conditions of dwellings offered for rent; fixing certain responsibilities
and duties of owners and occupants of structures and the condemnation of
dwellings unfit for human habitation and the demolition of such dwellings
and structures; and fixing penalties for violations.
§ 311-2. Title. [Amended 5-21-2013]
The code adopted and established by this article is commonly known as
the "International Property Maintenance Code," including all subsequent
additions, revisions, addenda and editions, as published by Building
Officials and Code Administrators (BOCA) International, Inc. Each and all of
the regulations of the International Property Maintenance Code, including
all subsequent additions, revisions, addenda and editions, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article.
§ 311-3. Reconstruction of walls and siding.
§ 311-4. General exterior maintenance.
The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences,
roofs and gutters, shall be maintained in good repair, and all surfaces
thereof shall be kept painted, when necessary, for the purpose of
preservation and appearance. The same shall be maintained free of broken
glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or
other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to
A. All reconstruction of walls and siding shall be of standard quality and
appearance commensurate with the character of the properties in the
same block and on both sides of the street on which the premises fronts,
such that the materials used will not be of a kind that, by their
appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and standards, will
depreciate the values of neighboring and adjoining premises as
aforesaid.
B. The reconstruction of the areas shall be of the same material as initially
constructed, i.e., replace brick with brick not plywood, unless the
reconstruction utilizes a more attractive or better quality of
construction than previously existed.
§ 311-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-4
1:593
the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards
eliminated and the adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected
from blighting influences.
§ 311-5. Certificate of continued occupancy; fee.
§ 311-6. Violation of heat requirement.
§ 311-7. Hot water requirements.
A. Required. Owners of all residential units, including rental and
nonrental units, after the unit has been vacated, sold or where there
has been a change in occupancy, shall obtain a certificate of continuing
occupancy. This certificate of continuing occupancy shall be applied for
and secured prior to new occupancy of the property. Upon receipt by
the enforcement officer of an application for a certificate of continuing
occupancy and payment of the required fee, an inspection of the
premises shall take place. The inspection shall ensure compliance with
all applicable building, health, safety and fire codes, regulations,
ordinances and statutes of the City.
B. Fee. The fee for an inspection to obtain the certificate of continuing
occupancy shall be as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.39
A. Whenever there appears to be a violation of Property Maintenance
Code requirements pertaining to heating, notice shall be given to the
owner or person in control of the premises to correct or abate such
violation within 24 hours from the date of service in the notice.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
B. Any person, corporation or entity who violates any provisions of the
heat requirements of the Property Maintenance Code shall be subject to
a fine of $250 per dwelling unit for the first offense. For the second
offense within one year, the fine shall be $500 per dwelling unit; a third
offense shall be $750 per dwelling unit; and a fourth offense shall be
$1,000 per dwelling unit. A court appearance shall be required after the
first offense. [Amended 2-16-2016]
A. Requirements. As required by the National Standard Plumbing Code
under N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq., every kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub
or shower required by that chapter of the New Jersey Administrative
Code shall be connected to both hot and cold water lines, and, as
further required under N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.4(f), every dwelling unit shall
have water heating facilities which are installed and maintained in good
and safe working condition, connected with the hot water lines required
under N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.4(e) and capable of delivering water at a minimum
temperature of not less than 120° F. and at a maximum temperature of
39.Editor's Note: Original Section 6 of this article, Amendments, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 5-21-2013.
§ 311-4 UNION CITY CODE § 311-7
1:594
§ 311-8. Extermination of vermin.40 [Added 3-4-2008]
§ 311-9. Conversion of heating systems. [Added 3-16-2010]
not more than 160° F. at all times in accordance with anticipated need.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
B. Duty to remedy. Whenever there appears to be a violation of Subsection
A above, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control of the
premises to correct or abate such violation within 24 hours from the
date of service in the notice.
C. Violation; penalty. Any person, corporation or entity who violates any
provision of the hot water requirement of this section shall be subject to
a fine of $250 per dwelling unit. Court appearance shall be required
after the first offense. [Amended 5-21-2013]
A. Any time the Department of Health discovers the presence of vermin in
any dwelling with two or more apartments and deems it to be a public
health nuisance, the entire house/building shall be exterminated to
prevent the spread from one apartment to the next.
B. Upon the Department of Health discovering the presence of vermin, the
property owner will be issued a notice indicating the need for the
property owner to eradicate the vermin from the property.
A. Seasonal restrictions.
(1) The replacement of a furnace; the conversion of a building from oil
or gas heat to another form of heating utility service which involves
furnace replacement; the conversion of heating utility meters from
a single master meter to individual unit meters; and the
replacement of said meters due to equipment failure (hereinafter
"conversion activity") shall only be permitted to take place between
May 1 and September 30 in a calendar year.
(2) Any conversion activity as defined herein shall be subject to the
appropriate permitting and review by the Electrical and Plumbing
Subcode Officers of the City, and such other code officials as
necessary or required pursuant to law, and shall not obviate in any
manner the responsibility of any landlord/property owner to obtain
the necessary permits and approvals from the City in order to
proceed with this work.
(3) Any conversion activity that is performed between October 1 and
April 30 shall only be performed upon demonstration by the
landlord/property owner that such conversion activity is necessary
as part of any emergency repairs needed to restore heating service
to one or more units in the building. Said information shall be
provided in advance of such work to the Construction Code Official,
40.Editor's Note: See also Art. IV, Extermination Requirement for Multifamily Dwellings.
§ 311-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-9
1:595
and, as necessary, to the appropriate subcode officials in the City,
as part of the review process for the permits required to proceed
with any such conversion activity. The Construction Code Official
shall be authorized to make the determination as to whether the
conversion activity is necessary as part of emergency repairs
needed to restore heating service to one or more units in the
building. The Construction Code Official's determination shall be
appealable to the Board of Commissioners. In the event that the
Construction Code Official authorizes the conversion activity in
such circumstances, the landlord shall also give notice to all
tenants of the anticipated time that heating services may be
suspended, and such suspension may not exceed four hours.
B. Conversions during term of residential tenancy. [Added 4-20-2010]
(1) In cases where the residential tenant is responsible for payment for
heating services under the lease, the conversion of a building from
oil or gas heat, or vice versa, or to any other form of heating utility
service which involves furnace replacement shall not be permitted
to take place during the term of the tenancy.
(2) Any subsequent conversion work performed after the end of the
tenancy shall be subject to the appropriate permitting and review
by the Electrical and Plumbing Subcode Officers of the City, and
such other code officials as necessary or required pursuant to law,
and shall not obviate in any manner the responsibility of any
landlord/property owner to obtain the necessary permits and
approvals from the City in order to proceed with this work.
(3) This subsection does not supersede the provisions of Subsection A,
governing the need to replace furnaces or other conversion activity
as permitted under that section.
§ 311-9 UNION CITY CODE § 311-9
1:596
ARTICLE II
Building Requirements and Maintenance
[Adopted 3-21-2006]
§ 311-10. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING — Any structure, whether public or private, whether vacant
or occupied, that is adapted to or used for dwelling occupancy; for the
transaction of business; for the rendering of professional services;
amusement; the display or sale or storage of goods, wares, merchandise,
articles or equipment; for the performance of work or labor; for office
buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants,
warehouses, worships, garages or structures where domestic or other
animals or fowl are kept; for sheds, outbuildings, or other structures or
premises used as accessory to any such use.
OWNER — The actual owner of the buildings, whether an individual,
partnership or corporation, or the agent of the building or other person
having custody of the buildings or to whom the rent is paid.
RODENT/VERMIN ERADICATION — The elimination or extermination of
rodents/vermin within buildings by any or all accepted measures, such as
poisoning, fumigation or trapping, so that the buildings are completely
freed of rodents and there is no evidence of rodent infestation.
RODENT/VERMIN HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or
protection for rodents/vermin, thus favoring their multiplying and continued
existence.
UNFIT BUILDING, DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT — One which is so
damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin-infested or so
located that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupants and/or lacks illumination, ventilation, is structurally unstable,
constitutes a fire hazard, lacks exit and sanitation facilities adequate to
protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
VERMIN — Includes rodents and other objectionable little animals or
insects, such as, but not limited to, larvae, flies, Cimex lectularius L.,
commonly known as "bed bugs," roaches, fleas, lice and mites.
§ 311-11. Determination of unfitness; notice to vacate.
A. Whenever it shall be decided by the Health Officer or his/her designee
that any building or part thereof occupied as a residence or business is
unfit for human habitation by reason of its unsanitary condition, the
Health Officer or his/her designee shall cause a notice of such decision,
together with the reasons therefor, to be served in the following
manner:
(1) The notice shall be served upon the owner of the property and its
occupants by certified mail or personal service.
§ 311-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-11
1:597
§ 311-12. Lighting, ventilation and cleanliness.
No owner or lessee of any building or any part thereof shall lease or let or
hire out the same or any portion thereof to be occupied by any person or
allow the same to be occupied as a place in which or for anyone to dwell or
lodge, except when such building or such part thereof is sufficiently lighted
and ventilated and is in all respects in that condition of cleanliness and
wholesomeness required by this code, any ordinance of the City of Union
City or any law of this state or in which they require such premises to be
kept.
§ 311-13. Occupancy of basements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any basement space
within a dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which
does not comply with the following requirements:
§ 311-14. Occupancy and air space.
No owner, agent, lessee or keeper of any tenement house, lodging house
or boardinghouse or dwelling shall cause so great a number of persons to
dwell, be or sleep in any such house or any portion thereof as to provide less
(2) If the owner or occupants cannot be served in accordance with
Subsection A(1), the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the building.
B. The notice shall state that the building or a designated part thereof
shall be vacated within the time as is specified in the notice and/or to
abate the violations within the time as is specified in the notice.
A. The floor level of rooms used for sleeping is less than 3 1/2 feet below
the average grade of ground adjacent to and within 15 feet of the
exterior walls of such rooms. The floors and walls must be impervious to
leakage of underground and surface runoff water and insulated against
dampness, and provided that the windows thereof are at least 15 feet
from the nearest building or wall.
B. The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum,
not less than 8%, of the floor area.
C. Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
D. The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum of 4% of the floor area being ventilated, except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the public officer.
E. Prior zoning approval, Uniform Construction Code approval and a
certificate of occupancy to occupy the basement area have been
received. [Added 5-21-2013]
§ 311-11 UNION CITY CODE § 311-14
1:598
than the minimum standards of the Housing Code of the City of Union City
in regard to occupancy and air space.
§ 311-15. Cleaning requirements; painting restrictions; sanding or
blasting.
§ 311-16. Water supply.
A. Every house, apartment, building or dwelling and every yard, court,
passage, area and alley connected therewith or belonging thereto shall
be kept clean.
B. The owner, agent, lessee and occupant of any tenement house,
apartment, house, building or dwelling or part thereof shall maintain
the interior and exterior premises free of garbage, filth, decaying
organic matter, organic waste, stagnant water, vermin or any condition
that may become a detriment or menace to the health of the inhabitants
of this municipality.
C. The use of any paint or any pigmented liquid substance applied to
surfaces by brush, roller or spray or other means, in which the total
nonvolatile ingredients contain more than 0.5% of lead by weight or
5,000 parts per million (ppm) by atomic absorption analysis or one
milligram per square centimeter, on the interior or exterior surfaces of
any dwelling or dwelling unit is prohibited.
D. When it is determined that lead-based paint or any pigmented liquid
substance in excess of the standards set forth in Subsection C exists,
the Health Officer or his/her designee or his/her authorized agent may
order the removal or abatement of such hazard. Such removal or
abatement must be conducted in such a manner as not to constitute a
threat to the health or safety of residents, occupants or workers and
shall be conducted by properly trained workers under the direction of
qualified supervisors and utilize currently acceptable industry
standards and work practices.
E. Unconfined power sanding or abrasive blasting of the surface coating of
any building is prohibited. Sanding or blasting requires the use of a
dust-catching cover equipped with a high-efficiency particulate air
(HEPA) vacuum. For all methods of paint or surface-coating removal,
adequate measures, including ground cover, must be taken to contain
dust and chips.
A. Every house, apartment, building, business or dwelling shall be
provided with a safe supply of potable water meeting the standards as
set forth in Potable Water Standards, as published by the New Jersey
State Department of Health and Senior Services, and shall be provided
with a supply of hot water with a minimum temperature of 120° F.
B. The minimum rate of flow of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet
shall be not less than two gallons per minute.
§ 311-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-17
1:599
§ 311-17. Toilet facilities.
In each dwelling, a minimum of one toilet and one sink in good and
serviceable condition or as otherwise prescribed by the Uniform
Construction Code41 shall be provided for each family living separately.
Every premises occupied as commercial, business or industrial shall be
provided with a minimum of one toilet and one sink in good and serviceable
condition or as otherwise prescribed by the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 311-18. Prevention of leaks.
The owner, lessor or agent of any building or part thereof used in any
degree for occupation by human beings, whether for business or dwelling
purposes, shall keep the roofs, gutters and sidewalls of such building so that
same shall not leak.
§ 311-19. Defective chimneys and flues.
No chimney, smoke pipe, smokestack, flue or any part thereof or any
connection therewith shall be or remain so defective or out of repair as to
allow any noxious fumes or odors to escape into said building.
§ 311-20. Pest control during demolition or renovation of buildings.
§ 311-21. Inspections; stop-work orders.
A. It shall be unlawful to demolish, raze, or renovate a building, dwelling
or structure vacated or otherwise in the City of Union City unless
provisions are made for rodent and vermin eradication or proof that
such infestation does not exist. Proof of such must be submitted to the
Department of Health 14 days prior to the commencement of
renovation, demolition, razing or moving and once every 30 days
thereafter until the completion of such renovation, demolition, razing or
moving. The owner, agent or individual(s) responsible for the
demolition, razing, moving or renovation of a building, dwelling or
structure shall ensure that the building, dwelling or structure subject to
demolition, razing, or moving or renovation shall remain free of rats,
rodents or other vermin for the duration of the demolition, razing, or
moving process by hiring a commercial pesticide applicator licensed by
the State of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
B. For the duration of the demolition, renovating, razing or moving
process, the owner thereof or person responsible for such demolition
shall provide for a method of containing migrant dusts at the site by
hydrating at intervals reasonably necessary to contain the spread of
migrant dusts on the construction site.
A. The Health Officer or his designee shall be permitted to examine and
inspect any building, dwelling or structure as often as he deems
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 311-17 UNION CITY CODE § 311-21
1:600
§ 311-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or a combination thereof, and
each violation of the provisions of this article and each day the same is
violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 311-23. Conflicting provisions
§ 311-24. Relocation assistance.
Any person, firm or corporation who rents, leases or causes to be rented,
leased or otherwise occupied any dwelling unit in violation of any provision
of this article or any other chapters of the Code of the City of Union City
which results in the displacement of tenants, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1
et seq., shall be responsible for all relocation costs as set forth in N.J.S.A.
20:4-4.1 et seq.
necessary before, during or after demolition, renovating, razing or
moving occurs to ensure compliance with this article.
B. No person shall obstruct or hinder or cause to obstruct or hinder the
Health Officer or his designee from examining and inspecting all areas
and adjacent areas of sites before, during or after demolition,
renovating, razing or moving occurs to ensure compliance with this
article.
C. The Health Officer or his designee may cause an order stopping the
demolition, renovating, razing or moving of any building, dwelling or
structure if, in his judgment, a public health nuisance is occurring or
may occur.
A. In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict
with the provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or code of the City of Union City, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.
B. In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the City of Union City
which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of
health and safety of the people, the provisions of this article shall be
deemed to prevail, and such other ordinance or codes are hereby
declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict
with this article.
§ 311-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-24
1:601

ARTICLE III
Abandoned Property List
[Adopted 1-3-2012]
§ 311-25. Findings.
§ 311-26. Designation of public officer.
The Housing and Health Inspector is hereby designated as the public officer
for the purpose of carrying out the responsibilities established by this
article and shall have all the responsibilities and powers provided by law.
§ 311-27. Identification of properties.
The Housing and Health Inspector is hereby directed to identify abandoned
properties within the City, place said properties on an abandoned property
list established as provided in the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as amended by Section 28 of P.L. 2003, c. 210, and
provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are required to
effectuate an abandoned property list as provided by law. The abandoned
property list shall apply to the City of Union City as a whole.
A. The City of Union City contains a number of vacant buildings that have
been abandoned by their owners, and that are in a state of disrepair and
neglect; and
B. These buildings, by virtue of their condition and their proximity to other
buildings, are diminishing the value of neighboring properties and have
a negative effect on the quality of life of adjacent residents and property
owners, increasing the risk of property damage through arson and
vandalism and discouraging neighborhood stability and revitalization;
and
C. Many of these buildings, or the land on which they are situated, can be
used for productive purposes, which will further the revitalization of the
City of Union City and improve its economic and social condition; and
D. The City of Union City desires to use the powers granted local
governments under the laws of the State of New Jersey to address the
conditions created by these buildings, and further their reuse for
productive purposes; and
E. By creating an abandoned property list, as set forth in the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) as amended by Section
28 of P.L. 2003, c. 210, the City will better be able to address the
conditions created by these buildings and further their reuse for
productive purposes.
§ 311-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-28
1:603
§ 311-28. Rehabilitation entities.
The Housing and Health Inspector shall exercise the authority granted
the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-90 to designate qualified
rehabilitation entities to act as the designee of the municipality with respect
to the provisions of that section.
§ 311-29. Report.
The Housing and Health Inspector shall provide a report to the Mayor
and Board of Commissioners every six months, with respect to the number
and location of properties on the abandoned property list, the status of
those properties, and any actions taken by the municipality or by any
qualified rehabilitation entity designated pursuant to the authority granted
the Housing and Health Inspector with respect to any property on the list
or any other abandoned property within the City of Union City.
§ 311-28 UNION CITY CODE § 311-29
1:604
ARTICLE IV
Extermination Requirement for Multifamily Dwellings
[Adopted 5-21-2013]
§ 311-30. Monthly extermination for buildings with four or more
residential units.
All multifamily buildings with four residential units or more in one building
shall have the entire building exterminated for all types of rodents, insects
and vermin every month.
§ 311-31. Proof of contract.
§ 311-32. When effective.
This article shall take effect as of July 1, 2013, and after notice of this article
has been mailed to all property owners affected by this article.
A. A copy of the contract that provides for monthly extermination shall be
provided to the City of Union City Health Department within 30 days
after this article becomes effective.
B. Proof of the one-year contract for monthly extermination shall be
submitted to the Health Department on or before July 31 of each year.
§ 311-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-32
1:605

ARTICLE V
Registration Requirements for Vacant and Abandoned Properties
[Adopted 1-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
§ 311-33. Registration of abandoned residences.
This article shall establish a process for the maintenance of vacant
properties in the City of Union City, establishing registration requirements
and levying a registration fee on owners of vacant properties.
§ 311-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Shall include the titleholder, any agent of the titleholder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, § 17)42, or
any other entity determined by the City of Union City to have authority to
act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation; provided, however, that any property that contains all
building systems in working order and is being actively marketed by its
owner for sale or rental shall not be deemed vacant. Property determined
to be "abandoned property" in accordance with the meaning of such term in
the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall
also be deemed to be vacant property for the purposes of this article.
§ 311-35. General requirements.
A. Upon the effective date of this article, the owner of any vacant property
as defined herein shall within 60 days after the building becomes
vacant property or within 30 days after assuming ownership of the
vacant property, whichever is later, file a registration statement for
each such vacant property with the Rent Regulation Officer on forms
provided by that Rent Regulation Officer for such purposes. The
registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains vacant property and shall pay a
registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in this article for
each vacant property registered.
B. Any owner of any building that meets the definition of vacant property
prior to the effective date of this article shall file a registration
statement for that property on or before February 1, 2014. The
42.Editor's Note: As amended by P.L. 2009, c. 296.
§ 311-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-35
1:607
§ 311-36. Registration statement requirements; property
inspection.
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement,
the owner of any vacant property shall provide access to the City to conduct
an exterior and interior inspection of the building to determine compliance
with the Municipal Code, following reasonable notice during the period
covered by the initial registration or any subsequent renewal.
registration statement shall include the information required under this
article, as well as any additional information that the Rent Regulation
Officer may reasonably require.
C. The owner shall notify the Rent Regulation Officer within 30 days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Rent Regulation Officer for such
purpose.
D. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of the building.
A. The registration statement shall include the name, street address and
telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or older,
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process, in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding, on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code. This person must maintain an office in the State of
New Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey. The statement
shall also include the name of the person responsible for maintaining
and securing the property, if different.
B. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements of
this article as to location of residence or office may designate him or
herself an agent.
C. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all processes in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by services
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purpose of this section until the owner notifies the
Rent Regulation Officer of a change of authorized agent or until the
owner files a new annual registration statement. The designation of an
authorized agent in no way releases the owner from any requirement of
this article.
§ 311-35 UNION CITY CODE § 311-36
1:608
§ 311-37. Fee schedule.
The initial registration fee for each building shall be $500. The fee for the
first renewal is $1,500, and the fee for the second renewal is $3,000. The
fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is $5,000.
Vacant Property Registration Fee Schedule
Initial registration $500
First renewal $1,500
Second renewal $3,000
Any subsequent renewal $5,000
§ 311-38. Requirements for securing buildings.
The owner of any building that has become vacant property, and any person
maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant, shall, within 30 days:
§ 311-39. Administration.
The Rent Regulation Officer may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this article.
§ 311-40. Violations and penalties.
D. The designated authorized agent shall provide, in the registration form,
an emergency phone number where the agent can be reached after
normal business hours in case of an emergency regarding the
registered premises. This agent shall be authorized by the owner (if a
different person) to perform emergency repairs to the premises, if
needed.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Code of the City of Union City, or as
set forth in rules and regulations adopted by the City;
B. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to this article),
and the person responsible for day-to-day supervision and management
of the building, if such person is different from the owner holding title
or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a
location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk,
whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than 18 inches by 24
inches; and
C. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete.
§ 311-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-40
1:609
§ 311-41. Interpretation of provisions.
Nothing in this article is intended to nor shall be read to conflict or prevent
the City from taking action against buildings found to be unfit for human
habitation or unsafe structures as provided in applicable provisions of the
Code of the City of Union City. Further, any action taken under any such
Code provisions other than the demolition of a structure shall relieve an
owner from its obligations under this article.
A. Any owner who is not in full compliance with this article or who
otherwise violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$500 and not more than $2,000 for each offense. Every day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Fines assessed under this article shall be recoverable from the owner
and shall be a lien on the property.
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of this article, or such
other matters as may be established by the rules and regulations of the
Rent Regulation Officer shall be deemed to be violations of this article.
§ 311-40 UNION CITY CODE § 311-41
1:610
Chapter 317
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
§ 317-1. Purpose.
New Jersey has adopted the Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5,
which has as its general purpose making government records more
available to the public than they have been in the past. In certain instances,
the production of voluminous records, archived records, or records in a
format which is not the usual format maintained by the municipality or
other special circumstances is costly and time consuming. The New Jersey
Open Public Records Act permits the municipality to require the payment
of fees, special service charges and/or special charges as a prerequisite to
the production of records requiring extraordinary time and effort, special
equipment or special formatting.
§ 317-2. Custodian of records.
The City Clerk by law is the custodian of records for the City.
§ 317-3. Interpretation of documents.
Nothing in this chapter shall require the custodian of records or any other
municipal official to examine, analyze, tabulate, or interpret documents
which are subject to production under the New Jersey Open Public Records
Act.
§ 317-4. Records requests; advance notice of costs.
§ 317-5. Use of outside vendors for duplication; fees and special
service charges.
A. Requests to be in writing. Any requests for documents shall be made to
the City Clerk in writing and preferably on a form established by the
City Clerk for such purposes.
B. Advance notice of fees, special service charges and special charges;
deposit. Any requester of government records who may be eligible for
the imposition of a fee, special charge or special service charge under
this chapter shall receive advance notice of the amount of fees and
charges before any work is started. Whenever the costs of reproducing
a document exceed $5, the City Clerk shall require payment in full of
such charges before causing the work to begin.
A. Duplication or other work beyond capability of municipal in-house work
force. Whenever the in-house municipal work force or available
municipal equipment is insufficient to duplicate or produce government
records in a timely fashion, the City Clerk may cause such duplication
or production to be accomplished by outside vendors such as copy
centers or producers of digital images and, in the case of payroll
§ 311-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-5
1:611
Chapter 323
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
Rental property — See Ch. 329.
Rent stabilization — See Ch. 334.
§ 323-1. Findings; liability for relocation costs.
records, the City's payroll-processing company. If the costs of such
duplication or production charged by such vendors exceed the routine
charges set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, the requester shall pay the actual
direct cost of same without any additional surcharge for labor costs.
B. Special service charges authorized. Whenever government records
cannot be reproduced by regular copying equipment or fulfillment of
the request would involve extraordinary time and effort (for example,
where a large number of records must be recovered from storage or
substantive staff time is required to review, redact, sort and/or
assemble records), charges may be imposed as follows:
(1) The actual cost (materials and supplies but no staff labor) of
duplication or reproduction; plus
(2) A special service charge as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be
imposed for each hour of extraordinary time predicted to be
utilized to respond to the request. [Amended 5-21-2013]
C. Digital records. If a request for governmental records involves
production or conversion of digital or computerized records or film
which is in a medium not routinely used by the agency (i.e., electronic
or film); not routinely developed or maintained by an agency; or
requires a substantial amount of manipulation or programming of
information technology, the requester shall pay fees and special
charges incurred by the City if the conversion is done directly by the
City as follows:
(1) Direct costs (no overhead) to comply with the request; plus
(2) Special charges as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees. [Amended
5-21-2013]
A. The City, pursuant to law, recognizes that there are residential
tenancies which constitute illegal occupancies due to building
conditions, which violate zoning and/or housing codes of the state and/
or City, causing relocation of tenants as well as demolition of premises
which are caused by substantial violations of state and City law.
§ 317-5 UNION CITY CODE § 323-1
1:612
§ 323-2. Assistance to displaced persons.
The City does hereby require that any tenant who receives a notice of
eviction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.2, as may be amended and
supplemented from time to time, that results from a zoning or code
enforcement activity for an illegal occupancy which the landlord must
correct, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g, or as a result of being cited by
local or state housing inspectors or zoning officers, and it is unfeasible
to correct such illegal occupancy without removing the tenant, shall be
considered a displaced person and entitled to relocation assistance in an
amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person.
The owner/landlord of the structure/building shall be liable for the payment
of such relocation assistance.
§ 323-3. Assistance paid by City; repayment by landlord.
B. The existence of such issues requires the displacement of the building
tenants.
C. In the event that displacement of the tenants results for any reason, the
building owner/landlord is liable to the tenants for relocation costs.
D. The City is authorized, pursuant to law, to establish a revolving
relocation assistance fund, out of which relocation assistance may be
paid to the displaced tenants in the event the owner fails to provide
same.
E. All relocation assistance costs incurred by the City, pursuant to law,
shall be repaid by the owner/landlord of the building to the City, and
such repayments shall be deposited into the City's revolving relocation
assistance fund.
F. In addition to requiring reimbursement for relocation assistance paid to
the displaced tenants from the building owner, the City shall require
that an additional fine for zoning and housing code violations for illegal
occupancies shall be imposed against the building owner/landlord in an
amount not to exceed six times the monthly rental paid by each of the
displaced persons, and such amount shall be deposited into the City's
revolving relocation assistance fund.
A. The City may pay relocation assistance from the City's relocation
assistance fund to any displaced person who has not received the
required payment from the owner/landlord of the structure at the time
of eviction.
B. All relocation assistance costs incurred by a municipality pursuant to
this chapter shall be repaid by the owner/landlord of the structure to
the municipality in the same manner as relocation costs are billed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1 and 20:4-4.2.
C. All repayments shall be deposited into the City's relocation assistance
fund.
§ 323-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-3
1:613
§ 323-4. Establishment of fund.
§ 323-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 323-6. Exceptions.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the owner of a structure shall exclude
mortgagees in possession of a structure through foreclosure.
D. The Community Development Agency pays for relocation expenses if
there is a fire or building code violation. Repayment shall be made to
the Community Development Agency for costs it pays. [Added
5-21-2013]
A. The City does hereby establish a relocation assistance fund into which
shall be deposited the following sums less any money required to be
repaid to the state. The sums to be deposited are:
(1) Any relocation costs and the interest thereon paid by an owner of
real property who has been liable for a civil or criminal penalty in
the case of any displacement of persons by housing or construction
code enforcement pursuant to law.
(2) Any sums realized by the City upon enforcement of the City's liens
or liquidation of any property acquired by virtue of enforcement
pursuant to law.
(3) Any sums realized by the City relating to any relocation cost and
interest thereon upon enforcement or liquidation of any property
acquired by virtue of enforcement and collected pursuant to law.
B. Money appropriated from this section shall be used by the City to
provide relocation assistance pursuant to law.
A. The City, in addition to requiring reimbursement from the owner/
landlord of the structure for relocation assistance paid to a displaced
tenant, shall require that an additional fine for zoning or housing code
violations for an illegal occupancy, up to an amount to six times the
monthly rental paid by the displaced person, be paid to the City by the
owner of the structure.
B. The City, after a hearing, may impose upon the owner/landlord, for a
second or subsequent violation for an illegal occupancy, a fine equal to
the annual tuition cost of any resident of the illegally occupied unit
attending a public school, which fine shall be recovered in a civil action
by a summary proceeding in the name of the City, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.
C. The Municipal Court and the Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of
proceedings for the enforcement of the penalty provided by this section,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g.
§ 323-3 UNION CITY CODE § 323-6
1:614
Chapter 329
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 266.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
Relocation assistance — See Ch. 323.
Rent stabilization — See Ch. 334.
§ 323-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-6
1:615

ARTICLE I
Certificate of Registration
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 13-10.1 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 329-1. Filing required.
Every landlord of a multifamily dwelling, at the time of the creation of the
first tenancy in any multifamily dwelling, shall file with the office of the
Rent Stabilization Board a certificate of registration. Registration shall be
upon forms prescribed and furnished by the Rent Board Administrator, and
shall include the name, address and telephone number of the owner and
the name and address of the lessor, if other than the owner, and the name,
address and telephone number of the agent responsible for the premises
who shall reside in the City and have full authority to act on the owner's
behalf. In the case of landlords who do not personally reside in the City or
in the case of corporate landlords, they shall also include the name of a
corporate office or principal and the address of their domicile or principal
place of business.
§ 329-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDLORD — The person or persons who own, or purport to own, or
exercise control of any building in which there is rented or offered for rent
residential housing space for living and dwelling purposes whether by lease
or otherwise.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Multifamily dwelling shall include any
building which contains two or more rental units. This definition does not
include owner-occupied two-unit dwellings or owner-occupied single-unit
dwellings.
§ 329-3. Amendments to certificate.
Every landlord required to file a certificate of registration shall file an
amended certificate of registration with the office of the Rent Stabilization
Board within 20 days after any change in the information required to be
included thereon.
§ 329-4. Copy to occupant and tenants.
Every landlord shall, at the time of creation of a new tenancy, provide
each occupant or tenant in his/her building with a copy of the certificate
of registration. If an amended certificate is filed, the landlord shall provide
each occupant or tenant with a copy of the amended certificate within seven
days after filing with the Rent Board Administrator.
§ 329-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-5
1:617
§ 329-5. Violation and penalties.
Any landlord who shall violate any provision of this act shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $500. Each day during which an owner is in
violation of § 329-1 or 329-3 shall constitute a separate violation hereunder.
§ 329-5 UNION CITY CODE § 329-5
1:618
ARTICLE II
Boiler Certification
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 13-10.2 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 329-6. Findings of fact.
§ 329-7. Applicability; authorized certifiers.
§ 329-8. Notification of malfunctioning boiler.
It shall be the duty of every owner, manager and superintendent of each
building subject to the provisions of this article to notify the Department
of Health within a period of two hours after any malfunction of a heating
system subject to the certification requirements thereof, except that if a
malfunction occurs on a Saturday, Sunday, holiday or on any day between
the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., or at any other time when the
Department of Health is unavailable by telephone, it shall be the duty of the
owner, manager and superintendent of each such building to notify the Fire
Department within a period of two hours following any such malfunction.
§ 329-9. Time limit for repair.
Any malfunction to the boiler which shall result in the failure to provide
sufficient heat as determined by the Health Officer shall be repaired within
24 hours of the malfunction.
A. The health, safety and welfare of a large number of City residents are
endangered each year during the heating season by reason of
inadequate and insufficient servicing and preventative maintenance of
boilers in some of the larger multiple dwellings in the City.
B. The City officials are aware of repeated failure of boilers in such
buildings during past heating seasons to provide adequate heat to the
residents thereof, and they have reason to believe the experience
during the current heating season will be no different.
A. Building with six residential units or more. Every owner of a building
containing six residential units or more, where the owner has
contracted, undertaken or is otherwise bound to heat or furnish heat for
any residential unit therein must have the entire heating system(s)
designed to supply heat to such residential units certified to be in
proper working order, such as shall be capable of supplying heat as
required under this article.
B. Certification by whom; when. This certification may be made by any
boiler service or inspection company, qualified for the type and size
boiler being inspected, and must be performed between June 1 and
September 1 of each year. A true copy of such certification(s) shall be
filed with the Department of Health and Construction Code Office by no
later than September 10 of each year.
§ 329-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-10
1:619
§ 329-10. Landlord's agent for heating repairs. [Added 11-21-2006]
A. The Health Officer shall have power to act as the agent for a landlord in
the engaging of repairmen and the ordering of any parts necessary to
restore to operating condition the furnace, boiler or other equipment
essential to the proper heating of any residential unit rented by said
landlord; provided, however, that at least 24 hours have elapsed since
the tenant has lodged a complaint with the Health Officer, prior to
which a bona fide attempt has been made by the tenant to notify the
landlord of the failure of the heating equipment, and the landlord has
failed to take appropriate action, and the outside air temperature is less
than 55° F.
B. Any person who supplies material or services in accordance with this
section shall bill the landlord directly and, by filing a notice approved by
the Health Officer with the County Clerk, shall have a lien on the
premises where the materials were used or services supplied.
§ 329-10 UNION CITY CODE § 329-10
1:620
ARTICLE III
Nuisance Conditions
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as §§ 13-10.3 to 13-10.12 of the 1996 Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 329-11. Nuisance declared.
Any structure in the City which is occupied by two or more families as
tenants and which, because of lack of repairs, because of a dilapidated
condition, because of lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities,
or because of structural defects or uncleanliness, becomes harmful to the
health or safety of the occupants of the building or structure, or of the
general public, shall constitute a nuisance.
§ 329-12. Complaint by Board of Commissioners.
A. Whenever the Board of Commissioners shall determine that any
structure, because of a lack of repair, because of a dilapidated
condition, because of lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities, or because of structural defects or uncleanliness, has become
harmful to the health or safety of the occupants or of the general public,
it shall file a complaint, in writing, with the Clerk of the City setting
forth the existing conditions pertaining to such structure. The
complaint shall state that, in the opinion of the Board Commissioners,
the condition complained of can be corrected or repaired or put in
proper condition to comply with the requirements of this article or to
comply with the requirements of any ordinance of the City or state law
applicable thereto. The complaint shall set forth in detail the nature of
the defect to be corrected or the repairs to be made.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall forthwith, upon making and filing of
the complaint, proceed to consider the complaint and, if in the
judgment of a majority of its members it is deemed advisable and for
the best interest of the tenants occupying the structure, or of the
general public, that the structure described in the complaint be
repaired, the Board shall declare the structure harmful to the health or
safety of the occupants or of the general public by adoption of a
resolution instructing the City Clerk to give notice of the contemplated
repairs to the owner, lessor and agent of the structure to be affected
thereby. The notice shall contain a description of the property affected,
sufficiently definite in terms to identify it, as well as a description of the
manner in which the repairs are to be carried out. The notice shall
further contain a statement that unless the structure is repaired within
30 days after the service of the notice, or such further time as may be
allowed by the Commissioners, giving due consideration to the extent of
the repairs required and the diligence prosecuted by the owner in
effecting them, the City will proceed with such repairs in accordance
with the statutes of the State of New Jersey, and will charge the cost
and expenses thereof as a municipal lien against the premises. The
notice may be served upon the owner, lessor and agent personally or by
§ 329-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-12
1:621
§ 329-13. Repair by City.
In the event that the owner, lessor or agent of the structure fails to make
repairs in compliance with the notice and within the time stated therein,
the Board of Commissioners shall file a resolution with the Clerk and,
immediately upon making and filing the resolution, shall have full power
and authority to effect the repairs. The resolution shall state specifically
how the structure shall be repaired and shall provide that the City Clerk
shall take action to ascertain the cost of the repairs in accordance with the
statutes.
§ 329-14. Recovery of costs.
When any such repairs shall have been undertaken, the Board of
Commissioners shall keep an accurate account of the cost and expenses
thereof and a true statement of the cost and expenses thereof under oath
or affirmation shall be filed by the Board with the Clerk, together with a
description of the structure and the name of the owner, lessor or agent in
charge thereof. The Board shall examine the account and, if it is properly
made, shall confirm it and file it, together with the report of its confirmation,
with the City Clerk who shall record it in a book to be kept for that purpose.
The cost and expenses so incurred shall be a municipal lien against the
premises and collected as provided for in this article.
§ 329-15. Appointment of custodian.
The Board of Commissioners may appoint a custodian of any such structure
on behalf of the City, who may either be an officer of the City or any other
person specifically designated, to enter and take charge of the premises
and supervise the abatement of the nuisance, the correction of the defective
condition or the maintenance of the premises in a proper condition so as to
conform to the requirements of this article and state law applicable thereto.
The custodian shall be compensated for his/her services by an allowance
of 5% of the income derived from the structure, but his/her compensation
shall in no event be less than the hourly compensation rate of $5, and the
compensation shall be paid to the custodian by the City and be included in
the cost and expenses undertaken and outlined as provided in this article.
§ 329-16. Receiver.
In the event that any owner of a structure in the City shall violate this
article, or fail to abate a condition harmful to the health or safety of
mailing the same to the owner, lessor and agent at his/her last known
address by certified mail, or, if the owner, lessor and agent have failed
to register the premises with the Clerk and have failed to designate an
agent in respect to the premises who resides in the City, or where such
agent cannot be found at the address given in the registration, service
shall be made by posting the notice upon the premises in a conspicuous
place.
§ 329-12 UNION CITY CODE § 329-16
1:622
the occupants of the structure or of the general public after notice and
opportunity to do so, the custodian designated by the Board of
Commissioners, by and with the approval of the Commissioners, may bring
an action in the Superior Court to be appointed receiver ex officio of the
rents and income of such real property for the purpose of collecting the rent
and income from the property and expend the same for the purpose of the
abatement of the condition. In such event, all of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.12h et seq.43 shall apply.
§ 329-17. Appeals.
Any property owner who desires to appeal from any action taken by virtue
of the provisions of this article, within 30 days from the date of receiving
notice of the proposed repairs of any such structure of which they are
owner, shall file an application in writing with the City Clerk for review
and revocation or modifications of such action. The Board of Commissioners
shall then grant the property owner or owners a hearing, at such time and
upon such notice as it shall determine. The property owner or owners shall
after such hearing be notified, in writing, of the action taken by the Board
and, within five days from the date of mailing the notice of the action taken,
shall proceed to do the necessary acts to fully comply with the original
notice, as affirmed or modified.
§ 329-18. Record book.
The Clerk shall keep a book in which (s)he shall record and file all
proceedings required to be taken by virtue of the provisions of this article.
§ 329-19. Supervision of work by Board of Commissioners.
All work in connection with repairing, altering and fireproofing of any
structure by virtue of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
supervision of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 329-20. Conflict with state law.
Nothing contained in this article is intended to conflict with the State of
New Jersey Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), and
any amendments thereto, or with any regulations promulgated thereunder
pertaining to the construction and maintenance of hotels and multiple
dwellings.
43.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 2003, c. 295.
§ 329-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-20
1:623

ARTICLE IV
Registration of Tenants
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as §§ 13-10.13 to 13-10.15 of the 1996 Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 329-21. Filing of certificate.
§ 329-22. Fees for duplicate certificate.
The fees for filing the duplicate certificate shall be as set forth in Chapter
155, Fees, payable to the Department of Health, Housing Division.
Registration certificates shall be supplied by the Department of Health,
Housing Division, upon request. Certificates can also be filed by mail.
§ 329-23. Exceptions.
This article shall affect multiple dwellings consisting of three or more
dwelling units, but not including rooming houses or hotels, public housing
and those buildings which have similar information on file for tax purposes.
A. It shall be the duty of every landlord of every dwelling unit within the
confines of the City who rents to any tenant in such a dwelling unit to
file a certificate, in duplicate, with the Department of Health, Housing
Division, of the City. The certificate shall contain the following:
(1) The name of each person to whom the housing facilities are being
rented and the age of all persons under 18 years of age.
(2) The specific floor and apartment number or location of the dwelling
unit.
(3) The number of rooms being rented.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the landlord.
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the superintendent or
person in charge.
B. The certificate shall be signed by the landlord and certified by the
tenant verifying the information contained in the certificate. The
tenant's name appearing on the certificate shall also appear on the
mailbox.
C. The landlord shall file a certificate supplying the same information on
all new tenants 14 days prior to occupancy. Included with this
information will be the amount of monthly rent. In those cases where
the information is not available 14 days prior to occupancy, the landlord
shall notify the City the same day that the tenant accepts responsibility
for occupancy.
§ 329-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-23
1:625

ARTICLE V
Management Office and Ownership Information
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2001-6 (§§ 13-10.16 and 13-10.17 of the 1996
Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 329-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure and land appurtenant
thereto containing three or more apartments rented or offered for rent to
three or more tenants or family units.
OWNER — The owner, lessee, agent or other person who manages or
controls any rented dwelling.
§ 329-25. Superintendent required.
The owner of any multiple dwelling unit shall be required to have a building
superintendent available on premises at all times. Tenants must receive
notification of who that person is and how they can be contracted.
§ 329-26. Management office on site.
Any multiple dwelling containing 100 or more units shall have a
management office on site. Such office shall have the hours of operation
posted on both the door of the office and by the tenants' mailboxes. The
management office must be open during reasonable hours to accommodate
the needs of the tenants. During hours that the office is not open, there must
be a contact number posted on the door where the building superintendent
or other qualified management official may be reached for any emergencies.
§ 329-27. Security personnel in lobby required.
Any multiple dwelling containing 150 or more units shall have a door
attendant/twenty-four-hour security personnel in the lobby of such dwelling.
The purpose of this person is to maintain security and assist residents with
needs or concerns.
§ 329-28. Registration of name of superintendent.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a multiple dwelling unit, any
part of which is leased or rented, to register the name of the building
superintendent with the office of the City Clerk upon forms prescribed and
furnished by the City. Any multiple dwelling with 100 or more units must
register with the City Clerk's office the phone number and mailing address
of the management office, as well as the hours of operation. Further, any
multiple dwelling with 150 or more units must register with the City Clerk's
office the name(s) of the security company/personnel performing such
duties.
§ 329-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-29
1:627
§ 329-29. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all multiple dwellings, whether already
constructed, in the process of being constructed, or to be constructed in the
future. All multiple dwellings currently in existence shall have 90 days to
comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 329-30. Posting of notices.
§ 329-31. Violation and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.
A. Where posted. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a building,
any part of which is leased or rented as a dwelling unit or business, to
post permanently and prominently in view in the common area nearest
the principal entrance to the building an ownership notice.
B. Information required in notice.
(1) If the owner is the sole proprietor, the notice must contain:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the owner; or
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the person
designated as the owner's agent who shall have the authority
to authorize and provide for emergency repairs of the building.
(2) If the owner is a partnership, corporation or other business entity
or the successor, assignee, executor or administrator of any of the
above-mentioned types of owners, the notice must contain:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the agent for the
service of process.
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the person
designated as the owner's agent who shall have the authority
to authorize and provide for emergency repairs to the building.
§ 329-29 UNION CITY CODE § 329-31
1:628
ARTICLE VI
Security Funds
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2001-17 (§ 13-10.18 of the 1996 Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 329-32. Definitions.
In applying and interpreting this article, the following definitions shall be
used:
DWELLING UNIT — Any room(s), or suite or apartment thereof, whether
furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied, or intended, arranged or
designed to be occupied, for sleeping, dwelling or residence purposed by
one or more persons.
EMERGENCY CONDITIONS — Any condition dangerous or injurious to
the health or safety of the occupants of a building or occupants of a
neighboring building which arises out of any of the following circumstances
or conditions:
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure of one or more stories
and any land appurtenant thereto and any portion thereof in which four
or more dwelling units are occupied or are intended to be occupied by
four or more persons who live independently of each other. Premises which
are used primarily for purposes other than sleeping, dwelling or residence
purposes shall not be considered a multiple dwelling.
§ 329-33. Depositing of funds.
The owner of a multiple dwelling, designated by the Multiple Dwelling
Emergency Commission established pursuant to § 4-95 of this Code, shall
deposit with the Commission security funds to be used for the repair,
A. Lack of adequate ventilation or light.
B. Lack of adequate and property functioning sanitary facilities.
C. Lack of adequate and healthful water supply.
Structural, mechanical or electrical defects which increase the hazards
of fire, accident or other calamity.
D.
From October 1 of each year until the next succeeding May 1, failure to
maintain every unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein
at a temperature of at least 68° F. whenever the outside temperature
falls below the 55° F. during the daytime hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m. or failure to maintain every unit of dwelling space and every
habitable room therein at a temperature of at least 55° F. whenever the
outside temperature falls below the 40° F. during the nighttime hours of
11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner
shall not be responsible for heat loss and the consequent drop in the
interior temperature arising out of action by the occupants in leaving
windows or doors open to the exterior of the building.
E.
§ 329-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-33
1:629
maintenance, supply or replacement of those items of structure, equipment
or supplies with are necessary to correct, eliminate or alleviate an
emergency condition.
§ 329-34. Replenishing funds; time schedule.
A. The amount of the security funds to be deposited with the Commission
shall be computed in the following manner:
(1) Where the owner owns between four and 25 dwelling units, the
owner shall deposit $100 for each dwelling unit.
(2) Where the owner owns between 26 and 40 dwelling units, the
owner shall deposit $2,500 for the first 25 units and $50 for each
additional unit.
(3) Where the owner owns more than 40 dwelling units, the owner
shall deposit $3,250 for the first 40 units and $30 per unit for each
additional dwelling unit.
B. In no event shall an owner be required to deposit more than $5,000 in
security funds pursuant to this article. All funds required to be
deposited under the terms of this article shall be deposited with the
Commission by delivering such funds to the office of the Department of
Public Safety of the City within 10 days after receipt of notice from the
Commission of the amount due. Notice of the amount due may be given
by the Commission, or its agent, but personally delivering the same to
the owner, or the owner's agent, servant, employee or joint venturer on
the owner's premises, or by certified and ordinary mail sent to the
owner's last registered address. Upon receipt of such security funds,
the Commission shall deposit the same in an interest-bearing account in
the name of the Commission in trust for each particular owner. All
interest payable on such accounts shall accrue to the particular owner
on whose behalf the account is maintained by the Commission.
A. In the event that the Commission spends money from any account, as
authorized by this article, thus reducing the amount in the account and
leaving less than the sum required as computed in § 329-33 above, the
Commission shall immediately notify the owner, in the same manner as
notification is given therein, of the amount necessary to bring that
account up to the originally required amount. The owner shall
thereafter deposit the required sum necessary to bring the account up
to the originally required amount with the Commission and within the
following time schedule:
(1) Where the balance remaining in the owner's account is more than
$1,500, the deposit shall be made within 30 days from the date the
owner received notice.
(2) Where the balance remaining in the account is $1,500 or less, the
deposit shall be made within five days from the date the owner
received notice.
§ 329-33 UNION CITY CODE § 329-34
1:630
§ 329-35. Withdrawal and expenditure of funds.
The Commission shall be authorized to expend the moneys from the account
it maintains for an owner to correct, eliminate or alleviate an emergency
condition only when:
B. Where the Commission has spent money from an account, the owner of
the premises may appeal to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners of
the City for a hearing concerning solely the following issues:
(1) Did an emergency condition exist?
(2) Was the amount expended to remedy the emergency condition
reasonable?
C. If such appeal is desired, the owner, within 10 days of receiving notice
of the amount spent, shall file with the Clerk of the City a letter
requesting such appeal. The Board of Commissioners of the City shall
hold a hearing regarding the aforementioned issues not less than 10
nor more than 30 days after the City Clerk has received the request
from the owner, and it shall render its decision within 30 days after the
hearing has been concluded. By mutual consent between the Board of
Commissioners and an aggrieved party, the time limitation herein
stated may be extended.
A. It has examined those circumstances and conditions alleged to
constitute an emergency condition and has declared an emergency
condition to exist.
B. The remedying of such emergency condition is the owner's
responsibility.
C. The owner or the owner's agent, servant, employee or joint venturer
has received notice of the circumstances or conditions constituting the
emergency condition from either the Commission or an affected tenant
in person or by regular mail, telegram or telephone conversation.
D. No work has been commenced by the owner or the owner's agent,
servant, employee or joint venturer to correct, eliminate or alleviate the
emergency condition within 24 hours after the owner or the owner's
agent, servant, employee or joint venturer has received notice of the
circumstances and conditions constituting the emergency condition.
E. Where work was commenced within the twenty-four-hour period
referred to in Subsection D above, but such work has not been
reasonably completed within 72 hours after the work was commenced
and such work, under the applicable circumstances and in the opinion
of the Health Officer or the Building Inspector, would have been
completed within 72 hours, any such withdrawal and expenditure of
security funds by the Commission shall require the signatures of any
two members of the Commission.
§ 329-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-36
1:631
§ 329-36. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be subject to a
penalty consisting of a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or both, subject to the discretion of the Judge.
B. In the event of a continuing violation, each day shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 329-36 UNION CITY CODE § 329-36
1:632
ARTICLE VII
Emergency Contact Information
[Adopted 1-21-2003]
§ 329-37. Required information.
§ 329-38. Transfer of property.
If the ownership of any property subject to this article is transferred, the
transferee shall complete the Emergency Contact Information Form within
five days of acquiring the property.
A. Any entity or person who leases or rents residential dwelling units or
businesses within this City of Union City shall complete an Emergency
Contact Information Form to be prepared by the Commissioner of
Public Safety, which shall contain:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person designated
as the owner's agent who shall have the authority to authorize and
provide for emergency repairs of the building; and
(3) Any other information required by the Commissioner of Public
Safety.
B. A copy of the completed form shall be submitted to the Commissioner of
Public Safety.
§ 329-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-38
1:633

ARTICLE VIII
Tenant's Bill of Rights
[Adopted 6-17-2003]
§ 329-39. Posting required.
The owner or manager of any multiple dwelling unit containing six or more
units shall post a Tenants' Bill of Rights in the form attached hereto as
Appendix A44 in the lobby or entrance and mailroom of such building so that
it may be seen by all tenants.
44.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 329-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-39
1:635
Chapter 334
RENT STABILIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Relocation assistance — See Ch. 323.
Rental property — See Ch. 329.
Income from pay phones — See Ch. 391, Art.
II, § 391-11.
§ 334-1. Findings.
§ 334-2. Applicability; exceptions.
A. The character of the City of Union City has changed over the years; the
governing body has revised and amended the Rent Leveling Ordinance
to reflect those changes;
B. The original Rent Control Ordinance was enacted in response to a
housing emergency crisis which existed in the early 1970s;
C. Hudson County has lost $1,000,000,000 in tax ratables since 1992 as a
result of successful residential and commercial tax appeals. Since 1994,
Union City has lost $40,000,000 as a result of successful residential and
commercial tax appeals;
D. Housing conditions in the City have changed since the enactment of the
original Rent Control Ordinance; and
E. In light of the current economic conditions in the existing housing
market in the City, it is no longer in the public interest to maintain rent
control on all types of residential units.
A. Applicability. The terms of this chapter apply to individual dwelling
units within a building, including condominium or cooperative units in
the process of being converted, or having been converted, rather than
to an individual tenant occupying a dwelling unit. An agreement for
occupancy of the dwelling unit shall not circumvent the application of
this chapter by titling the agreement as other than a lease, such as, but
not limited to a “use and occupancy agreement.” [Amended 1-5-2016]
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Units in one-, two- and three-family buildings.
(2) Units in four- , five- and six-family buildings that are owneroccupied.
Owners of four- , five- and six-family buildings, as part of
their registration, must file an affidavit, stating that they reside in
the building and comply with the regulations established by the
Rent Stabilization Board, which regulations shall set forth criteria
§ 329-39 UNION CITY CODE § 334-2
1:636
§ 334-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — A dwelling unit is fit for habitation
as defined by the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in
the City, and is occupied, or unoccupied and being offered for rent.
BOARD — The Rent Stabilization Board.
CODE COMPLIANCE — That the housing space and dwelling are free from
all heat, hot water, elevator and all health, safety and fire code violations as
well as free of all other violations of the chapter, the Property Maintenance
Code and other applicable federal, state, county or local laws or regulations.
CONVERTER — The owner, or representative of the owner, of property
containing dwelling units covered by this chapter, who proposes to or takes
any action for the purpose of effecting a conversion of such property or
dwelling units, from some other form of ownership into a cooperative or
condominium form of ownership.
COOPERATIVE and COOPERATIVE CORPORATION — A cooperative
housing association or corporation which entitles the holder of a
to establish proof of residency. The affidavit shall be in a form
provided by the office of the Rent Board Administrator. The burden
remains on the owner to demonstrate residency. [Amended
3-1-2016]
(3) Motels, hotels and similar type building and buildings intended for
transient use, floor space used strictly for commercial purposes in
any type building, including state-licensed rooming houses.
Dwelling units rented for the first time after the adoption of this
chapter are exempt, and the initial rent may be determined by the
landlord, but all subsequent rents shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
(4) New construction, consistent with state law, shall be exempt from
this chapter.
C. Existing tenants; establishment of basic rent. Existing tenants will
continue to be protected by rent control while they remain in their
units. For these tenants, a landlord must still comply with the
requirements of this chapter. All rents established by landlords and
tenants on March 1, 1973, and any subsequent increase shall represent
the base rent from which permitted increases are calculated.
D. Tenure of rent stabilization. This chapter shall remain in effect until the
Board of Commissioners determines, by ordinance, that rent control is
no longer necessary in the City of Union City and that it is in the public
interest to permit the unrestrained operation of the competitive rental
market.
§ 334-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-3
1:637
membership interest therein to possess and occupy a unit of dwelling space
owned and leased by such association or corporation.
DIVISION — The Division of Housing and Urban Renewal of the New Jersey
State Department of Community Affairs.
DWELLING — Any building or structure, including land, cooperative
apartments and condominium apartments, or trailer, or land used as a
trailer park, rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants or family
units. Furnished rooms are subject to the terms of this chapter
notwithstanding the fact that furniture is provided by the landlord and/or
rent is paid on a weekly or biweekly basis.
DWELLING UNIT — Any unit used for residential purposes, including both
rental, cooperatively owned and condominium units.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUATION — The value of the residential portion
of real property, calculated by dividing the assessed value of the property
for municipal tax purposes, by the equalization ratio published by the
Director of the Division of Taxation of the State of New Jersey, and
multiplying the result by the fraction of the square footage of the floor
area of the building and the area of the adjacent lot used for residential
purposes, including corridors, storage space, stairwells and other such uses
required in residential space, over the total square footage of the floor area
of the building and the area of the adjacent lot, with areas used in common
being allocated according to the same proportion.
GROUPS or ASSOCIATIONS — Combinations of building units or tenants
which shall be recognized and permitted to proceed jointly if the Board
finds a sufficient common basis of interest, facts or related connection; but
such representation shall be established by appropriate landlord, tenants or
others with such direct interest in the premises. Persons without such direct
interests shall not represent a landlord, tenants or others, nor shall the
unauthorized practice of law or other profession be authorized or permitted.
HOUSING SPACE —
JUST CAUSE FOR EVICTION — That the landlord recovered possession
of a housing space or dwelling for one of the reasons outlined in N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.1, as amended. Removal of a tenant due to a change in ownership
is not permissible unless said removal is done in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.1.
That portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent for living and
dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit, together with all
privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and
improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of
the property.
A.
Includes a garage, carport or parking space, which garage, carport or
parking space is included in the agreement for the rental of housing
space.
B.
§ 334-3 UNION CITY CODE § 334-3
1:638
LANDLORD — As used in this chapter, the person who owns or purports
to own any building, structure or complex of buildings or structures in
which there is rented or offered for rent housing space for living or dwelling
purposes under either a written or an oral lease, provided that this
definition shall not include owner-occupied two- and three-family dwelling
premises.
LIVING AREA — The amount of total rentable space applicable to any given
housing space, measured either in terms of rooms or square footage.
MAINTENANCE COSTS — Maintenance costs include real estate taxes,
utility expenses, expenses for repairs, upkeep and maintenance respecting
a dwelling unit, but shall not include principal or interest payments on any
blanket encumbrance or other mortgage or encumbrance.
MAJOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A permanent improvement that is
reasonably expected to last more than three years. The improvement must
benefit the dwelling and must be subject to an allowance for depreciation
under federal income tax provisions, but the Rent Stabilization Board,
taking all factors into consideration, will make the ultimate determination.
MONTHLY MAINTENANCE CHARGE — The annual maintenance costs
divided by 12.
PERIODIC TENANT — All tenants, including monthly tenants, who do not
have a written lease.
RENT INCREASE, DECREASE OR ADJUSTMENT — The notice forwarded
by the landlord to the tenant, or by the tenant to the landlord, by letter or
in any other form, setting forth the proposed amount of rent increase, rent
decrease or other rent adjustment. Each such notice shall state in detail the
reasons justifying or requiring the rent increase, rent decrease or other rent
adjustment.
RENTAL STATEMENT — The statement which the landlord shall be
required to sign and deliver to the tenant, when requested by the tenant,
and vice versa, describing the housing space rented, the related services
and equipment involved, whether such include the use of the basement,
garage, clotheslines, washing utilities, heat, hot water, garbage removal,
repairs, maintenance and the like, and the base rent and charge as of March
1, 1973, or other applicable date.
RESALE — Resale of a dwelling unit means any sale subsequent to the
original sale thereof.
SECRETARY — The Rent Stabilization Board Secretary.
SERVICES — The provision of light, heat, hot water, maintenance, painting,
elevator service, air conditioning, storm windows, screens, superintendent
service and any other benefit, privilege or facility connected with the use or
occupancy of any dwelling or housing space.
UNINHABITABLE BUILDING — A structure which is completely vacant and
unfit for human habitation as defined by the statutes, codes and ordinances
§ 334-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-3
1:639
in full force and effect in the State of New Jersey, County of Hudson and City
of Union City.
§ 334-4. Rent Stabilization Board.
A. Established. The Rent Stabilization Board, consisting of five members
as hereinafter established, is hereby continued in existence and
maintained as the Rent Stabilization Board of Union City.
B. Composition; terms.
(1) The Board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by
the Board of Commissioners by resolution adopted by a majority
vote of the Commissioners. For reasons of continuity and in the
best interests of the public the terms of the first members
appointed pursuant to this subsection shall be staggered terms of
one- , two- , three- , four- , and five-year term appointments.
(2) Thereafter the term of office of the members of the Board shall be
for five years each. Each member shall serve without
compensation, but each shall receive such expenses and per diem
allowances as the Board of Commissioners, from time to time, may
deem appropriate.
C. Alternate members. In addition to the five members of the Rent
Stabilization Board, the Board of Commissioners, as it deems necessary,
may appoint two alternate members to the Rent Stabilization Board, by
resolution adopted by a majority vote of the Commissioners. The term
of an alternate member shall be for one year. If any vacancy should
occur among the regular members, then the Board of Commissioners
may appoint either of the alternate members to fill the unexpired term.
An alternate member shall be entitled to sit with, and participate as a
member, in any meeting of or hearing before the Board. An alternate
member who has attended the full hearing or hearings on a specific
matter may participate in, and may vote upon, any determination made
during the absence or disqualification of any regular member.
D. Disqualification of member. No member or alternate member of the
Rent Stabilization Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which that individual has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
E. Powers of Board. The Rent Stabilization Board is hereby granted and
shall have and exercise all the powers necessary and appropriate to
carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the following:
(1) To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, the use of subpoenas, which rules and regulations
shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or amended, in its
description, providing that such rules are filed with the City Clerk.
§ 334-3 UNION CITY CODE § 334-4
1:640
§ 334-5. Board staff.
(2) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to
help them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
adjustments or additional rental, as herein provided.
(4) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants for
adjustment or reduced rental, as herein provided.
(5) To approve and accept a settlement or other agreement on the
subject matter of a dispute between a landlord and tenant.
(6) To require a landlord to produce for examination his/her books,
records, tax returns, balance sheets, profit and loss statements and
such other records as the Board may require in connection with any
application, hearing, proceeding or purpose, as set forth herein.
(7) The Rent Stabilization Board, upon an application by a landlord or
tenant or upon its own motion, may set a date for a hearing,
consider proofs and grant, deny, modify or otherwise adjust all
rentals, by increasing or decreasing same, and the Board may make
such determinations as to conditions, services, equipment, terms
and related matters pertaining to rentals and controlled premises
as may be warranted within the intent and purview of this chapter
and applicable state laws.
F. Quorums. A quorum for hearing shall consist of three members or
alternate members, and a majority shall be authorized to issue orders
relating to the powers and functions of the Board.
A. Rent Regulation Officer; duties.
(1) Position created. There is hereby created the position of Rent
Regulation Officer in the Department of Revenue and Finance.
(2) Qualifications. The Rent Regulation Officer shall be appointed by
and under the direction of the Director of the Department of
Revenue and Finance.
(3) Duties. The duties of the Rent Regulation Officer shall be as
follows:
(a) To obtain, keep and maintain all relevant records and other
data and information.
(b) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants
and to bring together tenants and landlords in formal
conferences and suggest resolutions of conflicts between them
in order to assist them in complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 334-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-5
1:641
(c) To notify landlords that there is no record of compliance by the
landlord with the provisions of this chapter.
(d) To remedy violations of this chapter by ordering rebates and
increases and bring appropriate legal charges as provided by
this chapter.
(e) To accept and process complaints from tenants of illegal rental
increases and to investigate such complaints prior to any
decision being rendered.
(f) To accept, process, review and investigate applications from
landlords for rental increases or surcharges under the
hardship increase or capital improvement recovery sections of
this chapter.
(g) To coordinate and supervise all staff associated with the
operation of this chapter.
(h) To attend all meetings of the Rent Stabilization Board.
(i) To perform such other duties as the Rent Stabilization Board
may specifically direct and as allowed by this chapter.
(j) To process all complaints regarding the withholding of certain
residential units from the rental housing market with the City
and forward them to the Construction Code Official or his/her
duly appointed designee, whose responsibility shall be to
conduct an investigation in accordance with law. Upon
completion of such investigation, a report shall be issued to the
Rent Regulation Officer, who shall be authorized to issue a
complaint in accordance with the above section.
(k) With respect to any application that the Rent Regulation
Officer receives from a tenant for a legal rent calculation
complaint pursuant to §§ 334-4 and 334-5 above, a tenant shall
in no case be entitled to a rent rebate for an illegally collected
rent which accrues between the date of the filing of the legal
rent complaint and the date of the final determination, which
shall not be computed as part of the three-year rebate
limitation.
(4) Compensation. The Rent Regulation Officer shall receive such
compensation as established by the Board of Commissioners.
(5) Term. The term of the Rent Regulation Officer shall be one year and
thereafter until a successor is chosen and qualifies.
(6) Determination. Any determination of the Rent Regulation Officer
under this section or such duties as may be delegated to him/her by
the Rent Stabilization Board, by regulation, will be rendered by the
officer, in writing.
§ 334-5 UNION CITY CODE § 334-5
1:642
(7) Appeal.
(a) In the event an affected party wishes to appeal that
determination, that party shall have 30 calendar days from the
date of that decision to file a formal appeal of the
determination with a fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, of
the Code of the City of Union City for each unit which is the
subject of the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be forwarded
to the Rent Leveling Office by ordinary and certified mail
within that thirty-day period.
(b) Upon receipt of the notice of appeal setting forth in detail the
grounds for the appeal and the required fee, the matter shall
be placed upon the Rent Stabilization Board agenda at the
earliest convenient date for determination. During the
pendency of the appeal, the rent for the subject unit shall be
the rent as established by the Rent Regulation Officer.
B. Assistant Rent Regulation Officer.
(1) Position created. There is hereby created the position of Assistant
Rent Regulation Officer in the Department of Revenue and Finance.
(2) Qualifications. The Assistant Rent Regulation Officer shall be
appointed by and under the direction of the Director of the
Department of Revenue and Finance.
(3) Duties. The duties of the Assistant Rent Regulation Officer shall be
to assist the Rent Regulation Officer in any and all matters which
may be required of him/her or delegated to him/her by the Rent
Regulation Officer, including those duties performed by the Rent
Regulation Officer.
C. Bilingual Principal Account Clerk/Typist, English and Spanish.
(1) Position created. There is hereby created the office or position of
Bilingual Principal Account Clerk/Typist, English and Spanish, in
the Department of Revenue and Finance.
(2) Appointment and salary. The appointment of the Bilingual Principal
Account Clerk/Typist, English and Spanish, shall be made by the
Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance. The person so
appointed shall be under the direction of the Director of the
Department of Revenue and Finance. The salary for this position
shall be as set forth by ordinance.
(3) Qualifications. The qualifications of the Bilingual Principal Account
Clerk/Typist, English and Spanish, shall be as follows:
(a) Have the ability to communicate in both English and Spanish
and be able to type reasonably well.
§ 334-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-5
1:643
§ 334-6. Professional services.
(b) Have been a resident of the City for at least one year prior to
the date of appointment.
(4) Duties. The duties of the Bilingual Principal Account Clerk/Typist,
English and Spanish, shall be:
(a) To receive and categorize rent inquiries from tenants and
landlords.
(b) To prepare an agenda for Rent Stabilization Board meetings.
(c) To schedule Rent Stabilization Board meetings and forward
notification of the dates and times of the meetings to the
appointed members of the Board and the Board's attorney.
(d) To prepare and distribute legally required notification of the
meetings, such as newspaper advertisements, and the posting
on designated buildings involved in rent matters to be
reviewed by the Board.
(e) To calculate the proposed rent increases or reductions
approved by the Board.
(f) To maintain files on all registered buildings covered under the
present Rent Stabilization Ordinance.
(g) To assist tenants and landlords on the method and categories
for which rent increases or reductions may be applied for and
coordinate such request with the Rent Stabilization Board
attorney.
(h) To interpret the provisions of the present Rent Stabilization
Ordinance with the aid and assistance of the Rent Stabilization
Board attorney.
A. Retention of professional services. In the event the Rent Stabilization
Board determines that a landlord or tenant's application for relief
contains calculations of a complex nature, then the Board, in the
interest of fairness and efficiency, may determine that the services of
professional experts are required to assist the Board in evaluating and
processing the application.
B. Estimate of fee. Should the Board determine that professional
assistance is required, then the Board shall forthwith send a copy of the
application and supporting documents to any professional expert
retained to assist the Board in evaluating and processing the
application. Within five days of receipt thereof, the professional expert
shall submit to the Board and to the applicant an estimate of funds
necessary to undertake the professional services to be rendered.
§ 334-5 UNION CITY CODE § 334-6
1:644
§ 334-7. Hearings.
C. Escrow funds. The applicant shall forthwith deposit such funds in an
escrow account maintained by the City. The professional expert shall
submit vouchers for all reasonable and necessary fees for the
professional services rendered, which fees shall be paid from the
escrow account in the manner prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16 through
40A:5-18 and the ordinances of the City of Union City. The professional
expert, at the time of submission of any such voucher, shall forward a
copy of same to the applicant.
D. Appeal of fee. In the event that the applicant questions the
reasonableness of any such voucher, the applicant may make written
protest of such voucher to the Board. In no event shall the Board
authorize the payment of any voucher submitted pursuant to this
section sooner than 10 days after its submission. Any of the aforesaid
moneys which are left in the escrow account upon completion of the
application shall be returned to the applicant after the Board reaches
its decision. Should additional funds be required after the original funds
are exhausted, such funds as shall be necessary in the judgment of the
Board shall be paid by the applicant to the City and placed in the escrow
account.
E. Action upon application. The Board shall take no formal action on any
application unless and until all escrow funds have been deposited with
the City, and any time limitations set forth in this chapter shall be
extended until all such escrow funds are deposited with the City.
A. Opportunity to be heard. All interested persons shall be given the
opportunity to be heard, with or without counsel, except that the Board,
in its discretion, may limit repetitious testimony or ask that a
spokesperson for the tenants be appointed.
B. The Rent Regulation Officer shall advise the appealing party of the date
of the initial hearing on an appeal of his or her determination. The
appealing party shall serve notice of the hearing date to the
nonappealing party by regular and certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least 20 days in advance of the hearing.
C. Oral decision by Board. In the event the Board renders its decision
orally, immediately following the hearing the landlord shall notify the
tenants of the Board's decision if that decision affects the rent or term
of any tenancy. The notice shall be by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested. Within 30 days thereof, the landlord shall provide
the Board with a copy of any notice served upon any tenant. The Rent
Stabilization Board shall not be required to render its decision in
writing unless requested to by the landlord within 30 days of the
hearing.
D. Reserved decision. In the event the Board reserves decision, the Board
shall render a written decision within 45 days of the hearing unless the
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-7
1:645
§ 334-8. Appeals.
Either the landlord or a tenant may appeal the decision of the Rent
Stabilization Board. All decisions of the Board are final. Any landlord or
tenant wishing to appeal the decisions of the Board may do so in the
Superior Court of New Jersey pursuant to its rules and procedures.
§ 334-9. Tenants' Advocacy Attorney.
Board, in its discretion, determines that an additional hearing is
necessary.
E. Additional hearings. If an additional hearing is necessary, the Board
shall so notify the landlord within 20 days of the initial hearing. A copy
of the notice of hearing shall be posted conspicuously in the lobby of the
building. The landlord shall serve notice of the hearing date to the
tenant, by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
20 days in advance of the hearing.
A. Established; appointment.
(1) There is hereby established within the Department of Public Affairs
the Office of Tenants' Advocacy Attorney. The Tenants' Advocacy
Attorney shall be appointed by the governing body for the term of
one year or until a successor is appointed and qualified.
(2) The Attorney shall be a duly licensed attorney at law and shall be
compensated by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners.
B. Duties. The Tenants' Advocacy Attorney, among other duties, shall:
(1) Provide and distribute information to tenants regarding federal,
state and municipal laws affection the rights and duties of landlords
and tenants.
(2) Distribute information specifically dealing with tenants' legal
rights.
(3) Write and publish information, pamphlets, leaflets or booklets
providing information on tenant/landlord rights and duties.
(4) Operate a hotline to provide advice to tenants.
(5) Promote, sponsor and organize tenants rights workshops to
disseminate information between tenants and tenant groups in
organizing to protect tenants' rights.
(6) Receive and forward to appropriate agencies of the City complaints
from tenants relating to the administrative action or inaction of any
department.
(7) Give free advice and assistance to apartment dwellers in their
dealings with the City Rent Stabilization Board and/or before any
§ 334-7 UNION CITY CODE § 334-9
1:646
§ 334-10. Permitted increases.
court or administrative tribunal as may be assigned by the
appropriate official of the City.
A. Rent control established. All units, unless otherwise specifically
exempted, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any and all
increases not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
refunded or credited to the tenant.
B. Annual increases for covered units.
(1) The maximum permissible annual rent increase is 3.5%.
(2) Exception for qualified senior tenants. The maximum annual
permissible rent increase for a senior tenant who satisfies each of
the following requirements is 2%:
(a) Sixty-five years of age or older; and
(b) Eligible to receive benefits under the Pharmaceutical
Assistance to the Aged and Disabled (PAAD);45 and
(c) Whose annual income combined with the annual income of all
other occupants of the unit does not exceed the combined
annual income of an applicant and spouse to be eligible for
PAAD except for a caregiver employed to provide care or
services to the senior tenant.
(3) A landlord may apply for a hardship increase under Subsection C of
this section in the event that the maximum annual rent increase for
covered units does not allow the landlord a reasonable return on
his investment.
C. Hardship increase. This subsection applies where the annual operating
expenses for any one building exceed at least 75% of the total annual
gross income. Operating expenses shall include all reasonable expenses
necessary to carry out the proper operation and maintenance of the
property, including property taxes allocated to the year. Operating
expenses shall exclude mortgage amortization, mortgage interest,
interest or costs of financing, attorney's, expert's or engineer's fees
related to the filing of hardship or capital improvement applications,
depreciation or expenditures for capital improvements. In reviewing
operating expenses, the Board shall consider normal and recurring
expenses and may make adjustments for extraordinarily high or low
operating expenses in any given year. Annual gross income shall
include all income realized in connection with the operation of the
premises including rentals from all residential and commercial units, as
well as fees collected for parking, rental from machines, concessions
45.Note: Chapter 83, Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged, New Jersey Administrative Code
8:83-1.1 et seq.
§ 334-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-10
1:647
and garages or other services. As to cooperatives and condominiums,
the rent charges shall be at least equivalent to the maintenance costs
charged by the association. This figure becomes the new base rent and
may be increased by 10% after the first year.
(1) In considering a hardship application, the Board shall give due
consideration to any and all relevant factors, including, but not
limited to the following:
(a) The level and quality of service rendered by the landlord in
maintaining and operating the building.
(b) The presence or absence of reasonable, efficient and economic
management. Total management fees may not exceed 6%.
(2) An applicant for hardship relief shall submit to the Board 10 copies
of the following:
(a) A statement for three prior twelve-month periods of gross
rentals and actual expenses incurred for that time in
connection with the operation of the building to be adjusted to
reflect the actual period of time the applicant has owned the
building if owned for less than three years.
(b) A list of all present owners of the property.
(3) A landlord shall not be entitled to apply for a hardship increase
until (s)he has owned the property for at least 18 months.
(4) The Board's decision shall become effective after full 30 days'
statutory notice to tenants.
(5) The Board shall promulgate rules, regulations and necessary forms
to be utilized, notice to tenants of hardship applications and notice
to tenants and landlords regarding hearings and general
procedure. Those rules and regulations shall have the force of the
law and shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(6) With the filing of a hardship increase application, the landlord shall
simultaneously deliver notice thereof to each affected tenant. At a
minimum, a landlord seeking a hardship increase shall notify
tenants, in writing, by regular and certified mail, return receipt
requested, and provide tenants with a summary of the application
and state the increase sought. Any tenant who receives such notice
shall have 30 days to file any written comments with the Board
regarding the application.
(7) Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the Board shall
notify the landlord, in writing, of the time and place for the hearing.
The hearing shall be held not more than 90 days nor less than 30
days, from the date of receipt of a complete application. The
landlord shall immediately, upon receipt of such notification of
hearing, serve such notice upon each affected tenant. The landlord
§ 334-10 UNION CITY CODE § 334-10
1:648
shall serve notice of the hearing date to the tenant by regular
and certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 20 days in
advance of the hearing. Prior to any hearing on such application,
the landlord shall present the Board with proof of service of notice
to affected tenant.
(8) No hardship application shall be considered or granted by the
Board for a period of time more than one year after the expiration
of applicant's last tax reporting year.
(9) The Board shall render a decision on a hardship application within
45 days of the conclusion of the hearing before the Board. Failure
of the Board to render its decision within the time period, absent
consent of the landlord, shall result in the application being
deemed granted.
(10) A hardship increase shall become part of the base rent.
D. Capital improvement surcharge.
(1) Application; notice.
(a) A landlord may apply for a capital improvement surcharge or
for a surcharge for major additional services not formerly
provided to the tenants of units of housing space in the affected
dwelling. The landlord shall make written application to the
Board upon forms adopted by the Board for these purposes.
Simultaneously with filing of a capital improvement
application, the landlord shall serve notice upon each affected
tenant. The landlord shall submit with its application a letter of
code compliance from the Union City Building Department.
(b) The Board shall promulgate rules, regulations, forms to be
utilized and notice procedures to the tenant. At a minimum, a
landlord seeking a capital improvement surcharge shall notify
tenants, in writing, by certified mail and provide tenants with a
summary of the application and state the increase sought.
(2) Nature and cost of improvement. A landlord shall submit a detailed
contract or proposal and proof of payment as to each improvement.
(3) Amortization of cost. The cost for a capital improvement shall be
amortized over the useful life of such capital improvement as
determined by the Rent Stabilization Board and the Rent
Stabilization Board's accountant.
(4) Notice of hearing. Within 30 days from receipt of all required
application forms, the Board shall notify the landlord, in writing, of
the time and place of the hearing. The landlord shall immediately,
upon receipt of such notification of hearing, serve notice thereof
upon each affected tenant. Prior to any hearing on this application,
§ 334-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-10
1:649
the landlord shall present the Board with proof of service of notice
of the hearing upon each affected tenant.
(5) Time for application. No capital improvement application shall be
considered or granted by the Board for work completed more than
one year before the date of filing of a request for a letter of code
compliance from the Building Department.
(6) Finding of improvement; apportionment of surcharge. Upon
determination that the proposed improvement is a capital
improvement that the proposed service is a major additional
service not formerly provided to the affected tenant or tenants, the
Board may grant a surcharge based upon the cost of the capital
improvement or major addition service. These costs shall include
reasonable interest thereon. Any surcharge granted by the Board
shall be fairly apportioned among the affected units based on the
size of the units and the benefit of the improvement by each unit. If
any such surcharge is granted, it shall not considered a part of base
rent and shall not be included in calculating the rent increases
allowable under § 334-2.
(7) Notice of decision. The Board shall notify the landlord, in writing,
of its determination under this subsection, and the landlord shall
forthwith deliver a copy of the determination by certified mail to
each affected tenant, to become effective upon thirty-day notice.
(8) Protected tenancy status.
(a) No capital improvement surcharge shall be imposed upon any
tenant who has been granted protected tenant status pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 or 2A:18-61.40.
(b) Any capital improvement surcharge awarded within two years
prior to the date of notice to the municipal administrative
officer required by N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.27 or 2A:18-40 shall
immediately become null and void upon the grant of protected
tenancy status. The protected tenant's rent shall be
recalculated and reduced accordingly; however, no rebate of
previously paid surcharge shall be granted.
(9) Compliance with codes. Permits, as required by law, are to be
secured from all agencies having control and jurisdiction for
alterations, repairs, replacements, extensions and new buildings.
All work done shall adhere to appropriate code standards and shall
be inspected by any agency having control and jurisdiction, and
their approval obtained. Copies of such permits shall accompany
the capital improvement application.46
46.Editor's Note: Original Section 14-10.5, Tax Surcharges; Section 14-10.6, Sewerage Utility
Pass Along Charges; and Section 14-10.7, Agreements for Additional Services, were
repealed 4-5-2005.
§ 334-10 UNION CITY CODE § 334-10
1:650
§ 334-11. (Reserved)47
§ 334-12. Rental dwelling rehabilitation program.
E. Maximum annual increase. The maximum annual increase from all
sources listed under this § 334-10, Permitted increases, shall not
exceed 15% unless an efficient landlord cannot meet operation
expenses or make a fair return on his/her investment. A tenant shall not
receive an aggregate increase from all sources of more than 15% any
twelve-month period.
F. Compliance with housing and building codes. Any landlord seeking an
increase under this section must file, with its application, a letter from
the Building Department that the building and grounds are in code
compliance with City building and housing codes.
G. Applicability of Consumer Fraud Act.
(1) In addition to the rights conferred on a tenant herein, a tenant may
seek redress against a landlord for reasonable attorneys' fees and
damages pursuant to the Consumer Fraud Act, N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et
seq.
(2) The Consumer Fraud Act shall act as an enforcement mechanism to
an individual tenant who may seek redress by an award of
attorneys' fees for a successful suit against a landlord for
overcharging of rent. Therefore, tenants who successfully bring an
action against a landlord for overcharging of rent may be awarded
attorneys' fees pursuant to the Consumer Fraud Act.
A. A landlord of any dwelling in full compliance with this chapter that is
participating in a complete rehabilitation program of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) shall be
permitted, upon approval by the Rent Stabilization Board, to place a
minimum of 20% of the units in the dwelling into the rental
rehabilitation program. The base rent and all subsequent increases for
all units that are placed in the rental rehabilitation program shall be the
rent or increase allowed by the program of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development in which the landlord is enrolled.
B. Prerehabilitation application.
(1) A prerehabilitation application shall be filed prior to the
commencement of the work which shall contain the following
information and any other information deemed relevant by the Rent
Stabilization Board:
(a) Photographs of each room of the apartment unit within the
dwelling which that is vacant and is the subject of the
47.Editor’s Note: Former § 344-11, Rental unit renovation allowance, as amended, was
repealed 6-17-2014.
§ 334-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-12
1:651
application. A dwelling will only be eligible for the rental
rehabilitation program if it is at least 50% vacant at the time
the preapplication is filed. Additionally, the application must
provide satisfactory proof that the landlord will relocate the
tenants that are living in the building, at the landlord's cost, to
a suitable apartment during the rehabilitation, and will return
the tenants to the dwelling, at the landlord's cost, upon the
conclusion of the rehabilitation. A suitable apartment shall
include an apartment of a similar size, including number of
bedrooms, and at the same rent, during the rehabilitation time
period.
(b) The preapplication shall explain the need for rehabilitation,
spelling out in detail the work that the landlord intends to
perform, the estimated costs.
(c) The preapplication shall also include proof of enrollment and
acceptance by HUD, or the governmental entity selected by
HUD, of the rehabilitation program the landlord is receiving
assistance by way of a grant, subsidized loan, or insured
mortgage, for the complete rehabilitation of the dwelling.
(d) The Rent Regulation Officer in his discretion may require an
inspection of the dwelling prior to the commencement of the
work by the Community Development Agency or the Building
Department of Union City. The Rent Regulation Officer may
inquire as to the circumstances under which any unit became
vacant and reject the application if the Officer finds that the
landlord was engaged in harassing conduct in violation of
§ 334-13 of this chapter of any tenant for the three-year period
prior to the filing of the preapplication. The prerehabilitation
inspection and determination by the Rent Regulation Officer
shall ensure that the proposed renovations will meet the
criteria set forth in Subsection D. Cosmetic and ordinary
repair-type work shall not generally qualify for approval under
this section. Upon approval of the prerehabilitation
application, the landlord may proceed with the rehabilitation
and may file a final application for approval.
C. Final application procedure.
(1) Upon completion of the rehabilitation of the dwelling, the landlord
shall file a final application for approval by the Rent Stabilization
Board and acceptance into the rental dwelling rehabilitation
program. The application shall contain the following information
and any other information deemed relevant by the Rent
Stabilization Board:
(a) A copy of the rent for each unit in the dwelling that has been
approved by HUD or the governmental agency administering
the rehabilitation program for HUD.
§ 334-12 UNION CITY CODE § 334-12
1:652
(b) A series of photographs which show the condition of the
dwelling after the improvements.
(c) A copy of all bills, building permits, invoices and canceled
checks associated with the renovation work.
(d) A copy of the certificate of approval issued by the Building
Department.
(e) Documents to be filed.
[1] The landlord shall file with its final application a certificate
of code compliance issued by the Building Department.
The Building Department shall inspect the subject
apartment and the common areas to certify to the Rent
Stabilization Board that the apartments in the dwelling to
be rented and the common areas and facade are in
compliance with the appropriate housing inspection codes
and all applicable federal, state, county or local laws or
regulations.
[2] The landlord shall also file with its application a inspection
performed by the Community Development Agency after
work has been completed which will certify that the
proposed work set forth in the prerehabilitation
application have been performed in a good and
workmanlike manner.
(f) The landlord shall file a certificate with the final application
stating that he has agreed to maintain and preserve the
dwelling as rental housing for a period of five years from the
commencement of any rental increase granted pursuant to this
section and has, prior to the application being submitted
hereunder, withdrawn, canceled, dismissed, vacated or
otherwise repudiated all notices to quit, dispossess actions,
and judgments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1(k) and has
further agreed not to commence any actions under N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.1(k).
(g) The application for approval shall be filed by the landlord with
the Rent Stabilization Board not later than 20 days of the
tenant taking occupancy of the apartment.
D. Criteria for reviewing application. In reviewing said application, the
Rent Stabilization Board shall consider but not be limited to the
following factors:
(1) Whether the landlord has made a complete rehabilitation of the
dwelling which has improved the living conditions of the tenants
living in the dwelling. The requirements of HUD or the
governmental entity administering the rehabilitation for HUD shall
§ 334-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-12
1:653
be considered by the Board in determining the appropriateness of
the rehabilitation;
(2) The amount of the increase, with the general policy that no
increase should be approved which is unconscionable in relation to
the prior approved base rent. The rent that is allowed by HUD or
the governmental entity administering the rehabilitation program
shall be considered an acceptable new base rent, provided that the
landlord has provided proof to the Board that the landlord has
complied with all the requirements of this chapter and HUD in
obtaining the new rent, including notifications to the tenant. Upon
proof that the landlord is in compliance with the regulations of the
governmental rehabilitation program and this chapter, the landlord
shall be required to use the governmental approved rent as the
base rent, and for all subsequent rent increases the landlord shall
be required to use the rent increase approved by the governmental
entity. In the event a rent increase is allowed by the governmental
entity and the landlord fails to notify the tenants of the increase,
the landlord shall be considered to have waived the rent increase
for the year in question. If the governmental rehabilitation program
in question does not govern future rental increases and only
establishes the initial base rent after a complete rehabilitation of a
dwelling has occurred, then all increases shall be governed by
§ 334-10 of this chapter;
(3) In the event the governmental rehabilitation program in which the
landlord is enrolled contains tenant qualification guidelines and the
tenant does not quality pursuant to these regulations, the initial
base rent after the complete rehabilitation has occurred will be the
maximum base rent established by the governmental program, and
each subsequent increase shall be governed by § 334-10 of this
chapter; and
(4) That the landlord or its agents, employees or contractors have not
engaged in any harassment, provocation, retaliation of the previous
tenants of the subject unit or the new tenant to occupy the
renovated space and other conduct more specifically set forth in
§ 334-13 of the chapter.
E. Notification procedures. The landlord shall serve a copy of the final
application on each tenant by personal service or certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least 15 days before any hearing thereon, and the
landlord shall be required to file a proof of service with the Rent
Stabilization Board. Upon receipt of a complete application and proof or
service of same upon the tenant, the Rent Regulation Officer shall
schedule a hearing before the Rent Stabilization Board, and the
landlord shall serve upon each tenant, personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least 10 days in advance of said hearings, a
second notice advising the tenants that the final application for
approval previously served upon the tenant would be heard by the
§ 334-12 UNION CITY CODE § 334-12
1:654
§ 334-13. Anti-harassment provisions.
§ 334-14. Certificates of continuing occupancy.
Board on that date. Said notice shall also advise the tenants that any
objection to the proposed rental agreement will be heard on that date.
F. Filing fees. The prerehabilitation application shall be accompanied by
the fees as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees. Inspection fees required
under this section performed by the Building Department shall be billed
by the Building Department.
A. Harassment; reduction of services prohibited. Any tenants desiring to
remain in their units may do so without provocation or retaliation from
landlords. For the purposes of this section, harassment of tenants shall
mean conduct, whether direct or indirect, committed intentionally or
negligently by a landlord, or anyone acting on his/her behalf. These
actions include, but are not limited to:
(1) A reduction in the quality of basic services necessary to the health
safety and welfare of the tenants.
(2) Heat, hot water.
(3) Adequate security.
(4) Intermittent failures.
(5) Bothersome telephone calls or letters.
(6) Frivolous eviction threats or legal proceedings.
(7) Actions which would cause a reasonable person of like age and
physical condition of a tenant to fear for his/her life, limb, property
or home.
B. Investigation/prosecution of harassment complaints. The City shall
assign one of its municipal prosecutors to investigate and/or prosecute
complaints involving harassment filed by either tenants or landlords.
A. Required. No person shall occupy or use any residential unit after such
unit has been vacated or sold or where there has been a change in
occupancy until the landlord has applied for and secured a certificate of
continuing occupancy. Upon receipt by the enforcement officer of an
application for a certificate of continuing occupancy and payment of the
required fee, an inspection of the premises shall take place. The
inspection shall ensure compliance with all applicable building, health,
safety and fire codes, regulations, ordinances and statutes of the City of
Union City.
B. Criteria and standards for certificates of occupancy.
§ 334-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-14
1:655
§ 334-15. Maintenance of services.
(1) Criteria for buildings with more than 50 units. The inspection shall
focus on the habitability of the apartment itself and only health and
safety standards will be applied to the common areas.
(2) Criteria in cooperatives and condominiums of more than 100 units.
An inspection shall be conducted of the premises to ensure
compliance with all applicable building, health, safety and fire
codes, regulations, ordinances and statutes of the City of Union
City. As to common area inspections, the inspection shall focus on
the habitability of the apartment itself. The health and safety
standard shall be applied to the common areas. Rent freezes shall
only be applied to those violations related to fire and safety code
violations. However, rent freezes shall not be applied to common
area violations except for those endangering the health and safety
of the occupants such as uninterrupted elevator service,
emergency lighting, fire and smoke alarms and other items
outlined in all applicable federal, state, county or local laws or
regulations. However, all other remedies promulgated by state and
municipal statutes, rules and regulations or those adopted by the
Board of Directors remain in place.
C. Failure to obtain certificate. A landlord who fails to obtain a certificate
of continuing occupancy shall be subject to any one or a combination of
the penalties listed in § 334-21. Any fines shall be payable to the City of
Union City.
D. Upon receipt by the enforcement officer of an application for a
certificate of continuing occupancy and fee, an inspection of the
premises shall take place. The inspection shall ensure compliance with
all applicable building, health, safety and fire codes, regulations,
ordinances and statutes of the City of Union City.
A. Continuation of services. During the term of this chapter, the landlord
shall maintain the same standards of service, maintenance, furniture,
furnishings and equipment in the housing space and dwelling as
required under the lease or otherwise mandated by law.
B. Decline in services. When services, care or maintenance, or when the
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and
equipment in the housing space or dwelling are not substantially
maintained as specified above, any tenant may apply to the Board for a
decrease in rent. A copy of such application shall be served upon the
landlord setting forth, in detail, the reasons for the application.
C. Applicability to parking spaces. The provisions of this section shall also
apply to any on-site parking or garage space occupied by the tenant in
conjunction with rental and occupancy of housing space. If it is
determined, after a hearing of the Board, as described in § 334-15, that
§ 334-14 UNION CITY CODE § 334-15
1:656
§ 334-16. Registration requirement.
the parking was a previously provided service, then the rent shall be
decreased by 25% of the current monthly rent. [Amended 1-6-2015]
D. Hearing notice procedure. Upon receipt of the application by the Rent
Regulation Officer, the Rent Regulation Officer shall schedule a hearing
on the application and shall notify both landlord and tenant of the date,
time and place of the hearing.
E. Maintenance of services. During a tenant's occupancy of a unit in which
the landlord provides utilities to the units of the building, the landlord
will be prohibited from constructing a separate apartment unit meter
and billing for any utility service previously provided by the landlord as
part of the services to the building, including but not limited to heat, hot
water, water and sewerage.
F. Violation and penalties. A first violation of § 334-15E of this chapter
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 for each unit in
violation. Subsequent violations shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $2,000 for each unit. Each day during which an owner is in
violation of § 334-15E of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation.
A. Registration information; fee.
(1) All landlords of units governed by this chapter must file a
registration statement with the Board in a manner and at a time
prescribed by the Board. Any such statement shall include at least
the following:
(a) The name of each tenant and the apartment number.
(b) The number of rooms for each apartment.
(c) The current rent for each apartment.
(d) The amount of the last increase for each apartment unit.
(e) The date of the last increase for each apartment unit.
(f) If applicable, the services provided to the building and the
telephone number.
(g) If applicable, the superintendent's name, address and
telephone number.
(2) This annual registration statement shall be filed with the Rent
Regulation Officer once every 12 months on the anniversary date
that the landlord may file for a permitted increase pursuant to
§ 334-10B. The Board shall establish a schedule of fees for the filing
of said registration statement. Failure to register or the filing of
§ 334-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-16
1:657
§ 334-17. Compliance with housing and building codes.
false registrations shall be punishable pursuant to § 334-21 of this
chapter.
(3) A landlord who shall fail to file the required annual rent
registration statement shall not be entitled to file any application
for a permitted increase under § 334-10 of this chapter. In addition,
in the event a landlord or a prior property owner for the same
property has not filed an annual registration statement the Rent
Regulation Officer in determining a legal rent calculation and the
Board upon any review of that determination shall be permitted to
disallow any increase related to a rise in the consumer price index
pursuant to § 334-10B for that year that the landlord or prior
landlord failed to file a rent registration statement.
(4) This section shall be applied to any rent calculation made by the
Rent Regulation Officer or the Rent Stabilization Board to any
determination that comes before it subsequent to the adoption of
this section. In addition, the Officer and the Board shall also have
the authority to disallow a rent increase a landlord is otherwise
entitled to under this chapter for any year that a landlord has failed
to file a rent registration statement prior to the effective date of the
adoption of this section.
B. Public document. For the purpose of disclosure, the registration
statement shall be considered a public document which shall be made
available for inspection pursuant to reasonable regulations established
by the City Clerk.
A. Compliance required prior to granting increase.
(1) Any landlord who seeks a hardship or major capital improvement
increase under § 334-10 shall file with an application a certification
from the office of the Building Department to the effect that the
building and grounds are in substantial compliance with City
building and housing codes, which certification shall be based on
an application made by the landlord to the Building Department not
more than one month before the filing of his/her application with
the Board. No such increase may be granted until such certification
had been filed and, if a tenant contests the accuracy of such
certification, until the Board has determined that there is
substantial compliance.
(2) The Board shall deny the application until there has been such
compliance.
B. Assistance of Board in obtaining certificate of code compliance.
Whenever a party who is seeking a certificate regarding code
compliance from the office of the Building Department notifies the
Board that the party seeks the assistance of the Board in expediting
§ 334-16 UNION CITY CODE § 334-17
1:658
that Department's inspection, then the Board shall utilize its best
efforts to have the office of the Building Department expedite such
inspection. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Rent
Stabilization Board from considering testimony by the landlord and
tenants as to the condition of the property.
C. Tenant's right to return to premises rehabilitated after a fire.
(1) Repair of fire-damaged building. Whenever any building or
buildings which contain residential units leased to tenants shall be
injured or damaged by fire, the landlord shall repair same as
speedily as possible.
(2) Tenant's right to return. In the event, as the result of injury or
damage to the residential leased premises as a result of fire, a
tenant is displaced, the tenant who is displaced shall have the right
to return to his/her unit as soon as the building is in complete
repair and has been approved for occupancy by the Construction
Code Official of the City pursuant to the usual procedures for
occupancy under applicable law.
(3) Rent.
(a) During the period of time that the tenant is displaced from the
building, the tenant shall have no obligation to pay rent for his/
her unit.
(b) In the event that the residential building is subject to rent
stabilization, the tenant shall return to his/her unit upon its
complete repair at the legal rent existing at the time of his/her
vacation of the unit.
(4) Exception. The above provisions, which must be liberally construed
in favor of tenants, shall not apply to any tenant whose fault caused
the fire which resulted in the displacement of tenants.
(5) Violations and penalties.
(a) Any person found guilty of violating any part of this subsection
shall be subject to a penalty existing of a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both,
subject to the discretion of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) In the event of any continuing violation, which shall include
each day a landlord prevents a former tenant from reoccupying
the premises after those premises have been repaired and are
ready for occupancy, each day shall constitute a separate
offense for the purposes of the imposition of a fine and/or
imprisonment.
D. Tenant's right to return to premises after abatement of UCC and
Building Code violations.
§ 334-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-17
1:659
§ 334-18. Fees.
There is hereby established a schedule of fees for applications to the Rent
Stabilization Board, which fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees,
and payable to the City of Union City.
§ 334-19. Alternate service of notice.
Personal service or service by certified mail that is either refused or
uncalled for may be remailed by ordinary mail and shall be effective as
though personal service or notice by certified mail had been accepted.
§ 334-20. Anti-warehousing rules and regulations.
(1) Abatement of UCC and Building Code violations. Whenever any
building or buildings which contain residential units leased to
tenants shall require the completion of work in order to abate UCC
and/or Building Code violations, the landlord shall repair same as
speedily as possible.
(2) Tenant's right to return. In the event, as the result of the need to
abate UCC and/or Building Code violations, a tenant is displaced,
the tenant who is displaced shall have the right to return to his/her
unit as soon as the building is in complete repair and has been
approved for occupancy by the Construction Code Official of the
City pursuant to the usual procedures for occupancy under
applicable law.
(3) Rent. During the period of time that the tenant is displaced from
the building pursuant to this subsection, the provisions of
§ 334-17C(3)(a) and (b) herein shall apply.
(4) Exception. The above provisions, which must be liberally construed
in favor of tenants, shall not apply to any tenant whose fault caused
the need for the completion of work to abate UCC and/or Building
Code violations which resulted in the displacement of tenants.
(5) Violations and penalties. The provisions of § 334-17C(5)(a) and (b)
herein shall apply to violations of this subsection.
A. Obligation to register vacant apartments.
(1) Owners of multifamily structures of five or more units shall report
any vacancy or unrented apartment to the Rent Stabilization Board
office if the vacancy or nonrental continues for 90 continuous days.
(2) Owners shall report the rental of the unit to the Rent Stabilization
Board office within 90 days of the date of the new rental. The rental
report shall include a copy of the inspection approval certificate
issued by the Union City Community Development Office, address
of building, date of rental, rent charged, name of new tenant, date
of move-in by the new tenant.
§ 334-17 UNION CITY CODE § 334-20
1:660
B. Exempt structure or structure or units. The following are exempt from
the provisions of this chapter:
(1) Units in owner-occupied structures where there are six units or
fewer and one of the units is owner-occupied.
(2) Units in newly constructed buildings which have complied with
N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.2.
(3) Units in hotels or motels that have been duly licensed by the City
and the State of New Jersey.
(4) When owner has filed for and been preapproved for a rental unit
restoration allowance (RURA).
C. Requirements. All such units shall be rented and occupied by a tenant
within 90 days after the end of the preceding tenancy, which shall be
defined as the last day of occupancy by the preceding tenant(s), except
where an extension has been granted by the Rent Stabilization Board
under the provisions of § 334-20D(4) below, in which event the unit
shall be rented and occupied within the time period specified in the
extension. Failure to comply with the requirements of this Subsection C
shall be considered a violation of this section and subject the owner to
the penalties set forth herein.
D. Extension of time period.
(1) An owner may apply for an extension of the time period set forth in
§ 334-20C where the condition of the structure or unit or other
special circumstances make rental within such time period
impossible. In order to obtain an extension, the owner must submit
an application in writing to the Rent Stabilization Board within 90
days or less from the date the preceding tenancy ended, setting
forth with specificity:
(a) The reasons that the structure or unit cannot be rented within
such time period;
(b) The steps the owner shall take to remedy the conditions that
make it impossible to rent the structure or unit; and
(c) The date by which the structure or unit shall be rented and
occupied.
(2) The owner shall provide the Rent Stabilization Board with all
documentation necessary to support the application, including but
not limited to code violation reports, engineering or inspection
reports, copies of advertisements, etc.
(3) Any extension granted by the Rent Stabilization Board shall specify
the date by which the structure or unit must be rented and
occupied. Additional extensions may be sought by the owner, but
§ 334-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-20
1:661
the total extension permitted in the aggregate shall not extend
beyond six months from the date the previous tenancy ended.
(4) The following circumstances shall constitute grounds for the
granting of an extension pursuant to this § 334-20D by the Rent
Stabilization Board:
(a) An owner wishes to reserve a vacant unit for a family member.
The owner shall provide in the time extension application full
documentation including the name of the future tenant, the
family relationship and the date of occupancy.
(b) An owner desires to maintain a unit vacant in order to improve
the conditions of said structure or unit. The owner shall
provide full documentation in the application, including up-todate
building and housing inspection reports, improvement
plans, all related required permits and the date by which the
structure or unit shall be rented and occupied.
(c) An owner maintains a vacant structure or unit in order to
correct code violations in said structure or unit. The owner
shall provide in the application full documentation such as
code violation reports, correction plans, permits and the date
by which the structure or unit shall be rented and occupied.
(5) Extension of the time period provided in Subsection C above
beyond the maximum time prescribed by § 334-20D shall be only
granted upon a clear and convincing showing by the owner that a
good faith effort has been made to rent the structure or unit at the
legal rent, and that no tenant can be found. In this circumstance,
the maximum extension granted beyond the maximum time
provided in this Subsection D shall be 60 days, renewable upon a
new showing by the owner.
E. City to inspect vacant structure or units and buildings.
(1) If a structure or unit is not rented within 90 days, or filed for an
extension, the recording agency will notify the Building
Department, Health Department, Fire Official and Northwest
Regional Fire and Rescue, which currently provides fire related
services to Union City. The above departments shall send
inspectors to the building to inspect the entire building and the
unrented structure or unit in particular to assure compliance with
all applicable codes. If violations are found or if a dangerous or
unsafe condition exists, proper measures are to be taken.
(2) The above departments will continue to inspect both the building
and the individual unrented structure or unit on a regular basis.
The building and unrented structure or unit shall be inspected at
least once every 10 business days until the structure or unit is
rented and occupied.
§ 334-20 UNION CITY CODE § 334-20
1:662
§ 334-21. Violation and penalties.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, the filing with the Rent Stabilization Board or Regulation Officer of any
material or statement of facts, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both. A violation
affecting more than one leasehold or tenancy shall be considered a separate
violation as to each leasehold or tenancy.
Chapter 342
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 370.
Water pollution — See Ch. 425.
F. Violations and penalties. A first violation of § 334-20A of this chapter or
the conditions upon which a waiver has been granted by the Rent
Stabilization Board shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500
for each unit in violation. Subsequent violations shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500. Each day during which
an owner is in violation of Subsection A of this section or the conditions
upon which a waiver has been granted shall constitute a separate
violation.
G. Vacancies upon effective date. Any landlord of any unit which has been
vacant 30 days or more from the end of the preceding tenancy as of the
effective date of this chapter shall be required to file the notifications
required under § 334-20A of this chapter within 15 days of the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 334-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-21
1:663

ARTICLE I
Regulations for Use of Treatment Works
§ 342-1. Findings.
§ 342-2. Purpose and policy.
A. The federal "Clean Water Act Amendments of 1977," as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (1986), the New Jersey "Water Pollution Control
Act," N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq. (West 1982), and the New Jersey
"Pretreatment Standards for Sewerage, etc.," N.J.S.A. 58:11-49 et seq.,
have resulted in a program of cleaning up our nation's waters;
B. Sewerage of the residents and commercial inhabitants of the City of
Union City is treated by the North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic
Valley Sewer Authority for the benefit of the residents and commercial
inhabitants of the City of Union City; [Amended 5-21-2013]
C. The City of Union City seeks to continue its utilization of the treatment
works and comply with all federal and state rules and regulations;
D. The North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority
has already made and will continue to make a substantial financial
investment in its wastewater treatment system to achieve the goals of
the Acts; and [Amended 5-21-2013]
E. The North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority
seeks to provide for the use of its treatment works by industries served
by it without damage to the physical facilities, without impairment of
their normal function of collecting, treating and discharging domestic
wastewater, and without the discharge by the North Hudson Sewer
Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority treatment works of
pollutants which would violate the discharge allowed under its New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) permit and
the applicable rules of all governmental authorities with jurisdiction
over such discharges. [Amended 5-21-2013]
A. This article sets forth uniform requirements for all discharges into the
wastewater collection and treatment system of the North Hudson
Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority and enables the City
of Union City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations pertaining to wastewater treatment and industrial
pretreatment. [Amended 5-21-2013]
B. The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which may
interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which may
pass through the system into receiving waters or into the
§ 342-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-2
1:665
§ 342-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all persons within the City of Union City and to
persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City,
dischargers to the POTW.
§ 342-4. Definitions.
atmosphere inadequately treated or otherwise incompatible with
the treatment system.
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim sludge from the
system.
(4) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which may
preclude the selection of the most cost-effective alternative for
wastewater treatment and sludge disposal.
C. This article authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
industrial user reporting, and provides for the regulation of discharge
to the POTW through enforcement of general requirements for all
discharges.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in §§ 342-1 through 342-10, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated.
B. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federations; the "Federal Guidelines for State and Local Pretreatment
Programs," EPA-430/9-76-017a, volume 1, 1977, or the latest revision
thereof; the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the New Jersey
"Water Pollution Control Act," N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.; or
"Pretreatment Standards for Sewerage, etc.," N.J.S.A. 58:11-49 et seq.
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
"Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (1986).
APPROVED TEST PROCEDURE — All analysis performed in accordance
with the analytical test procedures approved under 40 CFR 136, as
amended. Analysis for those pollutants not covered therein shall be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the NJDEP.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president if
the industrial user is a corporation; or
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or
(2)
§ 342-2 UNION CITY CODE § 342-4
1:666
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures in five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of
weight and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)], in accordance
with an approved test procedure.
BUSINESS CONFIDENTIALITY — The standard for business
confidentiality shall be that found in 40 CFR Part 2, as amended.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygenconsuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water
or wastewater expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed by a
chemical oxidant in accordance with an approved test procedure.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, and such additional pollutants as
are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the North
Hudson Sewer Authority's or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority's NJPDES
permit.[Amended 5-21-2013]
COOLING WATER — Any water used for the purpose of carrying away
excess heat and which may contain biocides used to control biological
growth or other additives to protect the system against corrosion,
scaling or other deterioration.
DISCHARGE — The releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying or dumping of a pollutant into the waters of the
state or onto the land or into wells from which the pollutant might flow
or drain into such waters, including, but not limited to, the release of
any pollutant into the treatment works.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — The liquid waste or liquid-borne waste:
EFFLUENT DATA — Information necessary to determine the identity,
amount, frequency, concentration, temperature or other characteristics
of any pollutant discharge.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS —
Pretreatment Standards as codified in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N (1986), specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or
pollutant properties which may be discharged or introduced to a POTW
by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
regulated facility, such as a plant manager, licensed operator or
person of equivalent responsibility.
(3)
Resulting from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and
handling of food; and/or
(1)
Consisting of human excrement and similar wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
(2)
§ 342-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-4
1:667
FISCAL YEAR — The fiscal year of the City.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, dispensing, handling, storage and/or sale of food.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a
compatible pollutant as defined in this section.
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS WASTEWATER — In addition to any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater from the site which is
introduced into a treatment works, the liquid waste or liquid-borne
waste resulting from the processes employed by any person identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of
the following divisions:
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who discharges, causes or permits
the discharge of nondomestic wastewater into the treatment works.
INTERFERENCE —
(1) Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
(2) Division B, Mining.
(3) Division D, Manufacturing.
Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services.
(4)
(5) Division I, Services.
Inhibiting or disrupting the operation of a POTW or its treatment
process so as to contribute to, cause or increase a violation of
any condition of a state or federal permit under which the POTW
operates;
(1)
Discharging industrial process wastewater which, in combination
with existing domestic flows, is of such volume and/or strength
as to exceed the POTW design capacity or that approved by the
licensed operator; or
(2)
Preventing the use or disposal of sludge produced by the POTW
in accordance with Section 405 of the Act and regulations, criteria
or guidelines developed pursuant to the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. § 3251 et seq.
(1977), the Federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq. (1977),
the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et
seq. (1982), Sections 2, 4 and 6 of the State Act and, to the
extent practicable, the New Jersey Guidelines for the Utilization
and Disposal of Municipal and Industrial Sludges and Septage.
(3)
§ 342-4 UNION CITY CODE § 342-4
1:668
LICENSED OPERATOR — The Superintendent of the North Hudson
Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority. See
"Superintendent."[Amended 5-21-2013]
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits
for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable
waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section 402,
Clean Water Act,48 N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.1 et seq.
NEW JERSEY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NJPDES) — The New Jersey system for issuing, modifying, suspending,
revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing
discharge permits pursuant to the State Act. The term also includes
discharge permits (NPDES) issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.49
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution. Solutions with a pH greater
than seven are said to be basic; solutions with a pH less than seven are
said to be acidic; pH equal to seven is considered neutral. Analysis shall
be performed in accordance with an approved test procedure.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, holding tank waste,
incinerator residue, sewerage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewerage
sludge, septage, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive substance, thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal or
agricultural waste or other residue directly or indirectly discharged
into the waters of the state, the introduction of which renders these
waters detrimental or immediately or potentially dangerous to the
public health or unfit for public or commercial use.
PRETREATMENT — The application of physical, chemical and/or
biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in, or alter the
nature of the polluting properties of, wastewater prior to discharging
such wastewater into a sewerage system or treatment works.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal or state rules
and regulations implementing Section 307 of the Act50 or N.J.S.A.
58:11-49, as well as any nonconflicting state or local standards. In cases
of conflicting standards or regulations, the more stringent thereof shall
be applied.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act,51 which is owned in this
instance by the North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer
Authority or any other public body or authority. For the purposes of
48.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
49.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
50.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
51.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1292.
§ 342-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-4
1:669
these sections, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the North Hudson
Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority who are, by contract
or agreement, dischargers to the North Hudson Sewer Authority's or
Passaic Valley Sewer Authority's POTW.[Amended 5-21-2013]
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS (SIU) — Any user, excluding
municipal collection systems, who discharges on any one day
wastewater into a POTW where:
The volume of industrial process wastewater exceeds 25,000
gallons per day; or
(1)
The amount of BOD, COD or suspended solids in the industrial
process wastewater discharge exceeds the mass equivalent of
25,000 gallons per day of the domestic waste of the affected POTW;
or
(2)
The volume of industrial process wastewater in the discharge
exceeds 5% or more of the average daily flow of the POTW; or
(3)
The discharge of industrial process wastewater contributes, prior
to any pretreatment, 5% or more of the daily mass loading of any
of the pollutants listed in N.J.A.C. 7:14A, Appendix B,52 Tables II
through VI; or
(4)
The user is determined to be a hazardous waste facility under
N.J.A.C. 7:26-12 and meets the requirements of N.J.A.C.
7:14A-4.2(b)(1); or53
(5)
The user is determined to be an industrial waste management
facility under N.J.A.C. 7:14A-4;54 or
(6)
The user has been found by the NJDEP to be in violation of state
laws or regulations, or local ordinances concerning environmental
issues; or
(7)
The discharge consists of landfill leachate, either pure or diluted by
groundwater or surface runoff; or
(8)
The discharge consists of significant quantities of polluted
groundwater which is pumped from the ground in order to
decontaminate an aquifer; or
(9)
The NJDEP determines it would be consistent with the intent of the
Pretreatment Act or State Act to require a permit for the indirect
discharger; or
(10)
52.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 7:14A, Appendix B, was repealed by R. 1997, d. 107, effective
5-5-1997.
53.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 7:26-12 was repealed by R. 1996, d. 500, effective 10-21-1996, and
N.J.A.C. 7:14A-4.2(b)(1) was repealed by R. 1997, d. 107, effective 5-5-1997.
54.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 7:14A-4, Additional Requirements for an Industrial Waste
Management Facility, was repealed by R. 1997, d. 107, effective 5-5-1997.
§ 342-4 UNION CITY CODE § 342-4
1:670
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972 (as
revised), issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of
Management and Budget.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE ACT — The New Jersey "Water Pollution Control Act," N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1 et seq.
STORMWATER — The runoff or discharge of rain and melted snow
or other clean water from roofs, surfaces of public or private lands
or elsewhere. It shall not include the flow of any natural watercourse
even though such flow is augmented by above-defined stormwater. In
general, stormwater shall include only water which is sufficiently clean
and unpolluted to admit of being discharged, without treatment or
purification, into any natural watercourse without offense.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent (licensed operator of the
wastewater treatment system, of water pollution control, or of public
works) of the North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer
Authority, or his/her duly appointed deputy, agent or
representative.[Amended 5-21-2013]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — The total nonfilterable residue, as defined
in Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, and
analyzed in accordance with an approved test procedure.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Those pollutants, or combinations of pollutants,
including disease-causing agents, which, after discharge and upon
exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either
directly or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, on the basis of
information available to the Commissioner of the NJDEP, may cause
death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations,
physiological malfunctions, including malfunctions in reproduction, or
physical deformation in such organisms or their offspring. Toxic
pollutants shall include, but not be limited to, those pollutants
designated under Section 307 of the Federal Act or Section 4 of the
State Act.55
TREATMENT WORKS — Any device or system, whether public or
private, used in the storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of
municipal or industrial waste of a liquid nature, including intercepting
sewers; outfall sewers; sewage collection systems; cooling towers and
ponds; pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply, such
as standby treatment units and clear well cooling water facilities; any
other works, including sites for the treatment process or for ultimate
The industrial user is subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
(11)
55.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317 and N.J.S.A. 58:10A-4, respectively.
§ 342-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-4
1:671
§ 342-5. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter (i.e., parts per million)
N.J.A.C. New Jersey Administrative Code
N.J.S.A. New Jersey Statutes Annotated
NJPDES New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
§ 342-6. Discharge restrictions.
disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; any other method or
system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating
or disposing of pollutants, including stormwater runoff, or industrial
waste in combined or separate stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
The term "treatment works" shall not be construed to include any
facility subject to the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act,
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
TREATMENT WORKS PLANT — That portion of the treatment works
designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together
with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or
permitted to enter any treatment works.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge, deposit, cause or
allow to be discharged or deposited into the North Hudson Sewer
Authority's or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority's treatment works any
wastewater which significantly contributes to a violation of the North
Hudson Sewer Authority's or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority's NJPDES
permit, or which contains any of the following: [Amended 5-21-2013]
(1) Oil and grease:
§ 342-4 UNION CITY CODE § 342-6
1:672
(a) Oil and grease from industrial facilities, in concentrations or
amounts violating pretreatment standards; such oil and grease
include, but are not limited to, petroleum-based hydrocarbons
as determined by silica gel absorption.
(b) Wastewater from commercial and/or industrial facilities
containing floatable fats, wax, grease or oil.
(c) Fats, wax, grease or oil with a total concentration of more than
100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
32° F. and 150° F., 0° C. and 65° C., at the point of discharge
into the treatment works.
(2) Explosive and/or flammable substances: liquids, solids or gases
which, by reason of their nature or quantity, may be sufficient,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire
or explosion or be injurious in any way to the treatment works or
the operations of the works. Such materials include, but are not
limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
(3) Noxious substances: pollutants which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are malodorous, are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or health or whose
concentrations prevent their entry into the treatment works.
(4) Improperly shredded garbage: garbage, except domestic
wastewater discharged from garbage disposal units in private
dwellings, that has not been ground or comminuted to such a
degree that all particles float or carry freely in suspension under
flow conditions normally prevalent in the treatment works or which
contains particles of a size greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
(5) Radioactive wastes: all wastes that emit radioactivity to any
degree, except such waste that conforms with N.J.A.C. 7:28-11.2.56
(6) Solid or viscous wastes: solid or viscous wastes which may obstruct
either the flow of sewerage in the sewer system or the operation of
the treatment works. Such wastes include, but are not limited to,
grease, improperly shredded garbage, animal guts or tissues,
diseased human organs or tissue fluids, paunch manure, bones,
hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues and residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil. Certain wastes may
be prohibited at the discretion of the licensed operator.
56.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 7:28-11.2 was repealed by R. 2008, d. 281, effective 9-15-2008.
§ 342-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-6
1:673
(7) Excessive discharge: notwithstanding any other provision of these
sections, any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants,
discharged in a volume or strength that may cause interference
with the treatment works.
(8) Toxic discharge: toxic pollutants in a quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, that passes through or interferes
with the treatment works plant or that exceeds standards
promulgated by either the EPA pursuant to Section 307(a) of the
Act or the NJDEP pursuant to Section 4 of the State Act57 or that
exceeds the maximum permissible concentrations specified in
Table 1 below.
(9) Certain stormwater: stormwater, including surface water and
groundwater, either discharged by gravity or from sump pumps,
except where the user is served by combined sewers and cannot
discharge this water directly to a surface watercourse.
(10) Discolored materials: wastes that may cause the water of the
treatment works to exceed appropriate color criteria.
(11) Substances interfering with sludge management: any substance
which may cause sludge to be unsuitable for reclamation and
reuse; which may interfere with the reclamation process of the
POTW; which may preclude the POTW from selecting the most costeffective
alternative for sludge disposal; or which may cause the
POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act,58
or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,59 the
Clean Air Act,60 the Toxic Substances Control Act61 or, to the extent
practicable, the "New Jersey Guidelines for the Utilization and
Disposal of Municipal and Industrial Sludges and Septage."
(12) Corrosive wastes: any waste which may cause corrosion or
deterioration of the treatment works, including, but not limited to,
concentrated acids, alkalies, sulfides, chloride and fluoride
compounds and substances which will react with water to form
products which have a pH value lower than 6.0 standard units or
greater than 9.0 standard units.
(13) Heat: heat which may inhibit biological activity in the treatment
works, including, but not limited to, heat of a temperature in excess
of 65° C., 150° F., at the sewer connection or 400° C., 104° F., at the
treatment works plant.
57.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a) and N.J.S.A. 58:10A-4, respectively.
58.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1345.
59.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
61.Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
§ 342-6 UNION CITY CODE § 342-6
1:674
B. Limitations on wastewater discharges.
(1) Table 1 limitations. Table 1 presents the maximum concentrations
of certain pollutants allowable in wastewater discharged to the
treatment works by any discharger. Dilution of any wastewater
discharge for the purpose of satisfying these requirements shall be
considered a violation of this section. The North Hudson Sewer
Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority reserves the right to
establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements
on discharges to the treatment works if deemed necessary to
comply with objectives presented in § 342-2. [Amended
5-21-2013]
Table 1
Maximum Permissible Concentration
Pollutant
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
Ammonia 100
Arsenic 0.1
Cadmium 0.7
Chromium (total) 3.0
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.5
Copper 3.4
Cyanide 1.2
Lead 0.7
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 4.0
Phenols 10.0
Silver 0.5
Zinc 3.0
(2) Design parameters. No significant industrial user shall discharge
wastes with a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0, or in excess of
the limitations given either in Table 1 or below, without having first
obtained a special permit pursuant to § 342-9D.
Pollutant
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
BOD 250
TSS 190
Oil and grease 100
§ 342-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-6
1:675
§ 342-7. Control of prohibited wastes; accidental discharges.
C. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. If the federal standard for
a particular industry, pursuant to the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, and/or a state standard is more stringent than the standard
imposed under this article, then the federal and/or state standard shall
apply. Affected industrial users shall comply with the appropriate
standard within the stated compliance deadline. NJDEP shall attempt to
notify affected industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements
under 40 CFR 403.12, but failure to notify does not relieve such persons
of the obligation to comply with such reporting requirements.
D. Federal and state requirements. Federal and state requirements and
limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more
stringent than limitations contained in this article.
E. Excessive discharge. No industrial user shall in any way dilute a
discharge to achieve compliance with Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, state limitations or any other pollutant-specific limitation
contained in this article.
F. Residential wastewater. All residences shall be connected to the POTW.
Where residential sewer service is unavailable, such residences shall be
connected to the POTW within 180 days after residential sewer service
becomes available to such property.
G. Connections. All new sewers and connections to the POTW shall be
properly designed and constructed in accordance with all applicable
federal, state and local rules and regulations.
A. Regulatory actions. If wastewaters containing any prohibited substance
exceeding prescribed limits or violating restrictions imposed by § 342-6
of this article are discharged, or proposed to be discharged into the
treatment works of the North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley
Sewer Authority, the licensed operator may take any of the following
actions necessary to protect the treatment works: [Amended
5-21-2013]
(1) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
(2) Require the discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications
will bring such discharge into conformance with this article.
(3) Require pretreatment, including, but not limited to, storage
facilities or flow equalization necessary to ensure compliance with
this article.
(4) Require the discharger to pay all additional costs of damage
incurred by North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer
Authority as a result of such excess loads.
§ 342-6 UNION CITY CODE § 342-7
1:676
§ 342-8. Miscellaneous regulations.
Wastewater discharge. It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to
discharge sewerage combined with wastes directly or indirectly into the
treatment works without having satisfied all applicable terms of this article.
(5) Take such other remedial action, including, but not limited to,
discontinuation of service and/or injunctive relief, as may be
deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this
article.
B. Accidental discharges.
(1) Preventive measures. Each industrial user shall provide protection
against accidental discharge of prohibited materials or substances
regulated by this article, including, but not limited to, protective
facilities. Such industrial users shall provide and maintain such
protective facilities at their expense. Upon the request of the
licensed operator, the industrial user shall submit detailed plans
prior to construction showing facilities and operating procedures
for review and comment by the licensed operator.
(2) Notification; containment.
(a) In the case of an accidental discharge by an industrial user of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
article, or if for any reason an industrial user does not comply,
or will be unable to comply, with any prohibition or limitation in
this article, the industrial user responsible for such discharge
shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the
incident. The notification shall include location of discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume.
(b) Furthermore, such industrial user shall take immediate action
to contain and minimize the accidental discharge to the POTW.
(3) Report; damages.
(a) North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer
Authority may require the industrial user to submit to the
licensed operator a detailed written report of an accidental or
noncomplying discharge describing the date, time, cause,
quantity and characteristics of the discharge, any corrective
action already taken and any preventative measures to be
taken to prevent similar future occurrences. [Amended
5-21-2013]
(b) Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of liability
for any damage to person or property, nor shall such
notification relieve the industrial user of fines, civil penalties or
other liability which may be imposed under any applicable law.
§ 342-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-9
1:677
§ 342-9. Administrative requirements.
A. Wastewater discharge data disclosure. All industrial users proposing to
connect into or discharge sewage into the treatment works shall
complete and file with the licensed operator a disclosure declaration in
the form prescribed herein. Existing industrial users shall file
disclosure forms within 90 days after the effective date of this article;
proposed new industrial users shall file disclosure forms at least 120
days prior to connecting to the treatment works. The disclosure to be
made by the user shall include:
(1) Name, address and location of the industrial user.
(2) Name and phone number of contact person.
(3) Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code.
(4) Description of activities and products manufactured.
(5) Average daily wastewater flow or water consumption.
(6) Nature and concentration of pollutants or materials regulated by
this article.
B. Data disclosure by significant industrial users.
(1) Significant industrial users are required, upon request, to submit
the following information to the Superintendent:
(a) Disclosure of name, address and location of the industrial user.
(b) Disclosure of Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code.
(c) Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics,
including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this article, as
determined by bona fide chemical and biological analyses.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA and contained in 40 CFR
Part 136.
(d) Disclosure of time and duration of discharges.
(e) Disclosure of average daily and, at the discharger's discretion,
instantaneous peak, wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day,
including any daily, monthly and seasonal variations. All flows
shall be measured unless other techniques approved by the
North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer
Authority are used. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(f) Disclosure of site plans and details of all sewers, sewer
connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation and, if necessary,
floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans.
§ 342-9 UNION CITY CODE § 342-9
1:678
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or may be
discharged to the sewers or treatment works.
(h) Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or
materials prohibited by this article in the discharge, together
with a statement stating whether or not compliance with this
article is being achieved on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/
or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to
comply with this article.
(i) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance activities will be required to comply with this
article, the significant industrial user shall provide a
declaration of the schedule by which it will most expediently
provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of
additional operational and maintenance activities.
(j) Disclosure of the type, amount, process and rate of production
of each product produced by the significant industrial user
where such information is necessary to determine compliance
with discharge limitations.
(k) Disclosure of the type and amount, in average per day and
maximum per day, of raw materials utilized.
(2) All disclosure forms shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and a qualified engineer holding a New
Jersey state license.
C. Industrial discharge permits.
(1) Application; time; form. Existing significant industrial users shall
apply for an industrial discharge permit, hereinafter called
"permit," within 90 calendar days after the effective date of this
article. New significant industrial users, as defined by N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.1 et seq., shall apply for the permit at least 120 days prior
to their connection into the treatment works. All significant
industrial users who discharge sewage shall do so in accordance
with the terms and conditions of the permit. The application form
and required information for such permit shall be at the discretion
of Union City.
(2) Approval or denial. Union City shall evaluate such application and
either approve and issue the permit, deny the permit or require the
submission of additional information. Notice of denial of completed
applications shall be made expeditiously. Approvals may be subject
to certain requirements, the failure of which may result in
revocation of the permit.
§ 342-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-9
1:679
(3) Terms and conditions. Permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions and conditions of this article and all other rules,
regulations, user charges and fees which are in effect or which may
be established by Union City. The following terms may be imposed
by Union City in the issuance of the permit:
(a) Limitations upon the characteristics, quantities and the rate of
flow of wastes.
(b) The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at its sole
expense, of:
[1] Facilities or equipment for measurement of sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes discharged.
[2] Detention tanks or other facilities or equipment for
reducing the maximum rates of discharge.
[3] Pretreatment and flow-control facilities with suitable
control or sampling methods.
[4] Grease, oil and sand interceptors, separators or traps.
(c) The submission to and approval by the North Hudson Sewer
Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority of plans and
specifications for any of the facilities or equipment required to
be installed and maintained by the permittee and compliance
schedules for the installation and maintenance of these
facilities. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(d) Maintenance of appropriate records of all measurements made
by the permittee of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes,
as specified by Union City, with access thereto by Union City.
(e) The periodic submission to Union City of reports setting forth
adequate data of the contents of the discharge, from which the
North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer
Authority may determine, prior to the commencement of
operation of any pretreatment or flow-control facilities, the
acceptability of the sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
(f) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include, but
are not limited to, location, frequency and method of sampling,
and number, type and standards for tests and reporting
schedules.
(g) Requirements for notification of Union City of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the treatment works.
§ 342-9 UNION CITY CODE § 342-9
1:680
(h) Fees which reflect the cost of permit issuance and the added
cost of handling and treating the waters or wastes and
administering the industrial pretreatment program, which fees
are not covered by existing sewer charges.
(i) Requirements for notification of accidental discharges.
(j) Such other terms and conditions as may be necessary to
protect the treatment works and to carry out the intent and
provisions of this article.
(4) Duration of permit. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, but not to exceed five years. The permittee shall submit
such information, forms and fees as are required by Union City for
renewal no later than 180 days prior to the date of expiration. If the
permittee is not notified by Union City 30 days prior to the
expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended until such
time as Union City reissues or denies a new permit.
(5) Transfer prohibited. A permit shall not be reassigned, transferred
or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation.
(6) Revocation. Any permittee who violates any conditions of the
permit, this article, or any applicable state or federal regulation is
subject to revocation of its permit.
(7) Modification of terms of permit by Union City. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change
at any time by Union City. The permittee shall be informed of any
proposed changes at least 30 days prior to the effective date of
change. Any change or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(8) Modification of terms by permittee. An industrial user proposing to
make a significant change in its discharge rate or other
characteristic shall apply for a permit modification at least 90 days
prior to making any changes. The permittee may request, by
certified mail, a hearing to show cause why a permit should be
modified.
D. Excessive discharge; special permit. Any discharger who proposes to
discharge wastes in excess of the limitations given in § 342-6B(1), Table
1, or in § 342-6B(2) of this article shall apply to the Superintendent for a
special permit prior to any such discharge. The Superintendent shall
issue a special permit after determining on a case-by-case basis that the
discharge will not:
(1) Overload or interfere with the POTW.
§ 342-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-9
1:681
(2) Result in a violation of or exacerbate an already existing violation
of the NJPDES or other state or federal permits or applicable
consent order or judgment.
(3) Result in violation of applicable water quality criteria.
E. Liquid waste haulers. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
holding tank waste without first obtaining the written approval of the
licensed operator. All liquid waste haulers shall discharge only at the
point designated by the licensed operator and shall comply with all the
provisions of this article and the industrial discharge permit.
F. Records and monitoring.
(1) Maintenance of records. All industrial users who discharge or
propose to discharge wastewaters to the treatment works shall
maintain such records of production and related factors, effluent
flows and pollutant amounts or concentrations as are necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article and
any applicable state or federal pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(2) Availability of records. Such records, or a summary of such records,
shall be made available upon request by the licensed operator. All
such records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available to officials of the NJDEP and the EPA upon
demand All records shall be retained for a minimum of five years
and/or throughout the course of any related litigation.
(3) Monitoring discharge. The owner or operator of any facility
discharging industrial wastes into the treatment works shall install,
at his/her expense, suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the
accurate observation, sampling and measurement of such wastes.
Such equipment shall at all times be maintained in proper working
order and kept safe and secure from unauthorized entry or
tampering and accessible to authorized personnel. This provision
does not preclude Union City from installing such equipment at its
own expense.
(4) Individual monitoring of common sewer. When more than one
industrial user can discharge into a common sewer, the licensed
operator may require installation of separate monitoring
equipment for each industrial user. When there is a significant
difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced
by different operations of a single industrial user, the licensed
operator may require that separate monitoring equipment be
installed for each operation.
(5) Standards for monitoring facilities; prior approval. All monitoring
facilities, whether on public or private property, shall be
constructed in accordance with North Hudson Sewer Authority or
Passaic Valley Sewer Authority requirements and all applicable
§ 342-9 UNION CITY CODE § 342-9
1:682
construction standards and specifications. Plans and specifications
for all such work shall be submitted to the licensed operator for
approval and conforming to pretreatment requirements prior to
construction. [Amended 5-21-2013]
G. Admission to property; inspection, sampling and analysis.
(1) Access to premises. The licensed operator, or its authorized
representative, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, may
enter upon the premises of any discharger at any time for the
purpose of inspection of the premises and/or measuring, sampling
and/or testing any discharge of wastewater to the treatment works
in order to determine compliance with the requirements of this
article and/or any federal, state or local statutes, regulations or
ordinances.
(2) Access to sampling point. All industrial users proposing to connect
or continue to discharge into any part of the treatment works shall
make available, upon request of the licensed operator, a sampling
point which is representative of the discharge and is acceptable to,
and approved by, the licensed operator. This point must be
available to the POTW for purposes of conducting sampling
inspections, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
(3) Sampling. Compliance determinations by the licensed operator
with respect to the prohibitions and limitations set forth in § 342-6
shall be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples,
sequential samples or composite samples. Sequential or composite
samples may be taken over a twenty-four-hour period, or any other
time span as deemed appropriate by the licensed operator to meet
the requirements of a specific situation.
(4) Analysis. Laboratory analyses of industrial wastewater samples
shall be performed in accordance with an approved test procedure,
as defined in § 342-4 herein. Analyses shall be performed by a
laboratory certified by the NJDEP to do the analyses and at such
intervals as the licensed operator may designate.
H. Confidential information and public access.
(1) Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs
or inspections shall be made available to the public without
restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests
otherwise and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of Union
City that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as either
trade secrets or business confidentiality. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics, including, but not limited to, effluent data, will
not be recognized as confidential information.
§ 342-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-9
1:683
§ 342-10. Enforcement procedures; violations and penalties.
(2) Union City shall serve upon the furnisher of such confidential
information by certified mail, return receipt requested, written
notice of its intent to disclose such information and the person who
properly requested such information at least 10 calendar days prior
to such disclosure. Union City shall submit the claim of
confidentiality with the information to the requesting person.
(3) Nonconfidential files on both users and the pretreatment program
are open for public inspection. Requests for such review are to be
made in writing, and appointments may be required.
A. Suspension of service. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(1) Union City may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or
any permit when, in the opinion of Union City, such suspension is
necessary in order to halt an actual or threatened discharge which
presents, or may present, an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment, which may cause interference to the POTW or which
may cause North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer
Authority to violate any condition of its NJPDES permit.
(2) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the industrial discharge permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a failure to
voluntarily comply with the suspension order, Union City may take
such steps as are deemed necessary, including, but not limited to,
immediate severance of the sewer connection to prevent or
minimize damage to the North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic
Valley Sewer Authority system or endangerment to any individuals.
Union City shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service and/or
industrial discharge permit upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted
by the discharger describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent future occurrence shall be
submitted to Union City within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
B. Termination of service. In addition to termination as provided in
§ 342-10A, any discharger who violates the following conditions of this
article, or any applicable state or federal statutes or regulations, is
subject to having its service terminated or any permit suspended or
revoked:
(1) Failure of an industrial user to report the constituents of its
discharge;
(2) Refusal of reasonable access to the discharger's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
§ 342-9 UNION CITY CODE § 342-10
1:684
(3) Violation of any provision of this article or the industrial discharge
permit.
C. Legal action.
(1) Any person who is found to have willfully or negligently failed to
comply with any provision of this article, or the orders and permits
issued hereunder, may be subject to civil action in accordance with
the provisions of New Jersey state statutes. Each day on which a
violation occurs or continues to occur shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense. Violators may be subject to a penalty of up to
$1,000 for each offense. Violators of offenses resulting in or
exacerbating violations of POTW NJPDES, air or other state or
federal permit, consent order or judgment may be subject to a
penalty by the POTW of up to $10,000 for each offense, plus
damages, including, but not limited to, legal fees.
(2) Upon finding any violation of this article, or of limitations or
requirements contained herein, the licensed operator shall serve
upon such violator written notice stating the nature of the violation
and provide a reasonable time, but not to exceed 30 calendar days,
for the satisfactory correction thereof. If the user cannot achieve
compliance within 30 calendar days, then the user shall submit a
response stating why it cannot so comply and, if necessary, shall
submit, within such 30 days, an application for issuance or revision
of a permit or other approval as may have been granted. Union City
may suspend sewer service without such notification when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of Union City, to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
the community.
(3) The City may institute a civil action in the Superior Court, or other
court of competent jurisdiction, for injunctive relief to prohibit and
prevent any violation of this article, any pretreatment standard or
any regulations promulgated thereunder.
D. Falsification of information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representations or certifications in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article or any applicable laws, rules or regulations, or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required to be maintained pursuant to this
article, shall be in violation of this article.
§ 342-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-10
1:685

ARTICLE II
Fees
§ 342-11. Purpose and policy; applicability.
§ 342-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning, the following words and terms not included in § 342-4 shall have
the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nonresidential discharger.
CONVEYANCE AND TREATMENT FEE — The user fee charged to all
dischargers.
CONVEYANCE COST — The total cost of operation, maintenance
replacement, debt service, administration billing and collection, and related
costs applicable to the City's pumping stations, interceptors, tide gates,
regulators, tributaries and collection sewers.
DISCHARGER — A person or entity that emits discharge to the treatment
plant.
FEE — See "surcharge fee," and see "user fee."
FISCAL YEAR — The fiscal year of the North Hudson Sewer Authority or
Passaic Valley Sewer Authority, starting January 1 and ending December
31.[Amended 5-21-2013]
FLOW — The quantity of discharge treated by the treatment plant during
the fiscal year.
REVENUE, OTHER — Revenue received by the North Hudson Sewer
Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority from any other source,
including, but not limited to, interest income and impact fees.[Amended
5-21-2013]
A. This article sets forth a uniform method for the imposition, collection
and administration of user fees, penalty fees and the monitoring of
discharges and sets forth descriptions and delegation of the various
responsibilities associated therewith. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To comply with the mandate of the EPA to reconstruction the
treatment plant and install additional facilities to achieve greater
levels of sewerage treatment.
(2) To enable the City to comply with all applicable federal and state
laws and regulations pertaining to both cost recovery for federally
funded sewerage facilities and the collection of sewer user fees.
B. This article shall apply to all dischargers. The City of Union City shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this article, except as
otherwise provided herein.
§ 342-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-12
1:687
SEWERAGE USER PERMITS — Any permit which is required of any
discharger or any potential discharger prior to the discharge of sewerage to
the treatment plant.
SURCHARGE FEE — The user fee charged to commercial/industrial users
whose discharge is monitored and whose BOD-5 concentration and/or SS
concentration exceeds 300 ppm.
TREATMENT COST — The total cost of operation, maintenance,
replacement, debt service, administration, billing and collection and related
costs applicable to the treatment plant.
TREATMENT PLANT — The North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic
Valley Sewer Authority Sewerage Treatment Plant.[Amended 5-21-2013]
USER FEE — The fee charged for the purpose of recovering the costs of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the federally funded sewerage
treatment facility.
§ 342-13. Calculation of sewer user fees. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Sewer user fees shall charge to each user its proportionate share of costs
for sewerage treatment, including replacement, within the service area, and
shall be uniform throughout all areas subject to such sewer user fees under
this article for the same type, class and amount of use or service of the
sewer system. Sewer user fees shall be calculated in the following manner:
A. Surcharge fee. The North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley
Sewer Authority shall annually estimate those portions of the treatment
charge applicable to the factors of BOD loading and SS loading, shall
establish surcharge rates for each factor, and shall charge commercial/
industrial dischargers whose BOD concentration exceeds 300 ppm and/
or whose SS concentration exceed 300 ppm a surcharge fee based on
such rates; surcharge fees for the BOD loading factor and/or the SS
loading factor shall be based on volume of usage times the
concentration of such factor in excess of 300 ppm times the rate; all
remaining charges to such dischargers for the factors of BOD loading
and SS loading where the BOD concentration and the SS concentration
are both equal to 300 ppm or less shall be calculated pursuant to the
calculation for conveyance and treatment fees. The surcharge fee
formula follows:
Factor base x volume of usage x BOD-5 in excess of 300 ppm x SS in
excess of 300 ppm
B. Conveyance and treatment fee. The North Hudson Sewer Authority or
Passaic Valley Sewer Authority shall develop a user fee rate per 1,000
gallons of sewerage discharge based on the sum of the conveyance cost
plus the treatment cost minus revenues from surcharge fees minus
other revenues and divided by the flow and shall charge each
discharger a user fee based such rate times the volume of discharge of
such discharger. The conveyance and treatment fee formula follows:
§ 342-12 UNION CITY CODE § 342-13
1:688
§ 342-14. Planned budget. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Prior to the commencement of the fiscal year, the North Hudson Sewer
Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority shall prepare a planned budget
for all costs, revenues and rates for the following fiscal year. Such planned
budget and the basis for its contents shall be made available for public
inspection at least 30 days prior to a public meeting of Union City regarding
such budget, with notice of such public meeting being posted at Union
City's City Hall, advertised in one or more newspapers at least 30 days prior
to the meeting, and provided to the Mayor and governing bodies of the City
of Union City at least 30 days prior to the meeting.
§ 342-15. Billing. [Amended 5-21-2013]
The billing of all customer accounts is the responsibility of the North
Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority and shall be
done at the discretion of the North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic
Valley Sewer Authority but not less frequently than annually and not more
frequently than quarterly. North Hudson Sewer Authority or Passaic Valley
Sewer Authority may bill any and all users situated in Union City.
§ 342-16. Penalties for late payment or nonpayment of user fees.
[Amended 5-21-2013]
The payment of all bills for user fees levied by the North Hudson Sewer
Authority or Passaic Valley Sewer Authority are due within 45 days of
issuance by the City, and Union City may impose penalty fees for the late
payment or nonpayment of such bills. Union City shall annually establish
penalty fees at the time user fees are established and may consider in its
determination of such penalty fees the amount owed, the duration of the
delinquency or other criteria. Union City reserves the right to waive or
modify penalties.
§ 342-17. Minimum user fee.
The City may annually charge to each discharger a minimum user fee,
regardless of any use of the sewer facilities, to cover expenses incurred by
the City for billing and collection, administration and a portion of the debt
service.
§ 342-18. Other charges.
The City reserves the right to impose other charges to cover expenses
incurred in the conveyance and treatment of the sewerage.
Conveyance cost + treatment cost - surcharge fees - other revenues/
flow
§ 342-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-19
1:689
§ 342-19. Records.
The City shall maintain appropriate records of all revenues and expenses,
including the basis for its rates and charges and its budgeted expenses.
Such records shall be audited each year by a certified public accounting
firm, with copies of such audit provided by Union City.
§ 342-19 UNION CITY CODE § 342-19
1:690
ARTICLE III
Regulations for Use of North Hudson Sewerage Authority Treatment
Works
§ 342-20. Findings.
§ 342-21. Purpose and policy.
The following sections set uniform requirements for discharges into the
wastewater collection and treatment system and enable the North Hudson
Sewerage Authority to comply with applicable effluent limitations, national
standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards and
any other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by state or
federal law, and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the
quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into these systems.
A. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500, as amended by the
Clean Water Act of 1977, P.L. 95-217,62 as amended, the New Jersey
Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1, and the New Jersey
Pretreatment Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11-59, have resulted in an unprecedented
program of cleaning up our nation's waters.
B. The North Hudson Sewerage Authority, a public body and politic and
political subdivision of the State of New Jersey existing under and by
virtue of the Municipal Utilities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq., is the
owner and operator of the sewage treatment facilities which serve the
Town of West New York and certain portions of the Town of Weehawken
and the City of Union City.
C. The North Hudson Sewerage Authority, Town of West New York, the
Town of Weehawken, the City of Union City and the Hudson County
Utilities Authority entered into an agreement dated October 1986, as
may be amended and supplemented.
D. The North Hudson Sewerage Authority has already made and will
continue to make a substantial financial investment its wastewater
treatment system to achieve the goals of the Act.
E. The North Hudson Sewerage Authority seeks to provide for the use of
its treatment works by industrial, commercial and residential users
served by it without damage to the physical facilities, without
impairment of their normal function of collecting, treating and
discharging domestic wastewater, and without the discharge by the
North Hudson Sewerage Authority treatment works of pollutants which
would violate the discharge allowed under its New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System, NJPDES, permits, rules of the system
treating its waste and the applicable rules of all governmental
authorities with jurisdiction over such discharges.
62.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 342-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-22
1:691
§ 342-22. Definitions.
Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water
Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation; the Federal
Guidelines for State and Local Pretreatment Programs, EPA-43019-76-0179,
Volume 1, 1977, or the latest revision thereof; P.L. 95-217; N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1;
or N.J.S.A. 58:11-49, and as defined in § 342-4 of this chapter.
AUTHORITY — The North Hudson Sewerage Authority.
BENEFICIAL USES — Uses of the waters of the state that may be protected
against quality degradation, including, but not necessarily limited to,
domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply, power generation,
recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and
enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and
other uses, both tangible or intangible, as specified by federal or state law.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building, beginning five feet outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of
a user to a community sewer.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
stormwater or surface water.
COMMUNITY SEWER — A sewer owned and operated by the Authority,
tributary to a treatment facility operated by the Authority, otherwise known
as a "public sewer."
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Compatible pollutants are BOD, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria and such additional pollutants as are
now, or may be in the future, specified and controlled in NJPDES permits
NJ0029076, NJ0029084, NJ0029092 for its wastewater treatment works
where such works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such
pollutants.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the waters of the state
with waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease. Contamination shall include any
equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not
waters of the state are affected.
COOLING WATER — The clean wastewater from air conditioning, industrial
cooling, condensing and similar apparatus and from hydraulically powered
equipment. In general, cooling water will include only water which is
sufficiently clean and unpolluted to admit of being discharged, without
treatment or purification, into any natural watercourse without offense.
§ 342-22 UNION CITY CODE § 342-22
1:692
CRITICAL USERS — Users whose standard classification is identified on the
Standard Industrial Classifications, SIC, Manual in any of Divisions A, B, D,
E and I, and who:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the North Hudson Sewerage Authority, or his/
her duly appointed deputy, agent or representative.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
ENGINEER — The Authority Engineer, or his/her duly authorized deputy,
inspector, agent or representative.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatables if
it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
HEALTH OFFICER — The City Health Officer, or his/her duly authorized
deputy, inspector, agent or representative.
HOUSE SERVICE CONNECTION — The extension from the building drain
to the public sewer or other place of disposal; also called "building sewer."
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any privy vault, cesspool,
septic tank and discharge field, bed or seepage pit or pits used only for the
disposal of the sewage from buildings on the premises on which it is located.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid or water-carried wastes of any
industrial process, trade or business not clearly included within the
definitions of "sanitary sewage," "stormwater," "cooling water" or "subsoil
drainage" herein. In general, wastewaters carrying any quantity of oil,
greases, fats, abrasives, chemicals, residues of manufacturing, processed
wastes from dye baths, felting or fur processing, from slaughterhouses,
or meat processing plants and similar substances, whether dissolved, in
suspension or mechanically carried by water, shall be considered as
industrial wastes.
MASS EMISSION RATE — The weight of material discharged to the sewer
system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the "mass
A. Have a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday;
Have a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the Authority's wastewater
treatment system;
B.
Have in their wastes toxic pollutants in toxic amounts, as defined in
standards issued under Section 307(a) of Public Law 92-50063; or
C.
Are found by the manager to have significant impact, either singly or
in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment
system. A critical user is required to obtain a permit.
D.
63.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
§ 342-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-22
1:693
emission rate" shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or
combination of constituents.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or groundwater.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any unit whose primary function is one other
than residential.
NUISANCE — Anything which is injurious to health, is indecent, offensive
to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere
with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property of the community, the
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent
of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
OWNER — The owner of any real estate and also all tenants, lessees or
others in control or possession and use of the property in question.
POLLUTION — An alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by
waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial
use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include
contamination.
PREMISES — A parcel of real estate, including any improvements thereon,
which is determined by the Authority to be a single user for purposes of
receiving, using and paying for service.
PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A sanitary sewer system owned or
controlled otherwise than by the Authority or other public body.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage which has been shredded or
ground to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A sanitary sewer system owned or
controlled by the Authority or other public body.
QUALITY OF THE WATERS — The chemical, physical, biological,
bacteriological, radiological and other constituents and characteristics of
water which affect its use.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The common wastewater and water-carried wastes
from human dwellings and from toilet and lavatory fixtures, kitchens,
laundries and similar facilities of business and industrial buildings. In
general, "sanitary sewage" shall not include stormwater from roofs, yards,
streets or open places, water from land surfaces or brooks, clean overflows
from springs, wells, large volumes of subsoil drainage, large volumes of
clean water from air conditioning or other cooling or condensing facilities,
clean wastewater from hydraulically operated contrivances and those
wastes included within the definition of "industrial wastes."
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to convey only sanitary sewage, or
if so stipulated with respect to the particular sewer, sanitary sewage plus
industrial or other wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
§ 342-22 UNION CITY CODE § 342-22
1:694
plants and institutions. In general, sanitary sewers shall not be intended to
convey stormwater nor more than very small quantities of cooling water.
SEEPAGE or SUBSOIL DRAINAGE — Water from soil percolating into
subsoil drains and through foundation walls, basement floors or
underground pipes or from similar sources.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any structure or device, or combination
of structures and devices, for treatment of sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All the facilities of the Authority for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of wastes.
SEWER — The main pipe or conduit, manholes and other structures and
equipment appurtenant thereto, provided to carry sewage, industrial
wastes, stormwater, cooling water or similar wastes, subject, in each
particular, to the purposes and limitations imposed upon the particular
sewer.
SEWER LATERAL — The extension of the house service connection from the
street curb to the street sewer.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities for collection, conveying, pumping, treating
and discharge of sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quality of flow, exceeds, for any period or
duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration or flow during normal operation and shall adversely
affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
STANDARD CLASSIFICATION — A classification of users based on the 1972
Edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SIC), Bureau of the
Budget of the United States of America.
STORM SEWER/STORM DRAIN — A sewer or drain, with appurtenances
provided and intended for the conveyance of stormwater with and without
other clean wastewaters as may have been stipulated for any particular
drain or sewer.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and is
removable by laboratory filtering, as prescribed in "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," and is referred to as
"nonfilterable residue."
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited or
prohibited by the effluent standards in effect and whose discharge will not
cause any violation of receiving water quality standards.
USER — Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the Authority's wastewater treatment works.
§ 342-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-22
1:695
USER CLASSIFICATION — A classification of user based on the 1972, or
subsequent, Edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual
prepared by the Office of Management and Budget.
WASTE — Sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid,
gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, of human or
animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing
operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within
containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Any water, surface or underground, including
saline waters, within the boundaries of the state.
§ 342-23. Regulations and restrictions.
A. Prohibitions on wastewater discharge. No person shall discharge or
deposit, or cause or allow to be discharged or deposited, into the
wastewater treatment system any wastewater which contains the
following:
(1) Explosive and/or flammable mixtures: liquids, solids or gases
which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be
sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to
cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
treatment works or to the operation of the works. At no time shall
two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point
of discharge into the treatment works, be more than 5% nor any
single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
(2) Noxious materials: incompatible pollutants which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, are noxious or malodorous, are
capable of creating a public nuisance, or are or may be sufficient to
prevent entry into the treatment works for its maintenance and
repair.
(3) Improperly shredded garbage: garbage that has not been ground
or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in
the treatment works, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
(4) Radioactive wastes: radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life
or concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders
issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use
§ 342-22 UNION CITY CODE § 342-23
1:696
and which will or may cause damage or hazards to the sewerage
facilities or personnel operating the system.
(5) Solid or viscous wastes: solid or viscous wastes which will or may
cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or otherwise interfere with
the proper operation of the treatment works. Prohibited materials
include but are not limited to uncomminuted garbage, animal guts
or tissues, diseased human organs or tissue fluids, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt, residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar
substances. Other materials may be specified at the discretion of
the Director.
(6) Toxic pollutants: any toxic pollutant in amounts exceeding
standards promulgated by the Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307(a) of P.L.
95-217 and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other
taste- or odor-producing substances, or any other substances
normally not found in unpolluted waters which are not susceptible
to treatment or which may interfere with the biological process or
efficiency of the treatment system, or that will pass through the
system or preclude the selection of the most cost-effective
alternative for wastewater treatment and sludge disposal.
(7) Discolored material: wastes which cause discoloration or other
condition in the quality of the Authority's treatment plant effluent
in such a manner that the receiving water quality requirements
established by law cannot be met.
(8) Corrosive wastes: any waste which will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the treatment system. All wastes discharged to the
public sewer system must have a pH value in the range of 6.0 to 9.0
standard units. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
acids, alkalines, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride
compounds and substances which will react with water to form
acidic or alkaline products.
(9) Incompatible waste/water: waters or wastes containing substances
which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. No waste shall
be discharged to a community sewer that causes, threatens to
cause, or is capable of causing, either alone or by interaction with
other substances, conditions at or near the Authority's facilities
which violate any statute or any rule, regulation or ordinance of
any public agency or state or federal regulatory body.
§ 342-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-23
1:697
B. Limitations on wastewater strength.
(1) No person shall discharge any wastewater containing in excess of:
Arsenic 0.1 mg/l
Cadmium 0.02 mg/l
Chromium (total) 0.5 mg/l
Copper 1.0 mg/l
Cyanide 1.0 mg/l
Iron 5.0 mg/l
Lead 1.0 mg/l
Mercury 0.01 mg/l
Nickel 1.0 mg/l
Silver 0.2 mg/l
Tin 5.0 mg/l
Zinc 3.0 mg/l
(a) The same requirements shall apply to any salts of the above.
(2) No person shall discharge any wastewater:
(a) Having a temperature higher than 40° C. (104° F.) or which, on
contact with water or sewage, will generate heat in excess of
40° C. (104° F.).
(b) Containing more than 25 mg/l of oil or grease of animal or
vegetable origin.
(c) Containing more than 25 mg/l of oil or grease of mineral or
petroleum origin. Existing installations at the time of adoption
of this chapter, October 9, 1987, may be permitted to discharge
up to 50 mg/l, provided it had no significant adverse effect on
the sewerage facilities.
(d) Containing any hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide
or any halogen gas in excess of 10.0 mg/l.
(e) With a chlorine demand in excess of 15 mg/l.
(f) In excess of the Authority's NPDES permit limits for
chlorinated hydrocarbons which cannot be removed by the
Authority's wastewater treatment process.
(g) In excess of 1.0 mg/l phenolic compounds.
(h) Containing materials which exert or cause:
[1] Unusual concentrations of inert or suspended solids, such
as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime
§ 342-23 UNION CITY CODE § 342-23
1:698
residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to,
sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
[2] Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the sewage treatment plant.
[3] Unusual volume or quantities of flow or concentration or
both of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in § 342-22.
(3) Any person diluting wastewater for the purpose of meeting the
above-stated limitations shall be considered in violation of this
article.
C. Holding tank waste. Holding tank waste shall be discharged into the
community sewer only at points with approved permits for this type and
quantity of pollutant.
D. Prohibitions on storm drainage and groundwater.
(1) Disposal of stormwater, groundwater, rainwater, street drainage,
subsurface drainage or yard drainage, directly or indirectly to any
community sewer, shall not be allowed unless a permit is issued by
the Authority. The Authority may approve such discharge only
when no reasonable alternative is available or such water is
determined to constitute a pollution hazard.
(2) If approval is granted for discharge of such water into the
community sewers, the user shall pay the applicable wastewater
service charge and fees and meet such other conditions that may
be required by the Authority.
E. Prohibitions on unpolluted water.
(1) Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water,
process water or blowdown from cooling towers or evaporative
coolers, or any other unpolluted water, shall not be permitted to be
discharged through direct or indirect connection to a community
sewer without written approval of the Authority.
(2) The Authority may approve the discharge of such water only when
no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available or such
alternative in unacceptable.
(3) If approval is granted for the discharge of such water, the user shall
pay the applicable wastewater service charges and fees and shall
meet such other conditions as required by the Authority.
F. Limitations on point of discharge. No person shall discharge any
substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a community
sewer, other than through a building sewer approved by the Authority.
However, upon written application by the user and payment of the
§ 342-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-23
1:699
§ 342-24. Control of prohibited wastes.
applicable wastewater service charges and fees, the Authority may
grant permission for such direct discharges at approved locations.
G. Authority's alternatives on discharges.
(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, into the Authority's sewers which contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this
article and which, in the judgment of the Authority, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Authority may:
(a) Reject the wastes.
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers.
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes.
(2) If the Authority permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Authority and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
A. Regulatory actions. If wastewaters containing any substance prohibited
in this article or containing any substance in concentrations exceeding
limits imposed by this article are discharged into the treatment works
of the Authority, or any tributary treatment works hereto, the Director
shall take all actions necessary to:
(1) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater;
(2) Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications
will cause the discharge of such substances to be in conformance
with this article;
(3) Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow
equalization necessary to ensure complete compliance with these
rules and regulations;
(4) Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to
pay all the additional cost or expense incurred by the Authority for
handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment
works; and
(5) Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable
or necessary to achieve the purpose of this article.
§ 342-23 UNION CITY CODE § 342-24
1:700
B. Submission of plans. Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater
flows prior to discharge into any part of the treatment works is
required, plans, specifications and other pertinent data or information
relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall first be
submitted to the Authority for review and approval. Such approval shall
not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with any
applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any
governmental authority. Any subsequent alterations or additions to
such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall not be made without
due notice to, and prior approval of, the Authority.
C. Pretreatment facilities operation.
(1) Pretreatment facilities shall be maintained in good working order
and operated efficiently by the owner or operator at his/her own
cost and expense, subject to the requirements of these rules and
regulations set forth in this article and all other applicable state
and federal codes, ordinances and laws.
(2) The Authority herein provides notice that it adopts the "General
Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of
Pollution," 40 CFR Part 403, upon the effective date of these
regulations. All users shall comply with the requirements of 40 CFR
Part 403. The Authority herein provides notice that the Authority
adopts the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for
existing and new sources of pollution, 40 CFR 403.5 and Chapter I,
Subchapter N, including all subsequent amendments and
supplements. All users shall comply with these requirements.
(3) Where any Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard applicable
to a particular industrial subcategory is more stringent than the
limitation imposed under this article for sources in that
subcategory, the federal standard shall supersede the limitations
under this article. Affected industrial users shall comply with the
applicable standards by the compliance deadlines specified in 40
CFR 403.6(b). All industrial users subject to Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, at a minimum, shall comply with the
reporting requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.12.
D. Records of treatment.
(1) Adequate records shall be kept based on regular observations and
analyses as to the quality of the effluent of this preliminary
treatment when requested in writing by the Authority.
(2) The Authority may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this article.
These requirements may include:
(a) Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified
time period.
§ 342-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-24
1:701
(b) Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
(c) Information on raw materials, processes and products
affecting wastewater volume and quality.
(d) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid sludge, oil, solvent or
other materials important to sewer use control.
(e) A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
(f) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
(g) Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of
materials through spills to the municipal sewer.
E. Access to property. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of
these rules and regulations, the Director, or his/her representative,
upon the presentation of credentials, may enter upon any property or
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting or copying
any records required to be kept under the provisions of this article. The
Director, or his/her representative, upon presentation of credentials,
may enter upon any property or premises at any time for the purpose of
inspecting any monitoring equipment or method and/or sampling any
discharge of wastewater to the treatment works.
F. Authority approval for discharge of certain wastes. Upon written
approval of the Authority, certain wastes which exceed the limits
imposed by this article may be permitted to be discharged into the
public sewer if a holding tank is employed and the wastes are released
at a constant rate over a twenty-four-hour period. This only applies to
intermittent flows or batch releases of short duration. Such approval
may be rescinded at any time by the Authority.
G. Control structures; installation, construction and maintenance. When
required by the Authority, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer shall install suitable control structures, together with
such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer
to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes.
Manholes, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Authority. The structures' manholes shall be installed by the owner at
his/her expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
H. Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the Authority, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive
amounts, as specified in § 342-23, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Authority and shall be
§ 342-24 UNION CITY CODE § 342-24
1:702
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall
be responsible for the proper removal and disposal, by appropriate
means, of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates
and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the Authority.
Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by
the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste
disposal firms.
I. Measurements, tests and analyses. All measurements, tests and
analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference
is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest
edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable
samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special
manholes have been required, the control manhole shall be considered
to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point
at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents
upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
J. Protection from accidental discharge.
(1) Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this
article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or
operator's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities
and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Authority for review and shall be approved by the
Authority before construction of the facility. Review and approval of
such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility to modify his/her facility as necessary
to meet the requirements of this article.
(2) Any possible connection of entry point for a persistent or
deleterious substance to the user's plumbing or drainage system
shall be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against
discharge of such a substance in violation of these regulations.
(3) In order that employees of users be informed of all requirements,
users shall make available to their employees copies of these
regulations and such other wastewater information and notices
which may be furnished by the Authority from time to time directed
toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be
furnished and permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
§ 342-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-24
1:703
§ 342-25. Sanitary disposal of sewage.
advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge
in violation of these regulations.
K. Exceptions. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the
Authority and any individual or corporation whereby a waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the Authority for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the individual or corporation concerned.
L. Noncompliance provisions. If the Authority finds that good reason
exists to believe that the requirements of this article have not been or
are not being observed, the Authority may require the owner, tenant or
lessee of the offending property to furnish it with adequate proof that
requirements are met or that such owner, tenant or lessee shall
immediately take steps to provide proper treatment facilities,
interceptors, or remedial action to correct conditions so that
conformance to this article will be observed.
A. Deposit of objectionable waste. No person shall place or deposit, or
permit to be placed or deposited, upon the surface of land in public or
private ownership any human excrement, garbage or any other
objectionable waste.
B. Effluents. No person shall permit septic tank or privy vault effluent or
other liquid containing human excrement or residues thereof to appear
on or flow over any land in the City in his/her ownership or control or
from his/her land to any other land in the City.
C. Discharge of polluted liquid into natural outlets. No person shall
discharge, or permit the discharge, of any sanitary sewage, septic tank
or privy vault effluent, industrial wastes or other waterborne polluted
liquid emanating from any building on his/her property into any natural
outlet in the City.
D. Construction of privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks. No person shall
construct any privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other facility
intended or used for the storage or disposal, or both, of sewage, except
as provided in this article.
E. Toilet facilities. Every building or premises in the City designed or
arranged for human occupancy, or devoted by its owner to such use,
shall be equipped with adequate and suitable toilet facilities and
adequate and suitable provisions, as provided in this article, for the
disposal of sewage originating therein.
F. Connection to public sewer; penalty for noncompliance. The owner of
all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located a public sanitary sewer of the Authority, is hereby required, at
§ 342-24 UNION CITY CODE § 342-25
1:704
his/her expense, to connect the sanitary facilities within such house or
building on such property with the public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this article within 60 days of public notification of
construction completion of the sewer system. In the event such owner
fails to connect to the sewer system within such period of time, he/she
shall be liable to a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, General
Penalty, of this Code.
G. Nonavailability of public or private sanitary sewer.
(1) Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system complying with the provisions of this article. Before
commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Authority. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Authority, which the applicant shall supplement by
any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed
necessary by the Authority. A permit and inspection fee as set forth
in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be paid to the Authority at the time the
application is filed.
(2) A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed and appraised by the
Authority. The Authority shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction. The applicant for the permit shall notify the
Authority when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be
made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the Authority.
(3) The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(4) At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days, in
compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools or
similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of
sludge and filled with suitable material.
(5) The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to
the Authority. Sludge removal from private disposal systems shall
be performed by licensed operators and disposed of in accordance
with the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, the Town of West New York Health
Officer and the Authority.
§ 342-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-25
1:705
§ 342-26. Wastewater volume determination.
§ 342-27. Permits.
(6) No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the Health Officer.
A. Metered water supply. For premises where, in the opinion of the
Authority, a significant portion of water received from any metered
source is not consumed by the user or is not removed from the premises
by means other than community sewers, sewage discharged to the
community sewer shall be calculated based on water consumption as
indicated by the water meter reading. The amount of water used from
private sources shall be determined by means of a meter installed and
maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the Authority.
B. Metered wastewater volume and metered diversions. For premises
where, in the opinion of the Authority, a significant portion of the water
received from any metered source does not flow into the community
sewer because of the principal activity of the user or removal by other
means, the wastewater volume shall be the volume of wastewater
discharging from such premises into the community sewer. Written
notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the
user if he/she wishes to dispute the Authority using the total amount of
water used from all sources as the measure of wastewater discharged
to the community sewer. If required by the Authority, such user must
install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the Authority and
at the user's own expense. Such meters may measure either the amount
of sewage discharged or the amount of water diverted. Such meters
shall be tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed
necessary by the Director.
C. Estimated wastewater volume. For users where, in the opinion of the
Authority, it is unnecessary or impractical to install meters and where
the quantity of water diverted from the sewers amounts to 20% or more
of the total water used, the quantity of wastewater may be based upon
an estimate prepared by the Authority. This estimate shall be based
upon a rational determination of the wastewater discharged and may
consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity,
population equivalent, annual production of goods and services or such
other determination of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater
volume discharged.
A. Wastewater discharge permits; reports.
(1) The Authority shall require that any person discharging or
proposing to discharge wastewater into a community sewer file a
discharge report. The discharge report shall include, but not be
limited to, the nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass
emissions, production quantities, hours of operation, personnel or
§ 342-25 UNION CITY CODE § 342-27
1:706
other information which relate to the generation of waste,
including substances and concentrations in the wastewater
discharge. Such reports shall also include the chemical
constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on
site even though they may not normally be discharged.
(2) In addition to discharge reports, the Authority may require
information in the form of wastewater discharge permit
applications and self-monitoring reports.
B. Mandatory permits.
(1) All users defined as "critical users" must obtain a wastewater
discharge permit before connection to or discharging into a
community sewer.
(2) Any person who discharges, or is planning to discharge, wastes
characterizing such user as a significant indirect user (SIU) shall
obtain an NJPDES/SIU permit prior to commencing discharge into
the treatment works.
C. Temporary permits.
(1) The Director may issue a temporary wastewater discharge permit
to any user, upon application, in accordance with the terms of this
section, in the following categories:
(a) A user who requires an Authority estimation of wastewater
flow.
(b) Any person whose wastewater strength is less than the normal
range of wastewater strength because of pretreatment,
process changes or other reasons.
(2) Permits issued under this subsection shall remain in effect only
until such time as it is determined by the Director that a permit is
or is not required.
D. Permit application.
(1) Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and
file with the Director an application, in the form prescribed by the
Director, and accompanied by the applicable fee. The applicant may
be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
(a) Name and address of applicant and applicant's SIC number.
(b) Volume of wastewater to be discharged.
(c) Constituents and characteristics of strength in the wastewater,
including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this article.
(d) Time and duration of discharge.
§ 342-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-27
1:707
(e) Average and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(f) A plat showing location and size of building sewers, sampling
points, pretreatment facilities, public sewer and other
pertinent details.
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials, processes and types of
materials which are or could be discharged.
(h) Each product produced by type, amount and rate of
production.
(i) Number and type of employees and hours of work.
(j) Any other information as may be deemed by the Director to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(2) The Director shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Director may issue a wastewater discharge
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
E. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all applicable provisions of this article and all other
regulations established by the Authority. Permits may contain the
following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of service charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the community sewer.
(2) The average and maximum strengths, characteristics or
constituents of the user's wastewater discharge.
(3) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
(4) Installation of inspection and sampling facilities, including
Authority access to such facilities.
(5) Pretreatment requirements.
(6) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number,
types and standards for tests and reporting schedules.
(7) Submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
(8) Maintenance of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as
specified by the Authority and affording the Authority access
thereto.
§ 342-27 UNION CITY CODE § 342-27
1:708
(9) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Authority to insure
compliance with these regulations.
(10) When incompatible pollutants, as defined by 40 CFR 128, are
proposed or present on the user's wastewater discharge, mean and
maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits.
(11) An agreement that the discharger shall hold the Authority issuing
the permit harmless against all fines levied on the Authority by the
State of New Jersey, or any subdivision or agency thereof, as a
result of the polluting or unlawful discharge of matter into a
community sewer, storm drain or natural body of water by the
permit holder.
F. Expiration of permit.
(1) Unless otherwise specified on the permit, the terms and conditions
shall be subject to modifications or revocation. Permits shall be
issued for a period of three years. The user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his/her permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. If not so informed, the permit may
automatically be extended an additional calendar year, but not to
exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be specified to expire on a specific date.
(2) Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
G. Transfer of permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises or a new or changed operation.
H. Revocation of permit. Any significant change in wastewater strength,
volume discharged or operations affecting the characteristics of
wastewater discharge may be grounds for modifying the terms and
conditions prior to the expiration date. Failure of the user to report
significant changes in their operations, wastewater discharge strength
or characteristics, or violation of conditions of the permit, may be
grounds for revoking a permit.
I. Violations of conditions of the permit.
(1) The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly
enforced by the Director in accordance with this article, applicable
state and federal regulations, and most practicable technology
available. Any discharger who violates the conditions of the permit
or of this article or applicable state or federal regulations is subject
to having his/her permit revoked and ceasing discharge to the
community sewer following a reasonable notice period and
reasonable time to comply.
§ 342-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-27
1:709
§ 342-28. Right of entry for inspections.
The Municipal Health Officer, the Director, the Engineer and other duly
authorized employees of the Authority bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose
of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 342-29. User classification.
All users shall be classified by assigning each one to a standard
classification category according to the principal activity conducted on his/
her premises, based on the typical wastewater strength for that type of
user as determined by the Authority. The purpose of such classification
is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharges based on quality,
quantity and flow to provide an effective means of source control and to
establish a system of wastewater service charges and fees which will insure
an equitable recovery of the Authority's cost. The elements of quality may
include, but not be limited to, the following: suspended solids, COD, oil and
grease and chlorine demand.
§ 342-30. Reporting and monitoring requirements.
(2) Failure of a user to factually report the strength, volume or
characteristics of his/her discharge or to refuse reasonable access
to their premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring of
pollution sources may be grounds for revoking the permit.
J. Trade secrets. All information and data pertaining to a user obtained
from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the
public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Authority that the release of such information to the general public
would divulge information, processes or methods which would give a
business advantage to competitors who did not otherwise have this
information. Contents, volume and frequency of discharge will not be
recognized as confidential information.
K. Special agreements. No statement contained in this article shall
prevent any special agreement or arrangement between the Authority
and any person where unusual circumstances compel special terms,
conditions and charges or fees for the collection, treatment and
disposal of the wastewater by the Authority.
A. Discharge reports.
(1) Every significant industrial user shall file periodic discharge
reports at intervals designated by the Director. The Director may
require any other industrial users discharging or proposing to
discharge into the treatment works to file such periodic reports.
§ 342-27 UNION CITY CODE § 342-30
1:710
(2) The discharge report shall include, but not be limited to, the nature
of process, volume, rates of flow, concentrations of incompatible
pollutants, total mass of each incompatible pollutant discharged,
hours of operation, and other information which relates to the
generation of waste. Such reports may also include the chemical
constituents and quantity of liquid materials stored on site even
though they are not normally discharged. In addition to discharge
reports, the Director may require information in the form of
industrial discharge permit applications and self-monitoring
reports.
B. Records and monitoring.
(1) All industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge
wastewaters to the treatment works shall maintain such records of
production and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant
amounts of concentrations as are necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this article and any applicable
state or federal pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Such records shall be made available upon request by the Director.
All such records relating to compliance with pretreatment
standards shall be made available to officials of the NJDEP and the
United States Environmental Protection Agency upon demand. A
summary of such data indicating the industrial user's compliance
with this article shall be prepared quarterly and submitted to the
Director. All records shall be retained for a period of five years.
(3) The owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging
industrial wastes into the system shall install at his/her own cost
and expense suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the
accurate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such
equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept
safe and accessible at all times.
(4) Each significant industrial discharger shall maintain separate
monitoring equipment.
(5) Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
federal, state or local requirements and all applicable construction
standards and specifications. Plans and specifications for all such
work shall be submitted to the Director for approval prior to
construction.
C. Inspection, sampling and analysis.
(1) Compliance determination. Compliance determinations by the
Director, or his/her agent, with respect to prohibitions and
limitations shall be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab
samples or twenty-four-hour composite sample wastewater, or as
may be determined by the NJDEP or the United States EPA.
§ 342-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-30
1:711
§ 342-31. Public sewers; connections and extensions.
(2) Analysis of industrial wastewaters. Laboratory analyses of
industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance
with the United States EPA "Guidelines Establishing Test
Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants," published in the Federal
Register, Volume 41, No. 232, December 1, 1976, as may be
amended from time to time. Analysis of those pollutants not
covered by the publications referred to therein shall be performed
in accordance with procedures approved by the NJDEP.
(3) Sampling frequency. Sampling of industrial wastewater for the
purpose of compliance determination with respect to prohibitions
and limitations will be done at such intervals as the Director may
deem appropriate; however, such sampling shall be conducted for
all significant industrial users at least once annually.
A. Permit required. No person shall uncover, make any extension or
connection to, or opening into, or use, alter or disturb any public sewer
or any appurtenance thereof without having first obtained a written
permit from the Authority to do so.
B. Extension. Every extension of any public sewer shall be made pursuant
to plans and specifications prepared by or for the Authority and
approved by the Engineer.
C. Connections to sewers required.
(1) All persons who own or occupy any land fronting on a street
through which a sewer is or shall be built shall connect all their
sinks, drains, water closets and privies on such land with such
sewer. No cesspool privy, privy vault, septic tank or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater shall be built or
maintained on such land, nor shall the Health Department issue
any permit for any cesspool on land so situated.
(2) Every connection into any public sewer shall be made by:
(a) A house service connection.
(b) A sewer lateral.
(3) All owners of property shall connect their respective premises with
such sewers within 60 days of public notification of the
construction completion of the sewer system. All persons who shall
neglect to make connections within such time shall be liable to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty, of this
Code.
D. Owner's responsibility. The house service connection and sewer lateral
shall be made, paid for, installed and maintained by the owner.
§ 342-30 UNION CITY CODE § 342-31
1:712
E. Submission of plans and specifications; conformance with New Jersey
uniform construction codes. Plans and specifications for all extensions
and connections to the public sewer system shall conform to the
Building Code of the City of Union City.64 Plans and specifications shall
be submitted to the Authority subject to prior review and approval by
the Authority.
F. Grade and alignment. The house service connection shall be laid at a
straight grade and, so far as possible, in a straight alignment. Changes
in direction shall be made only with curved pipe and fixtures. Cleanouts
shall be constructed as required by the Authority at each change in
direction and for every 50 feet of house service connection.
G. Low connection. In all buildings which the house service connection is
necessarily laid low to permit gravity flow to the street curb, the
sanitary sewage to be carried by such connection shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged into the house service
connection or sewer lateral.
H. Excavations. All excavations required for the establishment of a house
service connection shall be open trench work, unless otherwise
approved by the Engineer. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with the requirements of the Plumbing Subcode Official and
shall not be done until the house service connection has been inspected,
tested and approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official.
I. Open trenches. Open trenches in the establishment of house service
connections shall not be left unattended during the course of
construction without adequate regard to the safety of the general
public. Trenches left open overnight or over a weekend must have
adequate covering or, in lieu thereof, have barriers and lights so placed
along the opening so as to prevent any persons or vehicles from falling
therein.
J. Inspection. The owner, or his/her agent, shall inform the Engineer when
the house service connection is ready for inspection.
K. Separate and independent sewer laterals. Except as provided in
§ 342-31L, a separate and independent sewer lateral shall be provided
for:
(1) Each building under one roof, but not buildings accessory to it, in
one ownership and occupied as the residence of one family or for
one business enterprise.
(2) A combination of buildings on one lot or curtilage in one ownership
and occupied as the residence of one family or for one business
enterprise.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 342-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-31
1:713
§ 342-32. Accidental discharges; enforcement remedies; appeals.
(3) Each section of a double or semidetached dwelling having a
vertical common wall between its separate dwelling units making it
capable of divided ownership.
(4) One ownership property containing more than one office, unit or
use. A property which is in one ownership and which contains more
than one store, apartment or office may be serviced by one or more
sewer laterals as required by the Engineer.
L. Installation by contractor or owner. The sewer lateral, including the
connection from the curb to the sewer, the making of the tap in the
sewer, the making of the connection of the sewer lateral to the house
service connection, the backfilling of the trench and resurfacing the
street above the trench from the street sewer to the curb, shall be
installed at the owner's expense either by an owner who meets the
qualifications of a contractor with a New Jersey license or by a
contractor licensed by the City of Union City. All work shall be inspected
and approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official.
A. Accidental discharges; liability.
(1) If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be unable
to comply with any prohibition or limitations of this article, the
facility responsible for such discharge shall take immediate
corrective action to prevent continued harm to the treatment works
and shall immediately notify the Director so that additional
corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment works. In
addition, a written report addressed to the Director detailing the
date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and
characteristics of this discharge and corrective action taken at the
time of the discharge, and action taken to prevent future
discharges, shall be filed by the responsible person within five days
of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
(2) Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense,
loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant or treatment
process, or for any fines imposed on the Authority.
B. Notification of violation. Whenever the Director finds that any person
has violated or is violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation or
requirement contained herein, he/she may serve upon such person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the satisfactory correction
thereof.
C. Issuance of cease and desist orders. When the Authority finds that a
discharge of wastewater has been taking place, in violation of
prohibitions or limitations of this article, or the provisions of a
wastewater discharge permit, the Director may issue an order to cease
§ 342-31 UNION CITY CODE § 342-32
1:714
and desist and direct that those persons not complying with such
prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions to:
(1) Comply forthwith;
(2) Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the
Authority; or
(3) Take appropriate or remedial preventive action in the event of a
threatened violation.
D. Submission of time schedule. When the Authority finds that a discharge
of wastewater has been taking place, in violation of prohibitions or
limitations prescribed in this article, wastewater source control
requirements, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the
provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the Authority may require
the user to submit for approval with such modifications, as it deems
necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the user
shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of requirements.
E. Show cause hearing.
(1) If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the Director
may order any person who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to show cause before the Authority why service should
not be terminated. A notice shall be served on the offending party,
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
Authority regarding the violation and directing the offending party
to show cause before the Authority why an order should not be
made directing the termination of service. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may
be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(2) The Authority may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or
employee of the assigned department to:
(a) Issue in the name of the Authority notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in any
such hearings.
(b) Take the evidence.
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts/records and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Authority for action thereof.
(3) At any public hearing, testimony taken before the Authority, or any
person designated by it, must be under oath and recorded either by
the hearing officer in a summary manner or stenographically. In the
latter case, the transcript so recorded, or any part thereof, will be
§ 342-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-32
1:715
§ 342-33. Abatement of nuisances; violations and penalties.
made available to any member of the public upon payment of the
usual charges thereof.
(4) After the Authority has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the party responsible for the discharge directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated, and such further orders and directives as are necessary
and appropriate.
F. Appeals.
(1) Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any
decision, action or determination, including cease and desist orders
made by the Director interpreting or implementing the provisions
of this article or in any permit issued hereunder, may file with the
Director a written request for reconsideration within 10 days of
such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the
facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration.
(2) If the ruling made by the Director is unsatisfactory to the person
requesting reconsideration, within 10 days after notification of
Authority action, he/she may file a written appeal to the Authority's
governing body. The written appeal shall be heard by the body
within 30 days from the date of filing. The Authority's governing
body shall make a final ruling on the appeal within 10 days of the
close of the hearing. The Director's decision, action or
determination shall remain in effect during such period of
reconsideration.
A. Public nuisance; penalty. Discharges of wastewater in any manner in
violation of this article, or of any order issued by the Director as
authorized by this article, is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director. Any person
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty, of this Code.
B. Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the
provisions of this article, or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a
condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the Authority may
petition the Superior Court for the issuance of a preliminary or
permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the
continuance of such discharge.
§ 342-32 UNION CITY CODE § 342-33
1:716
ARTICLE IV
North Hudson Sewerage Authority User Charges
§ 342-34. Purpose.
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the City
to collect charges for all users who contribute wastewater to the Authority's
treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for
the purpose of operating, maintaining and retiring the debt for such public
wastewater treatment works.
§ 342-35. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this article and not defined in other sections of this chapter shall be
as follows:
DEBT SERVICE — The total principal and interest payments for a given
period on long-term debt issues.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than 200 mg/l and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than 250 mg/l.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — All expenditures during the useful life
of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and other items which
are necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve
the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement,
as defined below.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such works were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR — Any contributor to the Authority's
treatment works whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used for
domestic dwelling purposes only.
RESIDENTIAL USER UNIT CHARGE — The charge which is assessed to
each residential user. Residential user unit charges are applicable only to
residential contributors.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — The combination of all service charges for
sewer services, including user charges and debt service charges.
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which a treatment works will
be operated.
USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment
works.
§ 342-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-35
1:717
WATER METERS — A water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and/or installed by either the North Hudson Sewerage Authority
or by a user and approved by the North Hudson Sewerage Authority, or by
the water purveyor for the area.
§ 342-36. User charge system.
A. Establishment. A financial management system that will accurately
account for the revenues generated by the user charge system and
expenditures for the operation, maintenance and replacement of the
treatment system components shall be established. The accounting
system shall include recording of revenues, receipts and billings by
individual user and user class, report operation, maintenance and
replacement cost in total and unit process, record and report on billing
and collection activities and determine changes in assets, liabilities and
fund balances. The accounting system shall also reflect the budget and
conform to generally accepted accounting principals as set forth in the
New Jersey Local Authorities Accounting Principal and Auditing
Standards Manual.
B. Purpose of user charge system. The user charge system shall generate
adequate annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and
maintenance, including replacement and costs associated with debt
retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the treatment
works which the City may, by ordinance, designate to be paid by the
user charge system. The user charge, that portion of the total sewer
service charge which is designated for operation and maintenance,
including replacement of the treatment works, shall be established by
this article.
C. Deposit of collected revenues. The revenues collected as a result of the
user charge levied shall be deposited in a separate nonlapsing fund
known as the "Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund," and
will be kept in two primary accounts as follows:
(1) Operation and maintenance account. An account designated for the
specific purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs,
excluding replacement of the treatment works.
(2) Replacement account. An account designated for the specific
purpose of ensuring replacement needs are adequate to maintain
the capacity and performance over the useful life of the treatment
works. Deposits in the replacement account shall be made at least
annually from the operation, maintenance and replacement
revenue fund.
D. Fiscal year-end balance. Fiscal year-end balance in the operation and
maintenance account and the replacement account shall be used for no
other purposes than those designated for these accounts. Monies which
have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages
in the operation, maintenance and replacement fund shall be returned
§ 342-35 UNION CITY CODE § 342-36
1:718
§ 342-37. Payment for costs of service.
Each user shall pay his/her proportionate share of operation, maintenance
and replacement costs for the services provided by the Authority based on
his/her proportionate contribution to the total wastewater loading from all
users as determined by water meter readings acceptable to the Authority.
to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user
charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user
charge rates shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will
be returned to their respective accounts within six months of the fiscal
year in which the monies were borrowed.
A. Residential contributors. Quarterly user charges will be based on
average quarterly water usage.
B. Industrial and commercial contributors. User charges shall be based on
actual water usage during the current quarter. If a commercial or
industrial contributor has a consumptive use of water, or, in some other
manner, uses water which is not discharged into the wastewater
collection system, the user charge for that contributor may be based on
readings of a wastewater meter or separate water meter installed and
maintained at the user's expense, and in a manner acceptable to the
Authority.
C. Fixed charge.65
Annual debt service cost + annual billing and collection cost + annual
cost to treat infiltration/inflow = total annual fixed charges
(1) Residential user unit charge. The residential user unit charge is
calculated as follows, using the pollutant concentrations defining
"normal domestic wastewater" in § 342-35.
Residential unit charge unit flow charge + (unit BOD charge)
(BODND)(0.00834) + (unit SS charge) (SSND)(0.00834)
Where:
Residential unit charge is in $/1,000 gal.
Unit flow charge is in $/1,000 gal. from § 342-37D.
Unit BOD charge is in $/lb. BOD from § 342-37D.
Unit SS charge is in $/lb. SS from § 342-37D.
BODND is the normal domestic BOD strength in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
SSND is the normal domestic SS strength in mg/l.
0.00834 is a unit conversion factor from mg/l to pounds.
65.Editor's Note: Charges to be set by Authority from time to time.
§ 342-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-37
1:719
§ 342-38. Billing; penalties for nonpayment or late payment.
(2) Each user shall pay a user charge rate for operation, maintenance
and replacement. The fixed charge per customer per quarter shall
be $________66. In addition, each contributor shall pay a user charge
rate for operation and maintenance, including replacement of
$________67 per 1,000 gallons of water, or wastewater, as
determined in the preceding subsection, and an additional $_____68
per 1,000 gallons of water for debt retirement.
D. Surcharge. For those users whose wastewater has a strength greater
than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the normal
user charge will be collected. The surcharge for operation and
maintenance, including replacement, is:69
$ per pound BOD
$ per pound SS
Unit Costs
Unit cost for flow in
$/gallon
= Annual $ to treat annual flow/estimated
annual hydraulic loading
Unit cost for BOD in
$/pound
= Annual $ to treat annual BOD/estimated
annual BOD loading
Unit cost of SS in
$/pound
= Annual $ to treat annual SS/estimated
annual SS loading
E. Discharge of toxic pollutants. Any user which discharges any toxic
pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent
of the sludge from the Authority's treatment works, or any user which
discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with other
substances caused identifiable increases in the cost of operation,
maintenance or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such
increased costs. The charge for each such user shall be as determined
by the responsible plant operating personnel and approved by the
Authority.
F. Rates applicable to whom. The user charge rates established in this
article apply to all users of the Authority's treatment works within the
City of Union City.
A. Billing. All users shall be billed quarterly. Billings for any particular
quarter shall be made within 30 days after the end of that quarter.
Payments are due when the billings are made. Any payment not
received within 30 days after the billing is made shall be delinquent.
66.Editor's Note: Actual costs and charges to be as set from time to time by the Authority.
67.Editor's Note: Actual costs and charges to be as set from time to time by the Authority.
68.Editor's Note: Actual costs and charges to be as set from time to time by the Authority.
69.Editor's Note: Actual costs and charges to be as set from time to time by the Authority.
§ 342-37 UNION CITY CODE § 342-38
1:720
§ 342-39. Review and revision of user charge system; notification of
rate.
B. Late payment penalty. A late payment penalty of 10% of the user charge
bill will be added to each delinquent bill for each 30 days of
delinquency. When any bill is more than 30 days in default, rendition of
sewer service to such premises shall be discontinued until such bill is
paid following due notice and opportunity for hearing.
C. Lien against on property. When any bill, including interest and penalty,
remains unpaid for one year after the date due, such bill shall be
recorded in the land records of the City by the Treasurer and shall
constitute a lien on the property. If such lien, including interest and
penalty, remains unpaid for a period of one year after date of
recordation, such property shall be subject to public sale by the
Treasurer.
D. Appeal and review of user charge. Any user believing that he/she has
been incorrectly assigned to a particular user class or incorrectly
assigned a wastewater volume or strength or should any user believe
that a portion of his/her metered flow is not discharged into the
sewerage system, that user may apply for review of his/her user charge
as provided in § 342-40.
E. Users of more than 25,000 gallons per day. All users contributing more
than 25,000 gallons per day and whose waste strength is greater than
200 mg BOD/l or 250 mg SS/l shall prepare and file with the Authority a
report that shall include pertinent data relating to the wastewater
characteristics, including the methods of sampling and measurement to
obtain the data, and the data shall be used to calculate the user charge
for that user. The Authority shall have the right to gain access to the
waste stream and take its own samples. Should the Authority do so and
should the results be substantially different as determined by the
Authority Engineer from the data submitted by the user, the user
charge for that user shall be revised accordingly and shall be effective
retroactively up to 18 months.
A. Review and revision. The Authority will review the user charge system
at least every two years and revise user charge rates as necessary to
ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of
operation and maintenance, including replacement, and that the system
continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and
maintenance, including replacement costs, among users and user
classes. Any excess revenues collected from a class of users shall be
credited to that class for the next year, and its rates will be adjusted
accordingly. Adequate records to document compliance with the user
charge requirements, including records of biennial reviews, will be
maintained.
§ 342-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-39
1:721
§ 342-40. Appeal by user.
§ 342-41. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
B. Notification. The Authority will notify each user at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation
and maintenance, including replacement, of the treatment works.
A. Any sewer user who feels his/her user charge is unjust and inequitable
as applied to his/her premises within the intent of the foregoing
provisions may make written application to the Authority requesting a
review of his/her user charge. Such written request shall, where
necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow and/or strength of
his/her wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the
charge is based, including how the measurements or estimates were
made.
B. Review of the request shall be made by the Authority and the Authority
Engineer, who shall determine if it is substantiated or not, including
recommending further study of the matter by the Authority Engineer.
C. If the request is determined to be substantiated, the user charges for
that user shall be recomputed based on the approved revised flow and/
or strength data, and the new charges thus recomputed shall be
applicable retroactively up to 18 months, as applicable.
A. Falsifying of information. Any person who willingly offers or presents to
the North Hudson Sewerage Authority or the City of Union City a
written statement containing a false statement or false information with
knowledge or belief that it will be filed with, registered or recorded in,
or otherwise become part of, the records of the North Hudson
Sewerage Authority or the City of Union City shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty, of this
Code.
B. Damage by vandalism; penalties. Any person who willfully breaks,
damages, destroys, uncovers, defaces or tampers with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewerage system
maintained by the North Hudson Sewerage Authority or the City of
Union City shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
Article IV, General Penalty, of this Code.
C. Damage by discharge; penalties. When a discharge of wastes causes an
obstruction, damage or any other impairment to Authority facilities, the
Authority may assess a charge against the discharger for the work
required to clean or repair the facility and add such charge to the user's
wastewater service charges.
D. General penalty provision. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this article for which a specific penalty is not provided, or any rules or
regulations hereunder, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
§ 342-39 UNION CITY CODE § 342-41
1:722
$5,000 to be collected in a civil action by summary proceedings under
the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq., or in any case
before a court of competent jurisdiction wherein injunctive relief has
been requested. If violation is of a continuing nature, each day during
which it continues shall constitute an additional separate and distinct
violation.
E. Revocation of permit; termination of service. The Authority may revoke
any wastewater discharge permit, or terminate or cause to be
terminated wastewater service to any premises, if, after proper order or
direction from the Authority, a violation of any provision of this article is
found to exist; a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a
condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, as defined in this
article; or a user fails to take the remedial steps required.
§ 342-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-41
1:723
Chapter 351
SMOKING
§ 342-41 UNION CITY CODE § 342-41
1:724
ARTICLE I
Smoking in Municipal Buildings
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3916 (§ 4-3 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 351-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — The burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance which contains tobacco.
§ 351-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 351-3. Violations and penalties.
The penalty shall be that of a petty disorderly person's offense pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3, except that the maximum fine which can be imposed for
violation of this article is $200.
A. Smoking is prohibited in all municipal buildings at all times. This
prohibition includes, but is not limited to, all areas, offices, common
areas, hallways and council chambers. It also includes all outdoor areas
within 10 linear feet from any and all entrances and exits to all
municipal buildings, thereby ensuring that tobacco smoke does not
enter the smoke-free outdoor area through entrances, windows,
ventilation systems or any other means. [Amended 1-4-2005]
B. Smoking shall be prohibited in all four firehouses in all areas at all
times.
§ 351-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-3
1:725

ARTICLE II
Cigarette Vending Machines
[Adopted 1-4-2005]
§ 351-4. Prohibition.
In view of the indiscriminate sales of cigarettes to minors by automatic
vending machines, all cigarette vending machines are hereby prohibited in
the City of Union City, except as otherwise provided in § 351-5.
§ 351-5. Exception.
Notwithstanding the prohibition against cigarette vending machines
specified in § 351-4, a cigarette vending machine is not prohibited if such
machine is manufactured, is mechanically altered or is otherwise set up in
such a manner as to render the machine incapable of dispensing cigarettes
without some affirmative action by an employee or owner of the
establishment in which said machine is located, which action shall be
necessary to enable the machine to dispense cigarettes to one customer,
but shall not enable the machine to dispense cigarettes to subsequent
customers without the repetition of said action by the employee or owner
prior to the use of the machine by each such customer.
§ 351-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person owning, operating, renting or permitting the use of a cigarette
vending machine on the premises under his or her control shall be subject
to a fine of $250. Each day on which such a machine is owned, operated,
rented or permitted on the premises shall result in an additional fine.
§ 351-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-6
1:727

ARTICLE III
Sale of Tobacco Products to Minors
[Adopted 1-4-2005; amended in its entirety 9-1-2015]
§ 351-7. Retail sale of tobacco and nicotine delivery products.
A. No person shall sell tobacco and nicotine delivery products in the City
of Union City unless the sale of such products is controlled by an
employee of the establishment. A person may only sell tobacco or
nicotine delivery products in a direct, face-to-face exchange between
the retailer and the consumer. Self-service displays of tobacco or
nicotine delivery products and cigarette vending machines shall be
prohibited, pursuant to § 351-4.
B. No person shall sell tobacco products or nicotine delivery products to
any person under the age of 21 years or give tobacco products or
nicotine delivery products to any person under the age of 21.
C. Retail establishments where tobacco products or nicotine delivery
products are sold shall conspicuously post and reasonably maintain
signs having a minimum size of six inches by eight inches where these
products are displayed and at all checkout counters notifying
customers that proof of age is required to purchase tobacco products or
nicotine delivery products.
D. All clerks selling tobacco products or nicotine delivery products shall
verify by means of government-issued photographic identification
containing the bearer's date of birth that no person purchasing the
tobacco- or nicotine-containing products is younger than 21 years of
age.
E. No tobacco retailer selling tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall
allow an employee to sell or distribute such products until the employee
has read the City ordinances and state laws pertaining to the sale or
distribution of tobacco or nicotine delivery products and has signed a
statement that the employee has read such City ordinances and state
laws.
F. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS — Products which are designed to
deliver nicotine or vapor, including what are commonly known as "ecigarettes,"
and used as a substitute for cigarettes or other forms of
tobacco, but excluding nicotine patches or nicotine chewing gum.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any product made or derived from tobacco.
§ 351-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-7
1:729
Chapter 359
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pet waste — See § 70-6G.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 87.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Littering — See Ch. 239.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
Water pollution — See Ch. 425.
§ 351-7 UNION CITY CODE § 351-7
1:730
ARTICLE I
Garbage and Rubbish Collection
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-15 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended through Ord. No. 2001-20]
§ 359-1. Placement of containers for collection; removal.
§ 359-2. Separation of garbage.
§ 359-3. Food-related garbage. [Amended 4-1-2008]
A. No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises within the City shall
place in the street in front of the premises any containers containing
garbage, refuse or recyclable material to be removed by the City prior
to 7:30 p.m. of the day preceding the day upon which collection of
garbage is made in the street upon which garbage containers are
placed. The owner, tenant or occupant shall remove such container
from the street by 9:00 a.m. of the day on which it has been collected.
[Amended 4-1-2008]
B. Prior to removal by the City as provided above, keeping, placing or
storing garbage, refuse or recyclable materials anywhere but in the
basement of the building or in the rear of the premises of the owner,
tenant or occupant, out of plain view from the street, sidewalk or
abutting property, is strictly prohibited.
A. All newspapers shall be separated from other refuse and placed upon
the street for collection by the City, either bagged or bundled and tied
securely.70 Other garbage or refuse material shall be put either into
plastic or metal garbage barrels, with handles, with a maximum weight
of 50 pounds each and placed upon the street for collection by the City.
Chemical container drums are not acceptable as garbage containers.
B. Any cardboard cartons, or wooden, being discarded must first be
flattened or disassembled and broken or cut into pieces and then
securely tied into a bundle.71
A. All food-related garbage must be neatly placed in high-grade plastic
receptacles, so constructed as to prevent spilling or leakage of its
contents, with attached or tight-fitting covers. Each receptacle shall be
waterproof, a maximum of 55 gallons, and, when filled, weigh not more
than 50 pounds and be equipped with pull handles.
B. All food-related rubbish shall be deposited in a high-grade extrastrength
plastic garbage bag. The bag should be doubled to help insure/
prevent any leakage of foul liquid substances.
70.Editor's Note: Collection of newspapers and cardboard is governed by Article II, Recycling.
71.Editor's Note: Collection of newspapers and cardboard is governed by Article II, Recycling.
§ 359-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-3
1:731
§ 359-4. Enforcement. [Added 4-1-2008]
A violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for a notice of
violation or summons to be issued by the appropriate City agency, including
but not limited to the Police, Health, Building and Public Works
Departments.
§ 359-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2008]
C. All food-related rubbish shall be thoroughly drained of all liquid
substances.
D. All sidewalks shall be maintained clean and free of any residential
waste from all food-related rubbish.
E. All sidewalks shall be properly washed, scrubbed and swept daily.
A. Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this
article shall be subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine
up to $1,000 for the second offense.
B. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
occurs shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
§ 359-3 UNION CITY CODE § 359-5
1:732
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3697-99 (§ 4-16 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. 1999-8; amended in its
entirety 3-17-2009]
§ 359-6. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following definitions:
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling, including, but not limited
to, glass, aluminum, tin (bimetal) and plastic containers (coded No. 1 and
No. 2).
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Hudson County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source-separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include
aluminum, tin and steel; corrugated cardboard; glass containers; grass
and brush; household batteries; leaves; masonry (asphalt, brick, block and
concrete); mixed paper; motor oil; motor oil filters; newspaper; office paper;
plastic containers (coded No. 1 and No. 2); tires; vehicle batteries; white
goods; and wood.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware, including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
televisions and cell phones.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are rented or leased or
offered for rental or lease for residential purposes (See N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13a.), except hotels, motels or other guest houses serving
transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under Subsection
(j) of Section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76
(N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the City of Union City.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 359-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-6
1:733
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 359-7. Mandatory source separation; exemptions.
§ 359-8. Collection procedures.
The collection of recyclable materials shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory of all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises located within the City of Union City to separate designated
recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable
materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other solid waste
generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such premises and
shall be placed separately at the curb in a manner and on such days and
times as may be hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by
the City.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16d, the governing body of a
municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or institutional
premises within its municipal boundaries from the source-separation
requirements of this article, which requires persons generating
municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to sourceseparate
from the municipal solid waste stream the specified recyclable
materials, if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of
all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an exemption
pursuant to this article, a commercial or institutional generator of solid
waste shall file an application for exemption with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this purpose. The
form shall include, at a minimum, the following information: the name
of the commercial or institutional entity; the street address location and
lot and block designation; the name, official title and phone number of
the person making application on behalf of the commercial or
institutional entity; the name, address, official contact person and
telephone number of the facility which provides the service of recycling
those designated recyclable materials, and a certification that the
designated recyclable materials will be recycled, and, at least on an
annual basis, said recycling service provider shall provide written
documentation to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the total
number of tons collected and recycled for each designated material.
A. All receptacles containing recyclable materials shall be placed, prior to
collection, between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of curb
and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to constitute a danger, where
such receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collector without
providing obstruction to pedestrians. The owner or occupant of the
premises shall keep all receptacles clean and in safe handling
§ 359-6 UNION CITY CODE § 359-8
1:734
§ 359-9. Requirements for residential dwellings.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily/high-rise housing developments, the management or
owner is responsible for setting up and maintaining the recycling system,
including collection of recyclable materials. Violations and penalty notices
will be directed to the owner or management. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 359-10. Requirements for commercial establishments. [Amended
5-21-2013; 12-16-2014]
condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of shall be placed
as noted above any time after 8:00 p.m. of the day immediately
preceding the day of collection. After collection, any receptacles or
containers shall be removed from the curbside by no later than 11:00
a.m. of the day of collection.
B. Containers or receptacles shall not exceed 15 pounds. Residents shall
write their house numbers and addresses on each container and
receptacle.
C. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in accordance with
the Health Code of the City.
D. No person, entity or institution shall place any material for pickup at
curbside except for plastic containers (coded No. 1 and No. 2), glass,
aluminum, and tin (bimetal), newspapers, mixed paper and cardboard.
E. Newspapers, books, magazines, flyers, phone books or junk mail shall
be secured, bundled and placed in separate containers and left at the
curb.
F. Cardboard shall be separately bundled in the same manner as
newspapers and placed at the curb.
A. All commercial, business or industrial facilities shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this article concerning collection of solid
waste and recyclable materials, except that the collection times for both
solid waste and recyclable materials is 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Solid
waste and recyclable material pick-up shall be completed City-wide no
later than 7:00 a.m.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or his or her designee. All commercial, institutional, or
industrial properties which provide outdoor designated recyclable
materials for those materials commonly deposited in the location of the
litter receptacle and shall provide for separate recycling service for
their contents.
§ 359-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-10
1:735
§ 359-11. Recycling plan for new developments.
Any application to the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment of the
City of Union City for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction
of multifamily dwellings of three or more units, or any commercial,
institutional or industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square
feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain,
at a minimum, the following:
§ 359-12. Mixing of waste and recyclable materials.
§ 359-13. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Health, the Health
Officer, the Recycling Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official, the
Housing Officer, Hudson Regional Health Commission and the Hudson
County Improvement Authority are hereby individually and severally
empowered to enforce the provisions of this article. The respective
enforcing official may, in his or her discretion, post warning notice stickers
for a first-time offense. An inspection may consist of sorting through
C. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as
may be prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including
the amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and
recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments shall, in addition to compliance with all
other recycling requirements, be required to recycle grease created in
the processing of food or food products and maintain such records as
may be prescribed for inspection by any Code Enforcement Officer.
A. A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of solid
waste and recyclables generated at the proposed development; and
B. Locations documented on the applicant's site plan that provide for
convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants and
occupants.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
§ 359-10 UNION CITY CODE § 359-13
1:736
containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the
presence of any recyclable material.
§ 359-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant or other entity that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by
a fine of no less than $250 nor more than $2,500. Each day for which a
violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 359-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-14
1:737

ARTICLE III
Construction and Demolition Debris
[Adopted 4-21-2009]
§ 359-15. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following definitions:
COVERED PROJECT — A construction, renovation or demolition project for
which a building permit or a demolition permit is required and for which a
dumpster, roll-off container or any other vehicle in which such material is
transported shall be placed on premises for the purpose of the placement of
waste materials.
§ 359-16. Debris recovery plan required; contents.
A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the Construction Office, with
a copy of the plan forwarded to the Recycling Coordinator, prior to the
commencement of any activity for City approval as further identified above.
The debris recovery plan shall identify the types and estimated quantities of
construction and demolition debris to be generated from the project, how
each material will be managed, and the name of each facility or service
provider that the entity will use to manage each material. The plan shall
further detail how the applicant shall ensure that a minimum of 50% of the
materials to be generated will be separated and recycled.
§ 359-17. Review of debris recovery plan.
§ 359-18. Diversion requirement adjustment.
A. Approval. A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the Construction
Official and/or the Recycling Coordinator and approved if it provides for
all of the information required by this article. An approved debris
recovery plan shall be marked "approved" and returned to the owner of
the entity which submitted the plan.
B. Denial. A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not
provide all of the information required by this article. If a debris
recovery plan is not approved, the owner of the entity which submitted
the plan shall be notified in writing that the plan has been rejected,
including the reasons for the rejection. In order to obtain the building
or demolition permit sought, the owner of the entity who will carry out
the construction, renovation or demolition project shall make the
required changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan to the
Construction Official and/or the Recycling Coordinator.
A. Application. If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project
experiences circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the
diversion requirement cited in this article, the owner of the entity may
apply to the Construction Official and/or the Recycling Coordinator for
an adjustment. The owner shall indicate in writing why it is infeasible to
§ 359-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-18
1:739
§ 359-19. Documentation and reporting requirements.
Documentation. Upon completion of the covered project, but before the
final inspection, the owner of the entity carrying out a covered project shall
submit, in person or by certified mail to the Construction Official and/or the
Recycling Coordinator, the documentation required to demonstrate that the
applicant has met the diversion requirement. The required documentation
shall include the following:
§ 359-20. Determination of compliance with diversion requirement.
The Construction Official and/or the Recycling Coordinator shall review the
information submitted pursuant to this article and determine whether the
owner of the entity carrying out the covered project has complied, or failed
divert 50% of the materials being generated from the covered project
and specify what percentage of diversion could be achieved. Increased
costs to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project will not
be an acceptable justification for an adjustment.
B. Review. The Construction Official and/or the Recycling Coordinator
shall review the information supplied by the owner. If warranted, the
Recycling Coordinator shall attempt to contact the owner to discuss
possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement.
C. Granting of an adjustment. If the Construction Official and/or the
Recycling Coordinator determines that it is infeasible for the entity
carrying out a covered project to divert 50% of the generated
construction and demolition debris from the covered project, the
percent of diversion required shall be adjusted. The owner shall be
notified in writing of the adjusted diversion requirement. The owner of
the entity carrying out the covered project shall be required to divert
the percentage of construction and demolition debris required by the
adjustment.
D. Denial of adjustment. If the Construction Official and/or the Recycling
Coordinator determine that it is feasible for the owner of an entity
carrying out a covered project to meet the diversion requirement cited
in this article, the owner shall be notified in writing of the denial of the
diversion requirement adjustment.
A. A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the entity
carrying out a covered project, indicating the quantity of each material
generated during the covered project, diverted and disposed of in
accordance with this article;
B. Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and
dispose of materials generated during the covered project; and
C. Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirement.
§ 359-18 UNION CITY CODE § 359-20
1:740
to comply, with the diversion requirement. The determination regarding
compliance will be provided to the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project in writing.
§ 359-21. Appeal.
An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project may appeal a
determination of failure to comply under this article to the City within 30
days of the decision or determination. The appeal shall be in writing and
shall state the facts and basis for the appeal. A decision by the Director of
Public Safety or his/her designee where the appeal is to be filed shall be
final.
§ 359-22. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Construction Official, the Union City
Police Department, the Department of Health, the Recycling Coordinator,
the Property Maintenance Official, the Housing Officer, Hudson Regional
Health Commission and the Hudson County Improvement Authority are
hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of
this article. The respective enforcing official may, in his or her discretion,
post warning notice stickers for a first offense. An inspection may consist of
dumping and opening of solid waste bags and containers to detect, by sound
or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
§ 359-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant or other entity that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine no less than $250 nor more than $2,500. Each day for which a violation
of this article occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 359-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-23
1:741
Chapter 366
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155. Pay/public telephones — See Ch. 391.
§ 359-23 UNION CITY CODE § 359-23
1:742
ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-5 of the 1996 Revised General Ordinances,
as amended through Ord. No. 3937]
§ 366-1. Duty to remove.
§ 366-1.1. Use of rock salt prohibited. [Added 1-6-2015]
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering on any
street in the City shall remove snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks
of such street or the abutting right-of-way actually used by the public
and from driveways and other vehicle access places as appropriate,
including corners and crosswalks, to a minimum width of three feet, so
as to provide for convenient passage of pedestrians. In the event of ice
which may be so frozen as to make removal impractical, (s)he shall
cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand or ashes within 12
hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
B. The owner, occupant or tenant of premises used by the public or
business invitees shall remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks,
streets, rights-of-way and parking areas used by the public in the
transaction of business thereat and, in the event of ice which may be so
frozen as to make removal impractical, shall cause the same to be
thoroughly covered with sand or ashes within 12 hours of daylight after
the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
A. No owner, tenant or occupant of a premises abutting or bordering on
any street in the City shall use rock salt to de-ice the sidewalk. Calcium
chloride or other similar substance may be used on sidewalks.
B. Any owner, tenant or occupant of a premises who is found to have used
rock salt to de-ice the sidewalk and which de-icing causes the sidewalk
to deteriorate shall be responsible for repair or replacement of the
sidewalk. The City shall give the owner, tenant or occupant notice of the
deterioration of the sidewalk and 60 days to repair or replace same. If
the City repairs or replaces the sidewalk, because the owner, tenant, or
occupant fails to do so, then the cost of the City's work shall become a
lien on the subject property.
C. Anyone found using rock salt to de-ice sidewalk that was installed and/
or replaced by the City of Union City within the last 14 years shall be
liable, in addition to the repair and replacement of the sidewalk, for the
payment of fines as follows: [Added 6-30-2015]
(1) First offense: $250.
(2) Second offense: $500.
(3) Third offense: $750.
§ 366-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-2
1:743
§ 366-2. Casting of snow or ice.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or on any street, it being the intent
and purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons throwing, casting,
placing or depositing snow and ice which accumulates within the private
property belonging to that person on the sidewalks or streets of the City,
except that snow or ice removal from a sidewalk or public right-of-way in
compliance with § 366-1 may be deposited neatly on the remaining portion
of such sidewalk or right-of-way from which removal is not required.
§ 366-3. Authority to remove.
In case such snow or ice shall not be removed from such sidewalks or
shall be cast or deposited thereon or placed upon the sidewalks or the
street by the owner, tenant or occupant of any premises as hereinabove
provided, the same shall be removed under the direction of the Director
of Public Works, and the cost of removal as nearly as can be ascertained
shall be certified by the Director of Public Works to the Director of Finance.
The Board of Commissioners shall examine the certification and, if found
to be correct, shall cause the cost to be charged against the real estate
abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks, and the amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien and a tax in the same manner as the taxes
next to be levied and assessed upon the premises, and shall bear interest
and be enforced and collected by the same officers and in the same manner
as other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine or other penalty for
violation of any of the provisions of this article shall not constitute any bar
to the right of the City to collect the cost, as certified, for the removal of
snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.
§ 366-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to a
fine of $50.
§ 366-2 UNION CITY CODE § 366-4
1:744
ARTICLE II
Obstructions
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-13 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended through Ord. No. 3937]
§ 366-5. Obstructions prohibited.
§ 366-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined the sum of $50.
A. No persons shall erect or maintain stands or showcases or display or
sell merchandise on or from the sidewalks of this City, or place any
article, substance or thing upon the sidewalks in any manner so as to
encumber them.
B. No person shall offer or display for sale or sell any goods, wares or
merchandise from any store premises fronting on any street or avenue
in the City in such a manner as to encumber the sidewalk in front of the
store premises.
§ 366-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-6
1:745

ARTICLE III
Closing of Streets
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 4-14 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 366-7. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Any highway, avenue, boulevard or other road or public place
open to public travel.
§ 366-8. Closing by Mayor authorized.
The Mayor is authorized to provide for the closing of any street or streets
or portions thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days or during
specified hours on any day or days whenever (s)he finds that such closing is
necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare of the
citizens of Union City.
§ 366-9. Warning signs.
Any street or streets or portions thereof closed to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days or during specified hours on any day or days shall have
posted therein, in locations clearly visible, warning signs setting forth in
clear language that the street or streets or portions thereof are closed to
motor vehicle traffic, and further, the warning sign shall also set forth the
specified time period that the street or streets or portions thereof shall be
closed to motor vehicle traffic.
§ 366-10. Interpretation.
The provisions of this article being necessary for the preservation of public
safety, health or welfare of the City and its inhabitants shall be liberally
construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 366-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-10
1:747

ARTICLE IV
Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 18-1 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended through Ord. No. 2001-9]
§ 366-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning as
indicated:
APPLICANT — A person who applies for a permit.
PERMITTEE — A person who has been issued a permit.
STREET — Any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement or other
right-of-way accepted or maintained by the City as a public street, as well
as any state or county road or highway over which the City has acquired
jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 366-12. Permit required.
A. Permit required. No person shall make an excavation in, or tunnel
under, any street without the issuance of a permit.
B. Term. Such permit shall remain in effect for 30 days, provided that such
time may be extended upon application made to the appropriate City
official within the thirty-day period for an additional 30 days, upon good
cause being demonstrated for the noncompletion of the work within the
initial period.
C. Case of emergency.
(1) In the event of an emergency, work may commence immediately,
provided that:
(a) An application has been filed with the Building Department
with an estimate of fees required and with an estimated
performance guarantee.
(b) The procedure in Subsection C(1) above may be implemented
the next business day succeeding the commencement of the
work, in the event the emergency takes place after the close of
the business day, provided that a call is made to the Police
Department citing the information required in § 366-13A(1)
through (7) and (9).
(c) The permit, when issued, shall be retroactive to the date on
which the work was begun.
(2) The Director of Public Safety is to turn over to the Commissioner of
Revenue and Finance immediately all fees received by him/her
pursuant to this article.
§ 366-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-13
1:749
§ 366-13. Application for permit.
A. All applications for street opening permits shall be filed with the
appropriate City official on forms provided by such office and shall
provide the following information, as applicable:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of parties to be reached
in the event of an emergency.
(3) Street address of premises adjacent to proposed opening.
(4) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of properties abutting and
adjacent to the portion of the street to be opened.
(5) Name, address and telephone number of property owner for whose
benefit opening is to be performed.
(6) Character and purpose of the proposed work.
(7) Estimated time when work is to be commenced and completed.
(8) Plans and specifications or other drawings on permit, showing the
exact location and dimensions of all openings.
(9) Name, address and telephone number of the person who is to
perform the work.
(10) An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to replace, at his/her
own cost and expense, the pavement, curb, gutter, lawn, sidewalk
and all other disturbed areas in accordance with current City
standards within 90 days of any particular street opening with the
following exceptions:
(a) Within 24 hours of such opening the area shall be restored by
complete backfilling with a dense graded aggregate in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of Transportation
specifications for the full depth of the trench, excepting the
uppermost portion, which shall be restored by base course Mix
I-2 and two inches of bituminous concrete surface course Mix
I-5. The surface course shall consist of five inches of stabilized
base.
(b) The surface course may be delayed with consent of the
Building Department or City Engineer until a reasonable time
to allow for trench settlement.
(c) The placement of the surface course may be delayed in the
event of the winter season to a date not beyond April 15.
(d) Certain underground conduits, pipes, etc., which may require a
sand cushion adjacent to the structure for protective reasons,
§ 366-13 UNION CITY CODE § 366-13
1:750
§ 366-14. Protection of work.
will be permitted if indicated in the application and with
approval of the Department of Public Works or City Engineer.
(e) Edges of all excavation shall be cut in a straight line with a saw
or an approved pavement cutter.
(11) The nature, location and purpose of the work.
(12) A statement that the permittee will comply with the ordinance,
regulations and laws relating to the proposed work.
(13) Any other data reasonably required by the Construction Code
Department.
B. A permit shall be required for each and every road excavation unless
otherwise agreed upon.
C. A permit shall not be transferred except upon prior written consent of
the Construction Code Official.
D. Each permittee shall call 1-800-272-1000 to obtain a utility mark out at
least 48 hours prior to commencement of excavation of any street and
certify that (s)he has followed the mark-out procedure for determining
the location of utilities and obstructions within the area of the proposed
work, and submit a mark-out reference number, as provided by the
Garden State Underground Plant Location Service.
A. Each permittee shall keep each respective opening properly guarded
with lights, devices and manpower as may be required. Barricades,
signs and traffic control shall be in accordance with the Manual of
Uniformed Traffic Control Devices. Work shall be performed in a
manner and by a schedule so as to affect the least traffic interference.
No road shall be closed to traffic unless permission is granted through
the office of the Chief of Police; provided, further, that no road shall be
so closed on a daily basis for more than one day without the grant of
permission from the Director of Public Safety, or his/her designee. In
the event the Police Chief, or his/her designee, deems it necessary, an
off-duty City police officer shall be employed by the applicant to direct
traffic.
B. The permittee shall hold harmless the City, its officers and agents from
any loss, injury, claim, demand or damage resulting from any
negligence or fault of the permittee, or the agents of the permittee, in
connection with the performance of work covered by the permit. In the
event the work has not been completed on or before the expiration date
of the permit and the permittee has not requested an extension of time,
the Building Department, if it deems it advisable, may take steps to
backfill the trench and replace a permanent pavement over the opening
for which the permit was issued and charge or deduct same against the
bond required in § 366-17. If any extension of time beyond the date is
§ 366-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-14
1:751
required for the completion of the work, a new application must be filed
if the City Engineer or Building Department so requires.
C. Except in the case of an emergency or special construction
requirements, all road openings shall be closed within 24 hours by the
permittee, or its delegated agent, and thereafter maintained in a safe
condition for vehicular traffic until the permanent surface has been
restored. In the case of an emergency, a substituted closing may be
constructed as directed by the Building Department.
D. Any work for which a permit is issued shall be conducted so as not to
interfere with any water main or sewer, or any connection from a water
main or sewer to any building, unless prior permission for interference
has been obtained from the subcode official of the Building Department
or the City Engineer. All rock within five feet of any water main, sewer
or other pipe which may become damaged shall be removed without
blasting. No excavation which may damage trees or shrubbery shall be
made without the prior permission of the Building Department or the
City Engineer.
E. When closing the street, each permittee shall completely backfill the
trench with material which is to be placed in layers not exceeding 12
inches in thickness, moistened as required, and each layer tamped until
thoroughly compacted.
F. In the restoration of original pavement in an excavation, the following
rules shall govern:
(1) The foundation shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than
the width of the trench, except where deemed unnecessary in the
reasonably exercised judgment of the appropriate City official.
(2) The surface pavement shall extend 12 inches wider than the width
of the foundation and six inches longer than the length of the
foundation.
(3) The permittee must install the restored foundation as well as the
restored surface of all openings.
G. In cases where it is necessary to resort to tunneling operations to reach
the point of connection with any main line, the backfill in the tunnel
shall be of rammed cement concrete composed of a mixture of one part
of cement and six parts of coarse aggregate material.
H. The Building Department or the City Engineer may impose special
condition in any special case.
I. Under extraordinary conditions not covered by this section, the City
Engineer shall receive a copy of the plan of the permittee and, after
evaluation, set a fee commensurate with the circumstances in the
exercise of his/her reasonable judgment.
§ 366-14 UNION CITY CODE § 366-14
1:752
§ 366-15. Street openings by utility companies.
§ 366-16. Fees.
§ 366-17. General financial obligations.
J. The City Engineer may make any reasonable rules and regulations
which (s)he considers necessary for the administration and
enforcement of this article, but no regulation shall be inconsistent with,
alter or amend any provisions of this article or impose any requirement
which is in addition to those expressly imposed by this article. Copies of
all current regulations shall be furnished each permittee at the time of
the issuance of the permit.
A. Utility companies, including those engaged in the installation of gas,
water and electric lines, shall report to the Department of Public Works
and the City Engineer, yearly, their intentions with regard to
prospective work requiring future street openings in the community for
the purpose of coordinating such activity with pavement projects
anticipated by the City.
B. Except in the case of an emergency, the City shall have the right to
schedule street openings with utility companies in a manner which will
create the least disturbance to pavement courses, in furtherance of
which purpose the Department of Public Works shall provide to the
utilities a schedule of expected street construction and resurfacing.
A. Each applicant for a permit, before its issuance, shall pay to the
Building Department a fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, per
opening.
B. The permittee shall deposit with the Building Department such fees as
are reasonably anticipated to be required to reimburse the City for the
cost of plan review and inspections, as may be required by the Building
Department and/or the City Engineer. In the event the project extends
beyond the anticipated completion time, the City Engineer may deem
that additional fees be deposited to cover City expenses.
A. All permittees, including, but not limited to, public utilities, counties,
their contractors or contractors of state or federal agencies, shall
deposit a guarantee with the Treasurer of the City in the form of a bond,
certified check or bank draft acceptable to the City. The deposits
required herein shall be held in a separate account by the City and will
carry no interest to the permittee. One year after final restoration of the
work pending the approval of the Construction Code Official, the
guarantee shall be returned to the permittee. However, should the
Construction Code Official, upon final inspection, determine that the
construction under this permit was unsatisfactory and/or otherwise in
violation of the approved plans or conditions attached to the permit and
should the permittee, upon receipt of written notice of deficiencies fail
to remedy the same in 30 days, then the Construction Code Official
§ 366-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-17
1:753
§ 366-18. Replacement of pavement by City.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Commissioner of Public Works, the nature
of any street improvement through which an excavation has been made is
such that it will be for the best interest of the City that the replacement
holding the permit for the excavation to temporarily fill in and close the
same, bringing the filling to grade with such tops as the Commissioner
shall seem proper to make the same safe and fit for public travel. In that
event, any moneys deposited upon application for the permit shall be held
to meet the expense of such repavements and the holder of the permit shall
be entitled to receive only the balance of the moneys so deposited after
deducting the cost of repaving. Money deposited and withheld, however,
must be accounted for to the holder of the permit within one year from the
date of deposit.
§ 366-19. Default by permittee.
Should the pavement not be replaced within 30 days in the manner and
condition to correspond with the remainder of the pavement on the
highway, the person holding the permit shall be in violation of this article. In
that event the City, under the direction of the Department of Public Works,
may repair that portions of the street, all expenses shall be deducted from
shall initiate the process to deduct from the permittee's guarantee all
expenses incurred by the City in performing the necessary repairs to
remediate the same.
B. The Construction Code Official shall have the right to perform borings
in the pavement, cut cores in the pavement or to perform other
investigations as deemed necessary to confirm that the provisions of
the road opening permit have been satisfied. The cost of such
investigations shall be billed to the permittee.
C. The Construction Code Official may required an extended maintenance
period in excess of one year and an additional maintenance guarantee
depending upon the nature of the work involved. This additional
obligation will be released upon completion of the work and acceptance
of the work by the Construction Code Official.
D. When a maintenance bond is posted, it shall be executed by the
permittee as the principle and surety company licensed to do business
in the State of New Jersey as surety.
E. The release of the guarantee shall be also conditioned upon the
permittee restoring the surface and any damage to the streets abutting
the work site and those streets which had sustained damage through
the use of construction equipment and vehicles.
F. For utility main construction, other or additional conditions may be
prescribed by the City. Plans for such projects must have the approval
of the Construction Code Official before a permit may be issued.
§ 366-17 UNION CITY CODE § 366-19
1:754
the permit fee on deposit with the Commissioner of Revenue and Finance.
Should there be a deficit after making this deduction, the City may institute
suit of recovery against the permit holder in a court of proper jurisdiction.
§ 366-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate, permit, allow or suffer to be violated any
provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200 for
each violation, and the imposition of the payment of the required fees, as
provided for in Chapter 155, Fees. For the purpose of this article, each day
that a violation remains in effect may be considered a separate violation.
§ 366-21. Required notification. [Amended 10-6-2015]
§ 366-22. Construction specifications.
A. Once a year the Construction Code Official shall notify public utility
providers and municipalities of planned work on City roads. Any work
to be done on these roads will have to be done before paving is started.
Such notice shall state that no road opening permit shall be issued for
openings, cuts or excavations in such City road for a period of 10 years
after the date of paving. The notice shall also notify such permittee that
applications for road opening permits, for work to be done prior to such
paving shall be submitted promptly in order that the work covered by
the permit may be completed before paving.
B. During such ten-year period, no permit shall be issued to open, cut or
excavate in such City road unless, in the judgment of the Construction
Code Official, an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential
that the road opening permit be issued.
C. The Construction Code Official is authorized to demand a cash escrow
or equivalent in an amount not exceeding $10,000 to assure that any
road opening on roadways paved within the past 10 years is restored
satisfactorily. The restoration shall include milling and repaving of the
area so as to blend uniformly with the adjacent roadway as per the
conditions stated in the permit, including restoration of pavement
markings, signage and all other appurtenances.
A. Roadway restoration requirements for all excavation work involving
roads of the City shall require the following: a six-inch thick dense
grated aggregate subbase, base coat of stabilized eight-inch thick Mix
I-2 and two-inch surface course of bituminous concrete Mix I-5.
B. Any road in the City which has been resurfaced in the last 10 years for
which a new road opening permit is issued shall include the
requirement that the party performing the work must resurface the
road from curb to curb and from street corner to street corner.
Furthermore, all driveways and/or sidewalks at any intersection
impacted by work done under a road opening permit must be restored
with six-inch thick Class B concrete with wire mesh reinforcement. All
§ 366-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-22
1:755
regular sidewalks, when being restored or replaced as part of a road
opening permit, must have four-inch thick Class B concrete. The
acceptance of all work done under the aforesaid specifications shall be
under the jurisdiction of the Construction Code Official.
§ 366-22 UNION CITY CODE § 366-22
1:756
ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 18-2 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 366-23. Permit required. [Amended 2-2-2016]
§ 366-24. Application information.
Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Director
of Public Safety by the owner of the premises or his/her agent upon forms
provided by the City and shall contain the following information:
§ 366-25. Fees.
Fees, as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged for each permit
and, in addition, the applicant shall pay the cost of all tests which the
Director of Public Works deems necessary. Fees shall be paid at the time the
application is filed, and the cost of all proposed tests shall be paid prior to
the issuance of any permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or remove, or cause to
be constructed or removed, any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or
gutter or any part thereof within any public right-of-way in the City
other than pursuant to this article without first having obtained a
permit to do so from the Construction Code Official.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Subsection A
above, no permit shall be issued to any persons between November 1
and March 1 of each calendar year, subject to the articulated exceptions
found in § 366-28.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed
work, and the name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed if other than the applicant.
C. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the
work is to be done.
D. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
E. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact
location with respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and
prominent object, as well as its width and relationship to the grade of
the street and the adjacent property and, in the case of a driveway
apron, its slope or pitch.
F. Any other information that the Director of Public Safety deems
necessary in order to determine whether the work will comply with this
chapter.
§ 366-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-26
1:757
§ 366-26. Specifications.
§ 366-27. Notice required.
The applicant shall notify the Department of Public Works at least 24 hours
prior to the time of pouring or laying any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb
or gutter so that the Department may arrange for adequate inspection and
testing.
§ 366-28. Exception.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 366-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject upon conviction to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty.
A. All materials and work shall be in accordance with City specifications
on file in the office of the Department of Public Works.
B. Any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter which is removed shall be
promptly replaced in accordance with City specifications.
C. No concrete sidewalk shall be replaced or covered with blacktop.
D. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire
section or sections of curb or curb and gutter shall be removed and
replaced. The breaking and recapping of curbing is specifically
prohibited.
A. The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or gutters
in a major subdivision where the work is covered by performance
guarantees required by the Planning Board.
B. The repair or replacement of less than eight linear feet of an existing
sidewalk.
C. Emergencies. Under emergency conditions resulting from natural
forces or human activities beyond the control of the applicant, or which
pose an imminent or existing threat to the safety and security of
persons or property, or both, or which require immediate action to
prevent bodily harm or substantial property damage from occurring,
the provisions of §§ 366-23 through 366-29 of this article shall not apply
when an applicant undertakes any action in response to such an
emergency, provided that the applicant notifies the Construction Code
Official of the City at the earliest reasonable opportunity and that all
reasonable efforts are taken by the applicant to comply with §§ 366-23
through 366-29 of this article after responding to the emergency.
[Added 2-2-2016]
§ 366-26 UNION CITY CODE § 366-29
1:758
ARTICLE VI
Public Utility Poles and Other Utility Equipment and Installations
[Adopted 6-21-2005; amended 9-17-2013; 12-15-2015]
§ 366-30. Notification of placement or removal of poles required.
Before a public utility places, replaces or removes a pole or an underground
facility located in the City of Union City, the public utility shall notify
both the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Code Official in writing,
which may be by fax or e-mail, at least but not less than 24 hours before
undertaking any excavation related to the replacement or removal of the
utility pole or underground facility, which pole or underground facility is
used for the supplying and distribution of electricity for light, heat or
power, or for the furnishing of water service or telephone or other
telecommunications service on or below a public right-of-way in the City.
The City of Union City shall notify any public utility that provides service in
the City of the application of the provisions of this article.
§ 366-31. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOT PATCH — The installation of a mixture of asphalt to restore property
within the right-of-way to its previous condition subsequent to the
construction or excavation of a site required for the placement, replacement
of a pole or an underground facility pursuant to this article.
POLE — In addition to its commonly accepted meaning, any wires or cable
connected thereto, and any replacements therefor which are similar in
construction and use.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY — One or more underground pipes, cables,
wires, lines or other structures used for the supplying and distribution of
electricity for light, heat or power or for the providing of water service, or
for the furnishing of telephone or other telecommunications service.
§ 366-32. Removal of debris.
A. After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this article, the public utility shall
remove from such right-of-way any pole or underground facility no
longer in use as well as any other debris created from such placement,
replacement or removal and restore the property. including, but not
limited to, the installation of a hot patch as needed to restore the
property within the right-of-way to its previous condition as much as
possible.
B. Within 60 days of notice to the City of the utility company removal of a
utility pole, as set forth in § 366-30 or commencement of the removal of
the utility pole, whichever is first, the appropriate utility company shall
have the entire pole removed. Failure to completely remove the utility
§ 366-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-32
1:759
§ 366-33. Failure to comply; penalty.
In the event a public utility does not meet the requirements of § 366-32
concerning the removal of debris and the restoring of property. including,
but not limited to, the installation of a hot patch, within a right-of-way to its
previous condition within 90 days of placement, replacement or removal of
a pole or an underground facility, said public utility will be fined up to an
amount not to exceed $100 each day until the requirements of § 366-32 are
met, except that if the public utility is unable to complete the installation of
a hot patch due to the unavailability of asphalt material during the period of
time from November through April, the public utility shall not be required
to complete the hot patch installation until 60 days immediately following
the end of the November through April period. At least five business days
prior to the end of the ninety-day period established by this section, the City
shall notify the public utility that the penalties authorized by this section
shall begin to be assessed against the utility after the end of the ninety-day
period unless the utility complies with the requirements of § 366-32 of this
article. Any penalty imposed shall be collected or enforced in a summary
manner, without a jury, in any court of competent jurisdiction according to
the procedure provided by the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999 (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.). The Superior Court and Municipal Court shall have
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. In the case of removal
or replacement of a pole or an underground facility utilized by two or more
public utilities, the public utility last removing its pipes, cables, wires, lines
or other structures shall be liable for the removal and restoration required
under § 366-32 of this article, unless a written agreement between the
public utilities provides otherwise.
§ 366-34. Emergencies.
Under emergency conditions which significantly impact the placement of
a pole or underground facility resulting from natural forces or human
activities beyond the control of the public utility, or which pose an imminent
or existing threat of loss of electrical, water, power, telephone, or other
telecommunication service, or which pose an imminent or existing threat
to the safety and security of persons or property, or both, or which require
immediate action by a public utility to prevent bodily harm or substantial
property damage from occurring, the provisions of § 366-30 of this article
shall not apply when a public utility undertakes any construction or
excavation related to the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or
an underground facility in response to such an emergency, provided that
the public utility undertaking such construction or excavation notifies the
Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Code Official of the City of Union
City at the earliest reasonable opportunity and that all reasonable efforts
pole within the sixty-day period shall subject the utility company to the
fines set forth in § 366-33 of this article. This section shall be in addition
to the required restoration provisions as set forth in § 366-33 of this
article.
§ 366-32 UNION CITY CODE § 366-34
1:760
are taken by the public utility to comply with the removal and restoration
requirements of § 366-32 of this article after responding to the emergency.
§ 366-35. Utility equipment and installations.
Any and all utility boxes, meters, panels, devices and other similar
equipment and installations shall not be constructed on, placed on and/or
relocated to the portion(s) of any structure that is located adjacent to a
street or roadway.
§ 366-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-35
1:761

ARTICLE VII
Underground Fuel Tanks
[Adopted 2-2-2016]
§ 366-36. Permit required.
§ 366-37. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to removal of underground storage tanks under
emergency conditions resulting from natural forces or human activities
beyond the control of the applicant, or which pose an imminent or existing
threat to the safety and security of persons or property, or both, or which
require immediate action to prevent bodily harm or substantial property
damage from occurring. The provisions of § 366-36 of this article shall
not apply when an applicant undertakes any action in response to such
an emergency, provided that the applicant notifies the Construction Code
Official of the City at the earliest reasonable opportunity.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed,
any underground fuel storage tank without first having obtained a
permit to do so from the Construction Code Official.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Subsection A
above, no permit shall be issued to any persons between November 1
and March 1 of each calendar year, subject to the articulated exceptions
found in § 366-37.
§ 366-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-37
1:763
Chapter 370
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 122.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 175.
Land development — See Ch. 223.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 290.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 311.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 342.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366.
§ 366-37 UNION CITY CODE § 366-37
1:764
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 370-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Union City."
§ 370-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the City in order to promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the municipality.
It shall be administered to insure the orderly growth and development, the
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
circulation, utilities, and services.
§ 370-3. Administration.
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
Planning Board of the City, except on those applications where Chapter 223,
Land Development, requires consideration of the application by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment after referral for a report and recommendations from
the Planning Board.
§ 370-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land required for the installation and
maintenance of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, grading or other
means of stabilizing watercourses and runoff to prevent flooding and
minimize erosion and sedimentation, or as required along a natural stream,
body of water or watercourse to preserve the channelization and direction
of water flow on and across the land to be developed, including any
remainder parcels to prevent on-site, off-site, on-tract and off-tract flooding
and water damage to the public in accordance with the provisions of Title
58 of the New Jersey Statutes.72
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with these
regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper County
Recording Officer.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map or by metes
and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease, or separate use or Official Tax
Assessment Map.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — See "performance guarantee."
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
§ 370-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-4
1:765
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the written or graphic proposals for the
development of the City as set forth in and adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than 10 lots
fronting on an existing minor street, not involving any new street or road
or the extension of municipal facilities, or the extension of any off-tract
improvements, not involving a planned development, and not adversely
affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan,
Official Map, Chapter 223, Land Development, or this chapter.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — Where certification is required from the
Municipal Engineer, such certification may be made by any engineer duly
licensed to practice as such in the State of New Jersey. The services
rendered to the subdivider by the Municipal Engineer or an engineer of his/
her choice shall be at the cost and expense of the subdivider.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 or
any Official Map adopted pursuant to an authorized act of the New Jersey
Legislature.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the proposed lot lines of the lot or lots in
question, pursuant to the application for development, but within the
property of which the development lots are a part, which is the subject of
the development application or a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application, nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the present or proposed lot or lots for which the
development application is being made.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way, specifically
including the total land encompassed and defined herein as "on-site" and
"off-site."
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this chapter. The term shall also include any applicant or developer
as such terms are defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, each
of such terms being used interchangeably in this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE and MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any
security which may be accepted by the City in form and manner of execution
acceptable to the Corporation Counsel, including performance bonds, cash
deposits not exceeding 10% of the total performance guarantee, escrow
agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements to guarantee
§ 370-4 UNION CITY CODE § 370-4
1:766
the installation of required improvements. The amount of security
established as the performance guarantee shall be sufficient, allowing for
inflationary cost increases, to enable the City to complete the guaranteed
improvements in the event of the default of a developer. Maintenance
guarantees include any security in form and substance similar to a
performance guarantee, exclusive of cash deposits, to guarantee the
maintenance of the installed improvements for a period of not more than
two years after approval and acceptance by the City in accordance with this
chapter.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the City Clerk for Planning Board
consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements of
Article III of this chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to
be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the
requirements of Article III of this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or City roadway
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or approved by official action or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the
purpose of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself/herself or
for another. The term shall also include any applicant or developer as such
terms are defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, each of such
terms being used interchangeably in this chapter.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
§ 370-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-4
1:767
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development, except that the
following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions; provided, however,
that no new streets or roads are involved: divisions of property by
testamentary or intestate provisions; or divisions of property upon court
order; or conveyances by deed or other instrument to combine existing
contiguous lots into common ownership. "Subdivision" also includes
resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process
of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairperson of the Board for the purpose
of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and such other duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred
on this Committee by the Board.
TENTATIVE APPROVAL — The official action taken on a preliminary plat by
the Planning Board, meeting in regular session, which determines whether
or not the map submitted is in proper form and meets the established
standards adopted for design layout and development of the subdivision.
Such tentative approval confers certain irrevocable rights upon a subdivider
for a period of three years, on condition that the general terms and
conditions specifically agreed upon will be fully met and, further, that the
final plat be submitted for final approval within the three-year time period.
§ 370-4 UNION CITY CODE § 370-4
1:768
ARTICLE II
Procedural Requirements
§ 370-5. Application for minor subdivision approval.
A. Any owner of land within the City shall, prior to subdividing or
resubdividing land containing not more than 10 lots as described in this
chapter, submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board, at least one
week prior to the regular meeting of the Board, an application for minor
subdivision approval, together with a sketch plat and legal descriptions
of the proposed subdivision on prescribed forms, together with an
application fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by majority action of
the Board, a notation to that effect shall be made in the sketch plat.
Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the
Planning Board, or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Whenever County Planning Board approval is required,
the City Planning Board shall forward a copy of the subdivision to the
County Board for its consideration. If variances are required, the time
for approval and notice provisions shall be as set forth in the applicable
provisions of the amended Chapter 223, Land Development. Upon the
approval by Planning Board resolution of the minor subdivision plat, the
plat shall be signed by the Planning Board Chairperson and Secretary
and returned to the subdivider with the date of approval marked
thereon, accompanied by a copy of the resolution approving the minor
subdivision, with or without variance and conditions.
C. Coincident with the forwarding of the signed minor subdivision map
and resolution to the subdivider, the Secretary of the Planning Board
shall furnish one copy of the approved subdivision map and resolution
to the following municipal officers:
(1) City Clerk.
(2) Tax Assessor.
(3) County Planning Board.
D. The City Clerk shall keep a proper record of all approvals or
disapprovals forwarded to him/her by the Board, in a separate book for
this purpose, each approval or disapproval to be separately numbered.
E. The Tax Assessor, upon receipt of subdivision approval, legal
descriptions and sketch plat, shall take the necessary steps for
apportionment.
F. Approval of the minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
the resolution granting approval unless, within such period, a plat
prepared in conformity with such approval and drawn in accordance
with the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.,73 or
§ 370-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-5
1:769
§ 370-6. Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision.
a deed clearly setting forth the metes and bounds of the approved
minor subdivision by description or map reference and signed by the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning Board is filed by the
developer with the County Register's Office and the City Tax Assessor.
Recordation of the minor subdivision plat or deed within the prescribed
period shall guarantee the developer that the zoning requirements and
general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon
which such minor subdivision approval was granted shall not change as
regards the lots which comprised the minor subdivision for a period of
two years from the date of minor subdivision approval by the Planning
Board.
G. If the subdivision is classified by the Board as a major subdivision, then
a notice to that effect shall be sent by the Board to the subdivider
applicant for compliance with the procedure in § 370-6.
H. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board, an
appeal, in writing, to the Board of Commissioners may be taken within
10 days after the date of the action of the Planning Board. A hearing
thereon shall be had on notice to all parties in interest, who shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing, the Board of
Commissioners may affirm or reverse the action of the Planning Board
by a recorded vote of a majority of the total members thereof. The
findings and reasons for the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on
the records of the Board of Commissioners, and the applying party shall
be given a copy. In the event the Board of Commissioners reverses the
appeal and approves the minor subdivision, they shall notify the
following:
(1) The subdivider applicant.
(2) The City Clerk, who shall record same in the special book provided
for this purpose in § 370-5D.
(3) The Tax Assessor for compliance with § 370-5E.
A. At least six black-on-white prints of the preliminary plat, together with
three completed application forms for preliminary approval, shall be
submitted to the City Clerk two weeks prior to the Planning Board
meeting at which consideration is desired. At the time of filing, a fee to
be determined by the Planning Board shall be paid to the City Clerk to
cover the costs of publishing notice and of notifying the persons
concerned of the pending hearing on such subdivision. The City Clerk
shall immediately notify the Secretary of the Planning Board upon
receipt of a preliminary plat.
73.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 2011, c. 217, effective
5-1-2012.
§ 370-5 UNION CITY CODE § 370-6
1:770
B. The subdivider shall notify, by mail at least five days prior to the
hearing, all owners of adjoining property and directly across the street
and also within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the subdivision as their
names appear on the municipal tax record. The notice shall state the
time and place of hearing, a brief description of the subdivision and that
a copy of such subdivision has been filed with the City Clerk for public
inspection. Upon the written request of an applicant, the City shall
make and certify within seven days a list of those persons to whom
notice is required to be given. The City shall charge a fee as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees, for this service. The subdivider shall also cause such
notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper or a
newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 10 days prior to the
hearing. Proof of publication and service shall be filed with the Planning
Board prior to the hearing. [Amended 5-21-2013]
C. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary of
the Planning Board prior to the hearing to the following persons:
(1) Secretary of the County Planning Board.
(2) City Engineer.
(3) Secretary of the Board of Health.
(4) Such other City, county or state officials as directed by the Planning
Board.
D. Upon the submission to the Secretary of the Planning Board of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. If the Planning Board required any substantial
amendment in the layout of improvements proposed by the developer
that have been the subject of a public hearing, the Planning Board shall
deny the original application without prejudice to the developer filing
an amended complete application within 60 days thereafter in
conformance with the recommendations of the Planning Board for a rereview
and dispositive action. Upon the filing of an amended complete
application by the developer with the Secretary of the Planning Board
within the sixty-day period, and the payment by the developer of an
additional 1/2 the fees determined for the original application for the
re-review, the Planning Board shall review the amended complete
application and render its decision within the time periods provided for
in this chapter, commencing with the date that the amended complete
application is filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board.
§ 370-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-6
1:771
E. If, at the time during a review of an original application, the Planning
Board determines that the submissions made by the developer are
incomplete, the developer shall be forwarded a notice, in writing, to
that effect, and the period for approval shall be terminated until a
complete application has been filed with the Secretary of the Planning
Board, at which time the periods for review and approval stated in
Subsection D above shall commence.
F. If the Planning Board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, with or
without specific conditions, as contained in the approving resolution, a
notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, and the plat shall be
dated as of the date of the approving resolution, signed by the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning Board, and a signed copy
returned to the developer. If the Planning Board does not approve the
preliminary plat, it shall be returned to the subdivider with the findings
of the reasons for disapproval.
G. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed except where the public
health and safety require.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
(3) That the applicant may apply, before the expiration date of
preliminary approval, for extension of such preliminary approval
for additional periods of not less than one nor more than two years;
provided, however, that the subdivision review standards in effect
at the time of filing for the preliminary approval extension shall
apply to the subdivision, and the developer shall file an amended
preliminary plat with the Planning Board incorporating such
changes for review and approval.
H. After approval of a preliminary plat of a major subdivision, no
improvements shall be installed nor any building permits shall be
issued until:
(1) The applicant has paid all municipal charges for tax and
improvement assessments.
(2) The applicant has obtained from the Municipal Engineer and filed
with the Planning Board an estimate of the cost of construction of
such streets, on-site, off-tract and other improvements as are
required by the preliminary approval.
(3) That the applicant has obtained final subdivision approval from the
Planning Board and filed with the City Clerk those guarantees
required by the applicable sections of this chapter. The Planning
§ 370-6 UNION CITY CODE § 370-6
1:772
§ 370-7. Submission of final plat of major subdivision.
Board, after obtaining the advice of the Municipal Engineer, may
authorize the installation of improvements by the applicant prior
to and in lieu of filing guarantees, in part or in whole, where the
health, safety and general welfare of the public requires it.
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the City Clerk for forwarding to the
Planning Board for final approval within three years from the date of
preliminary approval. The City Clerk shall immediately notify the
Secretary of the Planning Board upon receipt of a final plat, and the
Planning Board shall act upon the final plat within 45 days after the
date of submission for final approval to the City Clerk.
B. The original tracing, one translucent tracing cloth copy, two cloth
prints, 10 black-on-white prints and three copies of the application form
for final approval shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board at least five days prior to the date of a regular Planning Board
meeting. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes, the
final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required
by the Planning Board.
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the City Engineer
that he/she is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact location
and elevation, identifying those portions already installed and those to
be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with one or both of
the following:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations; or
(2) A performance guarantee has been posted with the City Clerk in
sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
D. Any plat which requires County Planning Board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Board for its action prior to final approval by the Board of
Commissioners.
E. Final approval shall be granted or denied by the Planning Board within
45 days after submission and filing of the application to the Secretary of
the Planning Board, or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant in writing or on the record of a public meeting. In the
event that a complete application has not been filed by the applicant in
accordance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter, the
Planning Board shall deny the original application without prejudice to
the developer filing an amended complete application within 60 days
thereafter in accordance with recommendations of the Planning Board
for re-review and dispositive action. Upon the filing of an amended
complete application by the applicant with the Secretary of the
§ 370-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-7
1:773
Planning Board within the sixty-day period, and the payment by the
applicant of an additional 1/2 the fees determined for the original
application for the re-review, the Planning Board shall review the
amended complete application and render its decision within the time
periods provided for in this chapter, commencing with the date that
the amended complete application is filed with the Secretary of the
Planning Board.
F. Upon approval of the final plat and the applicant's filing the required
guarantees with the City Clerk in accordance with the Planning Board
resolution and in a form acceptable to the Corporation Counsel, a
notation of approval shall be made on each plat, and the plats shall be
signed by the Secretary and Chairperson of the Planning Board, the
City Seal affixed and dated as of the date of the affixation of the last
signature.
G. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board,
appeal in writing to the Board of Commissioners may be taken within 10
days after the date of the action of the Planning Board. A hearing
thereon shall be had on notice to all parties in interest who shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing, the Board of
Commissioners may affirm or reverse the action of the Planning Board
by a recorded vote of a majority of the total members thereof. The
findings and reasons for the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on
the records of the Board of Commissioners, and the applying party shall
be given a copy.
H. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the
Planning Board with the following:
(1) City Clerk.
(2) City Engineer, if any.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) County Planning Board, if any.
I. The final plat, after all signatures have been affixed as stated in
Subsection F above, shall be filed by the applicant with the County
Clerk within 95 days of the last date stated in Subsection F above that
the plat is signed.
J. Failure of the Planning Board to act within 45 days from the time a
completed application is filed or in such extended time as the applicant
may consent to shall be deemed as approval of the plan as submitted,
and the City Clerk, as the administrative officer contemplated by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, upon written request and the payment of the
required fee, shall issue a certificate as to subdivision of land to that
effect.
§ 370-7 UNION CITY CODE § 370-7
1:774
ARTICLE III
Plat Details
§ 370-8. Sketch plat.
The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or some other
similarly accurate base, at a scale to enable the entire tract to be shown on
one sheet, and shall show or include the following information:
§ 370-9. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall
be designed and drawn by a land surveyor duly licensed by the state. The
plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of Article V of this
chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
C. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
B. The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date, reference
meridian, graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
(1) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(2) Name and address of the subdivider.
(3) Name and address of person who prepared map.
C. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest 10th of an acre.
D. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and
natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and tentative
cross sections and center-line profiles for all proposed new streets.
E. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes and any natural
features such as wooded areas and rock formations.
F. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas and
electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed
§ 370-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-9
1:775
§ 370-10. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth, at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 100 feet, and in compliance with all the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.74 The final plat shall show or be accompanied by
the following:
utility systems. When an individual water supply and sewage disposal
system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved by the
appropriate local county or state health agency. When a public sewage
disposal system is not available, the developer shall have percolation
tests made and submit the results with the preliminary plat. Any
subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the established
requirements of this chapter or other applicable regulations shall not
be approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a situation shall
first be approved by the appropriate local county or state health agency.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs, and central angles of all
curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with number one.
E. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
F. Location and description of all monuments.
G. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
H. Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of plat.
I. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
J. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
74.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 2011, c. 217, effective
5-1-2012.
§ 370-9 UNION CITY CODE § 370-10
1:776
K. Cross sections and profiles of streets approved by the Municipal
Engineer may be required to accompany the final plat.
L. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and
at two-foot intervals for land or lesser slopes.
M. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
N. Certificate from Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 370-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-10
1:777

ARTICLE IV
Improvements
§ 370-11. Requirements.
Prior to the signing and sealing of the final plat, the applicant shall have
posted performance and maintenance guarantees with the City Clerk for
the ultimate installation of on-tract and off-tract improvements, as approved
by the Planning Board, and designed in accordance with the standards
hereinafter set forth, except as specifically waived or modified by the
Planning Board's resolution granting final approval. The subdivider shall
have furnished guarantees for the ultimate installation of the following:
§ 370-12. Inspection and approval.
All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Municipal Engineer at least 24 hours prior to the start of
construction. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected
and approved.
§ 370-13. Performance and maintenance guarantees.
A. Streets.
B. Street signs.
C. Curbs and gutters.
D. Sidewalks.
E. Streetlighting.
F. Shade trees, to be located on the street line so as not to interfere with
utilities or sidewalks, and shall be of one of the following types: maple,
or such other type as shall be approved by the Planning Board.
G. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
H. Monuments, to be of the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11,
and shall be placed in accordance with such statute.
I. Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers shall be
properly connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to
handle all present and probable future developments.
A. No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
completion of all such required improvements has been certified to the
Planning Board by the City Engineer, unless the subdivision owner shall
have filed with the municipality a performance guarantee sufficient in
amount to cover the cost of all such improvements or uncompleted
§ 370-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-13
1:779
§ 370-14. Contribution for off-tract improvements; condition of
preliminary approval. [Amended 3-21-2006]
As a condition of preliminary approval and prior to any construction or the
filing of an application for final approval of a subdivision or a site plan, the
applicant shall have posted a performance guaranty or, with the consent
portions thereof as estimated by the City Engineer and assuring the
installation of such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed
date. Such performance guarantee may be in the form of a performance
bond which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company approved
by the Board of Commissioners; a certified check, returnable to the
subdivider after full compliance; or any other type of surety approved
by the Corporation Counsel.
B. The performance guarantee shall be approved by the Corporation
Counsel as to form, sufficiency and execution.
(1) Such performance guarantee shall run for a period to be fixed by
the Planning Board, but in no case for a term of more than three
years. However, with the consent of the owner and the surety, if
there be one, the Board of Commissioners, by resolution, may
extend the term of such performance guarantee for an additional
period not to exceed three years. The amount of the performance
guarantee may be reduced by the Board of Commissioners by
resolution when portions of the required improvements have been
installed.
(2) If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety shall be
liable thereon to the City for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not installed, and, upon receipt of the proceeds
thereof, the City shall install such improvements.
C. A performance guarantee shall be furnished by the subdivider in favor
of the City in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation
for improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting,
shade trees, surveyor's monuments, water mains, culverts, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices and
public improvements of open space.
D. A maintenance guarantee shall be furnished by the subdivider upon
acceptance of the streets and improvements by the City. Such
guarantee, which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company
approved by the Board of Commissioners, shall be in the amount not to
exceed 15% of the original estimated cost of the required improvement
and shall run to and be in favor of the City for no less than two years.
The bond shall be approved by the Corporation Counsel on the advice of
the City Engineer.
§ 370-13 UNION CITY CODE § 370-14
1:780
of the City, installed or paid for any required off-tract improvements in the
manner provided below.
§ 370-15. Allocation of costs; criteria in determining allocation.
[Amended 3-21-2006]
A. The allocation of costs for off-tract improvements as between the
applicant, the property owners and the City, or any one or more of the
foregoing, shall be determined by the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment ("Board"), with the assistance of the appropriate City
agencies, on the basis of the total cost of the off-tract improvements,
the increase in market values of the property affected and any other
benefits conferred, the needs created by the application, population
and land use projections for the general area of the applicant's property
and other areas to be served by the off-tract improvements, the
estimated time of construction of the off-tract improvements and the
condition and periods of usefulness, which periods may be based upon
the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
B. Requirements for off-tract improvements shall be consistent with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42. In addition, the following criteria may also be
considered, as well as any other reasonable criteria the Board feels are
necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the City:
(1) Street, curb, sidewalk, shade tree, streetlight, street sign and
traffic light improvements may also be based upon the anticipated
increase of traffic generated by the application. In determining
such traffic increase, the Board may consider traffic counts,
existing and projected traffic patterns, the quality of streets and
sidewalks in the area and other factors related to the need created
by the application and the anticipated benefit thereto.
(2) Drainage facilities may also be based upon or be determined by the
drainage created by or affected by a particular land use,
considering:
(a) The percentage relationship between the square footage of the
property, the subject of the application, and the square footage
of the total drainage basin.
(b) The use of a particular site and the amount of the area to be
covered by imperious surfaces on the site itself.
(c) The use, condition or status of the remaining area in the
drainage basin.
(3) Water supply and distribution facilities may also be based upon the
added facilities required by the total anticipated water use
requirements of the property of the applicant and other properties
in the general area benefiting therefrom.
§ 370-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-15
1:781
§ 370-16. Determination of cost. [Added 3-21-2006]
The cost of the installation of the required off-tract improvements shall
be determined by the Board with the advice of the City Engineer and
appropriate City agencies.
§ 370-17. Amount of contribution. [Added 3-21-2006]
When the manner of construction has been determined, the applicant may
be required to provide a cash deposit to the City of one of following
amounts:
§ 370-18. Payment of allocated costs. [Added 3-21-2006]
(4) Sewerage facilities may be based upon the proportion that the total
anticipated volume of sewage effluent of the applicant's property
and other properties connected to the new facility bears to the
existing capacity of existing sewerage facilities, including, but not
limited to, sewer lines and other appurtenances leading to and
servicing the applicant's property. In the event that the applicant's
property shall be permitted to be connected to existing sewer
facilities, the applicant shall pay a charge or be assessed in
accordance with the law.
A. If the improvement is to be constructed by the City as a general
improvement, an amount equal to the difference between the estimated
cost of the improvement and the estimated total amount, if less, by
which all properties to be serviced thereby, including the subject
property, will be specifically benefited by the off-tract improvement.
B. If the improvement is to be constructed by the City as a local
improvement, then, in addition to the amount referred to in Subsection
A above, the estimated amount by which the subject property will be
specifically benefited by the off-tract improvement.
C. If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant, an amount
equal to the estimated cost of the off-tract improvements, less an offset
for benefits to properties other than the subject property.
A. The estimated costs of the off-tract improvements allocated to the
applicant, if deposited in cash, shall be paid by the applicant to the City
Treasurer, who shall provide a suitable depository therefor, and such
funds shall be used only for the off-tract improvements for which they
are deposited or improvements serving the same purpose, unless such
improvements are not initiated by the City within a period of 10 years
from the date of payment, after which said funds so deposited shall be
returned, together with accumulated interest or other income thereon,
if any.
B. In the event that the payment by the applicant to the City Treasurer
provided for herein is less than its share of the actual cost of the off-
§ 370-15 UNION CITY CODE § 370-18
1:782
§ 370-19. Assessment of properties for costs of improvements.
[Added 3-21-2006]
Upon receipt from the applicant of its allocated share of the costs of the
off-tract improvements, the City may adopt a local improvement assessment
ordinance for the purpose of the construction and installation of the offtract
improvement based upon the actual cost thereof. Any portion of the
cost of the improvements not defrayed by a deposit by the applicant may be
assessed against benefiting property owners by the City. Any assessments
for benefits conferred made against the applicant to his successors in
interest shall be first offset by a pro rata share credit of the allocated
costs previously deposited with the City Treasurer pertaining thereto. The
applicant or his successors in interest shall not be liable for any part of
an assessment for such improvements unless the assessment exceeds the
pro rata share credit for the deposit, and then only to the extent of the
deficiency.
§ 370-20. Credit for work performed. [Added 3-21-2006]
In the event that the applicant, with the City's consent, decides to install
and construct the off-tract improvement, or any portion thereof, the
certified cost shall be treated as a credit against any future assessment for
that particular off-tract improvement, or portion thereof, constructed by the
City in the same manner as if the developer had deposited its apportioned
cost with the City Treasurer, as provided therein.
tract improvements, then the applicant shall be required to pay its
appropriate share of the cost thereof.
C. In the event that the payment by the applicant to the City Treasurer
provided for above is more than its appropriate share of the actual cost
of installation of the off-tract improvements, the applicant or its
successors or assigns shall be repaid an amount equal to the difference
between the deposit and its share of the actual cost.
D. If the applicant shall deem that any of the amounts so estimated by the
Board are unreasonable, it may challenge them and seek to have them
revised in appropriate proceedings brought to compel subdivision or
site plan approval.
E. If the applicant and the Board cannot agree with respect to the
applicant's appropriate share of the actual cost of the off-tract
improvement, or the determination made by the City officer or board
charged with the duty of making assessments as to special benefits if
the off-tract improvement is to be constructed as a local improvement,
no approval shall be granted; provided, however, that the applicant may
challenge such determination and seek to have it reviewed in
appropriate judicial proceedings in order to compel subdivision or site
plan approval.
§ 370-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-21
1:783
§ 370-21. Contract with City for installation by applicant. [Added
3-21-2006]
§ 370-22. Compliance with design criteria required. [Added
3-21-2006]
Should the applicant and the City enter into a contract for the construction
and installation of the off-tract improvements to be done by the applicant,
the applicant shall observe all requirements and principles of this chapter
in the design of such improvements.
A. At the discretion and option of the City and with the consent of the
applicant, the City may enter into a contract with the applicant,
providing for the installation and construction of the off-tract
improvements by the applicant upon contribution by the City of the
remaining unallocated portion of the cost of the off-tract improvement.
B. In the event that the City so elects to contribute to the cost and expense
of installation of the off-tract improvement by the applicant, the portion
contributed by the City shall be subject to possible certification and
assessment as a local improvement against benefiting property owners
in the manner provided by law, if applicable.
§ 370-21 UNION CITY CODE § 370-22
1:784
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 370-23. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the City. Where either or both an Official
Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision shall conform
to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets, drainage rightsof-
way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown on an officially
adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in approval of
subdivision plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map exists, streets and
drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 et seq., and shall be such as to lend themselves to the
harmonious development of the City and enhance the public welfare.
§ 370-24. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets now shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designated as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine appropriate.
D. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than the following:
(1) Arterial streets, 80 feet.
(2) Collector streets, 60 feet.
(3) Minor streets, 50 feet.
(4) Marginal access streets, 40 feet.
(5) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
individual basis and in all cases shall be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
E. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the Board of Commissioners under
conditions approved by the Planning Board.
F. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street
§ 370-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-24
1:785
§ 370-25. Blocks.
§ 370-26. Lots.
width requirement of this chapter shall dedicate additional width along
either one or both sides of such road. If the subdivision is along one side
only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
G. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
I. Street jobs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
J. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
K. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
L. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
M. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. If a
dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for a future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
N. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Chapter 223,
Land Development, and to provide for convenient access, circulation
control and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
§ 370-24 UNION CITY CODE § 370-26
1:786
§ 370-27. Public use and service areas.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
Chapter 223, Land Development. In the event there is no lot dimension
and area in Chapter 223 at the time of the adoption of this chapter, and
only until and during such time there is no lot dimension and area in the
Chapter 223, then the minimum lot dimension and area shall be at least
25 feet by 100 feet. No subdivision shall be approved unless:
(1) Each of the resulting lot or lots shall have an area and dimension of
at least a width of 25 feet in front by a depth of 100 feet.
(2) Each of the resulting lot or lots are complete independent units
with suitable access thereto by means of an easement of sufficient
width and design to safely accommodate maximum traffic, parking
and ingress and egress needs and maximum access for fire-fighting
equipment.
(3) Comply with all of the provisions of the building code as to front,
side and rear setback lines.
(4) Have frontage upon an approved street.
(5) Comply with all other applicable governmental regulations. The
Planning Board may waive these requirements in cases where they
would create undue hardship and same are approved by the City
Engineer and Building Inspector.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width,
except lots fronting on streets described in § 370-24D(4) and (5) of this
chapter.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board, after adequate
investigations, may withhold approval of such lots.
A. In large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies
or municipal departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
§ 370-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-27
1:787
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designating any subdivision containing
such features.
§ 370-27 UNION CITY CODE § 370-27
1:788
ARTICLE VI
Violations
§ 370-28. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
A. Penalties; civil action by City.
(1) If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for
which City approval is required by ordinance pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, such person shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made shall be
deemed a separate violation.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the City may institute and maintain a
civil action:
(a) For injunctive relief; and
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not
been issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
B. Liens; return of moneys; time limit. In any such action, the transferee,
purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the
land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the
possession of the developer or his/her assigns or successors, to secure
the return of any deposits made or purchase price paid, and also a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of such land,
or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 370-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-28
1:789
Chapter 376
TATTOO AND BODY-PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Land development — See Ch. 223.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 254.
§ 376-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPRENTICE — Any person that performs the art of tattooing or body
piercing under the direct supervision of a practitioner in order to learn body
art procedures.
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment in licensed
establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to, body piercing
tattooing and permanent cosmetics.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person
using presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized
or disinfected jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. Such
definition shall not apply to medical services performed by a licensed
physician.
LEGAL GUARDIAN — An individual who, by legal appointment or by the
effect of written law, has been given custody of a minor or adult.
PRACTITIONER — Any person that performs the art of tattooing,
permanent cosmetics and/or ear and body piercing.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other inert pigment into or
under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument
used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or
mucosa.
§ 376-2. Conformance with regulations required.
A. No person shall engage in the business of tattooing or body piercing,
whether for compensation or not, operate any establishment where
tattooing or body piercing is performed, whether for compensation or
not, or tattoo or body pierce any person, whether for compensation or
not, without complying with the requirements of this chapter, pursuant
to local rules and regulations, as well as the regulations of the State of
New Jersey, or regulations about to be adopted, including the New
Jersey Administrative Code at N.J.A.C. 8:27.
§ 370-28 UNION CITY CODE § 376-2
1:790
§ 376-3. License required; fee.
§ 376-4. Compliance with health standards required.
B. No person shall display a sign or in any way advertise or purport to be a
body art practitioner or be engaged in the business of body art without
first obtaining a license or permit for the facility from the Department
of Health.
C. No person shall engage in the business of body piercing or tattoo or
body art without first complying with the City zoning regulations set
forth in Chapter 223, Land Development.
A. Each applicant for a license must qualify each year for a body piercing
license and shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in Chapter 155,
Fees, prior to the issuance of a license to engage in body piercing.
B. Each applicant for a license must qualify each year for a tattooing
business license and shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees, prior to the issuance of a license to engage in
tattooing of the body.
C. Each body piercing license and tattooing business license issued by the
City shall contain a registration number, and no such license shall be
transferable to another person or entity.
D. Licenses issued pursuant to the provision of this chapter shall be valid
for 12 months from the date of issuance. No license will be issued for a
subsequent year unless the licensee makes application for, and fully
complies with, the provisions of this chapter.
A. Tattooing.
(1) Establishments. All tattooing establishments located within the
City shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner, in
compliance with practical municipal ordinances and local rules and
regulations, as well as all rules and regulations of the state which
shall be deemed applicable.
(2) Procedures. All tattooing and other related procedures shall be
carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner so as to minimize
the danger of infection to the person being tattooed, including, but
not limited to:
(a) Operator: scrubbing hands with surgical brush, warm water,
soap and germicidal solution.
(b) Area of the customer to be tattooed: washed and sprayed with
germicidal solution.
(c) Tattoo stencil: cold sterilized with a germicidal solution.
§ 376-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-4
1:791
§ 376-5. Tattooing of certain persons prohibited.
§ 376-6. Records of tattooing required.
All persons engaged in the business of tattooing, whether for compensation
or not, or who endeavor in any manner whatsoever to tattoo any person
shall maintain, for a period of five years from the date of tattooing, records,
which shall be sequentially numbered, containing the following information:
(3) Implements and instruments. All instruments or other implements,
including, but not limited to, needles used in connection with
tattooing, shall be first sterilized by autoclaving at a minimum of
250° for a period of not less than one hour. Such autoclaving shall
be done at the licensed premises.
(4) Dyes and solutions. No dye, solution, chemical, substance, material
or any other thing shall be used in the application of tattoos to any
person unless such solution shall be approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration or other appropriate agency of local,
state or federal government for tattooing purposes.
B. Body piercing establishments and equipment.
(1) The room in which body piercing is done shall have an area of not
less than 100 square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall have an
impervious, smooth and washable surface.
(2) A toilet shall be adjacent to the area where the body piercing is
performed. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water, soap and sanitary towels.
(3) All tables shall be constructed of easily cleanable impervious
material and shall be separated from waiting customers or
observers by a panel at least four feet high.
(4) The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
A. No minor or incompetent may be tattooed without the written consent
of his/her parent or legal guardian and unless the parent or legal
guardian is present with the minor at the time of the body art
procedure.
B. No one who appears to be under the influence of a drug or alcohol shall
be tattooed, and the record will so indicate.
A. The date of tattooing.
B. The name, address and sex of the person tattooed.
C. The name and address of the person performing the tattoo operation.
D. The design, color or colors and location on the body of the tattoo.
§ 376-4 UNION CITY CODE § 376-6
1:792
§ 376-7. General body piercing regulations.
E. The dye or substance used in the marking of the skin.
F. The method of tattooing used.
G. If the person tattooed is a minor, as defined by law, the name, address
and relationship to the person tattooed of any person consenting to the
tattooing operation on behalf of such minor, along with the consent. It
shall not be a defense to any proceeding under this chapter for failure
to maintain such record that the person requesting tattooing
represented him/herself to be of legal age unless such representation
shall be in writing, signed by the person to be tattooed and
accompanied by a notation as to what means were used to obtain proof
of age, provided that the appearance of the person requesting tattooing
was such that an ordinary prudent person would believe such person to
be of legal age.
A. Age.
(1) It shall be a violation for anyone to pierce any body part of an
individual under 18 years of age without authorization signed by
the parent or legal guardian and witnessed by the operator and
unless the parent or legal guardian is present with the minor at the
time of the body art procedure.
(2) Competent proof of age shall be required to be shown with the
application for piercing.
B. Refusal. If the client's parents and/or legal guardians are suspected to
be under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other behavioral
modifying substance, the operator must refuse the client.
C. Application. In addition to the requirements to locate and construct a
body art establishment in the New Jersey Administrative Code at
N.J.A.C. 8:27, any person desiring to engage in body piercing or
tattooing shall apply to the City Department of Health, in writing, on
forms promulgated and supplied by the Department of Health for such
purpose. Such form shall be duly verified by the applicant. Separate
applications and separate licenses will be required for body piercing
and tattooing. The application shall set forth:
(1) The name, permanent addresses and telephone numbers of the
applicant.
(2) The address and telephone number of the manager of the business,
if different from the applicant.
(3) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, LLP or LLC, provide
the name and address of its registered agent.
(4) The full business name, business address and post office address of
the proposed establishment.
§ 376-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-7
1:793
(5) Copy of the New Jersey sales tax certificate.
(6) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership of firm, the federal
employer identification number (EIN) and the social security
number if the applicant is a proprietorship.
(7) A certification that the applicant is a citizen of the United States or,
if not, is a holder of documentation authorizing the alien to be
employed in the United States of America, such as an alien
registration card issued by the United States Immigration and
Naturalization Services (INS) on Form No. 1-151, 1-551, 1-94 with
an endorsement authorizing employment in the United State of
America.
(8) If the applicant is a partnership, firm or corporation, all information
required by the application shall apply not only to the partnership,
firm or corporation, but also to each officer, director or holder of
10% of the issued stock, if a corporation, and to all members of a
partnership or firm.
(9) Proof of general liability insurance equal to the among of
$1,000,000 of liability coverage for the applicant, operator and/or
owner of the establishment; and proof of malpractice liability
insurance equal to the amount of $1,000,000 for the applicant,
operator and/or owner of the establishment. Such insurance
policies shall name the City as an additional insured. Proof shall
include a certificate of insurance issued to the applicant by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey. The insurance certificate submitted to Union City must
include a thirty-day notice to Union City of cancellation or
nonrenewal of the insurance. There must be a ten-day notice clause
for cancellation or nonrenewal of the insurance due to nonpayment
of the insurance premium. Cancellation or nonrenewal of the
insurance during the license term shall be grounds for immediate
suspension or termination of the tattoo/body piercing license.
[Amended 10-1-2013]
(10) Each licensee performing piercing shall have completed a first aid
certification course sponsored by the American Red Cross, or
equivalent agency. Each licensee shall possess a first aid
certification.
(11) The owner, operator, practitioner and apprentice shall provide
proof of at least 12 months' experience.
(a) The owner/operator proof shall include a signed statement
from the previous employer, a business license, business
records, purchasing records and one or more samples of the
applicant's advertising.
(b) The practitioner proof shall include 1,000 hours of experience
for piercing, 2,000 hours of experience for tattoos, three
§ 376-7 UNION CITY CODE § 376-7
1:794
§ 376-8. Body piercing procedures.
certifications original signed statements from previous clients,
10 original photographs of piercing, tattoos and completion of
a blood borne pathogen course.
(c) The apprentice proof shall include an established written
apprentice program and the amount of hours completed in the
apprentice program. An apprentice is required to complete
2,000 hours of direct supervision.
(12) A written agreement from the applicant in a form approved by the
City's Corporation Counsel indemnifying and holding the City
harmless from any and all claims, losses, judgments or sums of
money of whatsoever kind and nature arising in, from or in
connection with the applicant's body art business.
D. Guidelines; approval of local health authority. Written guidelines shall
be established for the care of the site after piercing and shall be
approved by the local health authority. Each client shall receive a
written copy of the guidelines for care of body piercing sites.
E. Proof of immunity of operator. Hepatitis B pre-exposure or proof of
immunity is required for all body piercing operators who use needles.
Any accidental needle stick injury shall be reported to the Health
Department. If a person cannot obtain the vaccination for medical
reasons, (s)he shall submit to the Health Department a letter from his/
her physician certifying that the individual does not have Hepatitis B
and the vaccination contraindicated.
F. Training program for operator. All body piercing operators shall attend
a training program sponsored by the Health Department to assure basic
knowledge or sterile technique and universal precautions.
A. The operation of a body piercing establishment by the operator shall be
carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner so as to minimize the
danger of infection to the person being body pierced, including, but not
limited to:
(1) Scrubbing hands with antiseptic and water.
(2) Gloves being worn during the procedure.
(3) Washing the area to be pierced with water and antiseptic liquid
soap.
B. Requirements for the body piercing procedures shall be established by
the Health Department, and a copy shall be given to each licensee upon
obtaining the annual license.
C. All instruments shall be sterilized and maintained in a sanitary manner.
The sterilization shall include all instruments used for body piercing,
which shall be steam sterilized before use on any customer. Needles
§ 376-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 376-8
1:795
§ 376-9. Inspection.
All records and facilities of any establishment in which tattooing or body
piercing is performed, whether for compensation or not, shall be open for
inspection by the City Health Officer, or such person designated by the
Department of Health, with or without notice.
§ 376-10. Implied endorsement prohibited.
No person or operator of any establishment or other place where tattooing
or body piercing is performed shall state, represent, warrant, advertise
or imply to a customer, potential customers or to the public at large that
the establishment is endorsed, regulated or approved by the City, or any
department thereof, or is conducted in compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
Chapter 381
TAXATION
shall be single use only. Other methods of sterilization shall be
approved by the local Health Department. The proper procedures for
sterilization and minimum guidelines for body piercing shall be set
forth in the rules established by the Health Department.
D. The disposal of waste from this procedure shall be in accordance with
the statutes, rules and regulations established for the disposal of
medical wastes.
§ 376-8 UNION CITY CODE § 376-10
1:796
ARTICLE I
Five-Year Incentive for Residential Improvements
[Adopted 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 13-2003; amended in its entirety
2-21-2012]
§ 381-1. Findings.
The Board of Commissioners finds and declares that the entire City is an
area in need of rehabilitation. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.139 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:45-1.2, the Board of Commissioners finds that there is
evidence of substantial Housing or Health Code violations in at least 25% of
the dwelling units in the City, as provided for by N.J.A.C. 5:45-1.2(a)2; and
in accordance with the City's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan dated
March 2009, over 90% of the housing units in Union City were built prior to
1970, which exceeds the requirement that at least 25% of the dwelling units
in the City be at least 40 years old, as provided for by N.J.A.C. 5:45-1.2(a)3.
Specifically, according to the 2000 Federal Decennial Census, 69.4% of the
dwelling units were constructed prior to 1960. Thus, the entire City of
Union City is an area in need of rehabilitation, as provided for by N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.141.75
§ 381-2. Applicability of statute; definitions; application form.
§ 381-3. Payments in lieu of taxes.
Qualified residential properties within the City of Union City shall be
entitled to a property tax incentive for a period of five years. Pursuant to
A. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.139 to 54:4-3.149 are hereby adopted
in the City of Union City, and the Board of Commissioners declares that
the entire City shall be deemed an area in need of rehabilitation as
provided for by N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.141 and N.J.A.C. 5:45-1.2.
B. "Qualified residential property" as defined by N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.140 shall
mean any building used or to be used or held for use as a home
residence, including accessory buildings located on the same premises
and including condominiums, cooperatives and horizontal property
regimes.
C. The other definitions provided for by N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.140 shall be
applicable to this article.
D. Any applicant for an abatement under this article shall complete and
submit to the Tax Assessor an application on the Assessor's form or a
form prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation.
75.Editor's Note: Section Two of this ordinance, which immediately followed this section,
provided as follows: "Ordinance 13-2003, as hereby readopted, shall be amended to
provide that the Board of Commissioners of the City of Union City recognizes that the
findings enunciated in the Preamble of Ordinance 13-2003 are findings of the State
Legislature, to which the Board of Commissioners concurs, finds, and adopts same as valid
policy reasons for enacting the tax incentive program."
§ 381-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-3
1:797
N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.145c, for qualified residential properties within the City of
Union City, upon application to and approval by the Tax Assessor, the City
payments in lieu of taxes shall be due annually and computed according to
the following schedule:
§ 381-4. Financial agreement.
Each approved application provided for by this section shall be evidenced
by a financial agreement between the City of Union City and the applicant.
The agreement shall be prepared by the applicant and shall contain all
the requirements of this article. The agreement shall also provide for the
applicant to annually pay to the City the amount in lieu of as provided for by
this article and any additional charges that are due pursuant to § 381-5A(3)
as applicable.
§ 381-5. Eligible residential property.
A. Beginning of first year: no payment.
B. Beginning of second year: an amount not less than 20% of taxes due.
C. Beginning of third year: an amount not less than 40% of taxes due.
D. Beginning of fourth year: an amount not less than 60% of taxes due.
E. Beginning of fifth year: an amount not less than 80% of taxes due.
F. Beginning of sixth year: an amount not less than 100% of taxes due.
A. An owner of a newly constructed condominium or cooperative unit,
owners of substantially improved residential structures and owners of a
substantial conversion or alteration of a residential structure located in
the City of Union City consisting of one-, two-, three- and four-dwelling
units are entitled to avail themselves of the opportunity to gain a fiveyear
tax incentive as provided for in this article when they meet the
following qualifications:
(1) To be eligible for a tax abatement, a dwelling house, condominium
unit or unit in a horizontal property regime shall be occupied by the
owner thereof, and that a cooperative shall be occupied by the
residential shareholders therein, or in a case in which the aforesaid
condition is not satisfied, the annual payment in lieu of taxes on the
unit or dwelling house shall be increased by 1% above the amount
otherwise chargeable under § 381-3 and that in the case of a
cooperative, the annual payment in lieu of taxes shall be the
amount chargeable under § 381-3, plus an amount determined by
multiplying 1% of the amount chargeable under § 381-3 times the
percentage of units not occupied by residential shareholders.
(2) Substantial improvements or substantial conversions or alterations
to residential property must have a minimum cost of $15,000 for
residential property consisting of one and two dwelling units and a
§ 381-3 UNION CITY CODE § 381-5
1:798
§ 381-6. Application procedures.
minimum cost of $25,000 for residential property consisting of
three and four dwelling units.
(3) Submission of an architect's certification which sets forth the cost
of construction, certified to the governing body and the Tax
Assessor, or a certified construction cost audit by an independent
certified public accountant.
(4) Approval by the Tax Assessor which shall be granted, provided that
all the requirements of this article are satisfied.
(5) The entry into a formal written agreement with the City.
(6) Submission by the applicant of a certificate of occupancy.
(7) For residential dwellings, submission by the applicant of two proofs
of owner-occupancy. One such proof shall be a tax bill and/or deed.
Other acceptable proofs may be a driver's license, utility bills, and/
or car registration. Proofs submitted must be current and valid at
the time of submission. Applicant must also submit a notarized
affidavit stating that he/she presently resides in the property to
receive an exemption and/or abatement. Proofs must be
resubmitted annually no later than July 31 of each year to the Tax
Assessor.
(8) All provisions of this article are satisfied, as well as all other
statutory and regulatory requirements.
B. The Chief Financial Officer, in conjunction with the Tax Assessor, shall
develop application procedures for tax abatement applications within
60 days of the effective date of this article for approval by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners.
A. The following conditions shall apply to all applications under this
article:
(1) The application shall be filed with the Tax Assessor within 30 days
following the completion of the new construction, improvement or
conversion alteration; and
(2) Every application for tax abatement shall contain such information
as the governing body deems appropriate together with all
information required by this article and such other pertinent
information as the City may require.
B. The Tax Assessor shall approve any application which complies with the
provisions of this article and any other statutory or regulatory
requirements. Any approved applicant shall be notified by the Tax
Assessor.
§ 381-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-7
1:799
§ 381-7. Authorization for tax incentive.
All such abatements or projects shall be approved by the Tax Assessor and
memorialized by an agreement for tax incentive for a particular property
for a period of five years except as provided herein, upon which such
property is erected and which is necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof.
The incentive provided by this article shall take effect upon issuance of a
certificate of occupancy to the owner, and it shall be recorded and made a
permanent part of the official tax record of the taxing district, which record
shall contain a notice of the termination date of the abatement.
§ 381-8. Financial agreement.
Each approved abatement shall be evidenced by a financial agreement
between the City of Union City and the applicant. The agreement shall be
in a form prepared by the applicant and shall contain the representations
that are required by this article and N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.139 et seq., together
with such other information required by the City, including but not limited
to any amount of payment due to the City pursuant to § 381-3 of this
article. The agreement shall be approved by the Tax Assessor as to terms
and conditions, and the agreement shall be approved by the Corporation
Counsel as to form and shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 381-9. Liability for real property taxes.
In addition to the payments required as provided by this article, the owner
of the parcel of the qualified property granted abatement pursuant to this
article shall be liable for all real property taxes assessed and levied against
the land on which the qualified residential property is situated.
§ 381-10. Annual inspections for compliance.
Any property which is granted a tax exemption abatement pursuant to
this article shall be subject to an inspection by the City of Union City on
an annual basis to ensure that such properties are in compliance with all
ordinances, regulations, and safety codes of the City. Any property which
is determined to be in violation of any ordinance, regulation, and/or safety
code of the City shall be subject to rescission of this incentive by the Tax
Assessor.
§ 381-11. Conformance with statutory and regulatory requirements.
All projects subject to tax agreements as provided herein shall be subject
to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on pollution
control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing provision,
zoning, planning and Building Code requirements.
§ 381-7 UNION CITY CODE § 381-12
1:800
§ 381-12. Tax delinquencies.
No abatement shall be granted pursuant to this article with respect to any
property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or for
which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 381-13. Sale of residential property during period of tax
abatement.
In accordance with § 381-5A(1), to be eligible for a tax abatement, a
dwelling house, condominium unit or unit in a horizontal property scheme
shall be occupied by the owner thereof, and that a cooperative shall be
occupied by the owner thereof. If during any tax year prior to the
termination of the tax abatement agreement the owner fails to meet the
conditions for qualifying, except for a sale to a new owner who will occupy
the unit, then the tax which would have otherwise been payable for each
tax year shall be computed pursuant to § 381-5A(1). The Tax Assessor shall
notify the Tax Collector forthwith who shall, within 15 days thereof, notify
the owner of the property of the amount of taxes due.
§ 381-14. Payment in quarterly installment and termination.
The payment due according to this article shall be made in quarterly
installments according to the same schedule as real property taxes due and
payable. Failure to make these payments shall result in the termination of
the abatement. In addition to the remedy set forth herein, the payments
authorized by this article shall be enforced in the same manner as is
provided for in real property taxes.
§ 381-15. Administration of agreements.
The Tax Collector, in conjunction with the Tax Assessor, shall be responsible
to administer the terms of the agreement throughout the period of
abatement.
§ 381-16. Prohibition against added assessment.
The added assessment of Section 3 of P.L. 1941, c. 397 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-63.3)
and the omitted assessment provisions of Section 9 of P.L. 1947, c. 413
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-63.20) and Section 1 of the P.L. 1968, c. 184 (N.J.S.A.
54:4-63.33) shall not be applicable to any property for which the owneroccupant
has been granted a tax incentive under this Act.76
§ 381-17. Tax appeal.
No appeal shall be taken by the property owner from the valuation of
the Tax Assessor or determination by the Tax Collector of equalized taxes
otherwise due, except for mathematical or typographical errors.
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.139 et seq.
§ 381-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-18
1:801
§ 381-18. Expiration. [Amended 5-21-2013; 9-17-2013]
Upon completion of the passage and publication required by law, this article
shall deemed to be in effect, shall be retroactive to January 1, 2013, and
shall expire one year thereafter on December 31, 2013. All tax abatements
that were approved prior to the effective date of this article shall continue
until they are terminated in accordance with the terms of the tax abatement
approved by the City tax assessor.
§ 381-18 UNION CITY CODE § 381-18
1:802
Chapter 386
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 16.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Noise — See Ch. 261.
§ 386-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
COMPANY STAND — A public place alongside the curb of a street or
elsewhere in the City, which place the Director of the Department of Public
Safety has authorized holders of taxicab licenses to use exclusively for the
dispatching of company taxicabs.
CRUISING — The driving of a taxicab on the streets or public places of the
City in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.
DRIVER'S LICENSE — The permission granted by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets
of the City.
HEARING — A public hearing at which the licensee shall be given an
opportunity to appear personally and be represented by his/her chosen
counsel and be heard and to present evidence in his/her behalf of otherwise
answer the charges against him/her.
HOLDER — A person to whom a taxicab license has been issued.
LICENSE INSPECTOR — The Inspector of Licenses in the Department of
Revenue and Finance.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation or other legal entity, partnership or
incorporated association, but does not include a child of less than six years
of age.
RATE CARD — A card issued by the License Inspector for display in each
taxicab.
TAXICAB — A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business or carrying
passengers for hire, which is so constructed so as to comfortably seat not
less than four passengers exclusive of the driver, and not operated on a fixed
route.
TRANSFER — To sell, transfer or in any other manner dispose of a taxicab
license. Where the license is in the name of a corporation or other legal
entity, any change in control of the holder shall constitute a transfer of the
taxicab license held in the name of the corporation or other legal entity.
§ 381-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-1
1:803
The Director of Public Safety shall determine what constitutes change in
control.
WAITING TIME — The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of
acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does
not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion, if due to any cause
other than the request, action or fault of a passenger or passengers.
§ 386-2. Insurance requirements. [Amended 10-1-2013; 11-6-2013;
9-1-2015]
In order to ensure the safety of the public, it shall be unlawful for the
holder to operate, cause or permit a taxicab to be operated, nor shall any
license be issued hereunder, until and unless the holder or applicant shall
have secured an insurance policy from a company duly licensed to transact
business under the laws of this state conditioned for the payment of a sum
of not less than $100,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of
bodily injury to or the death of any one person resulting from an accident,
and a sum of not less than $100,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by
reason of bodily injuries to or the death of all persons on account of any
such accident by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of
such taxicab upon any public street, and a sum of not less than $50,000 to
satisfy all claims for damages to property by reason thereof. This insurance
must contain a thirty-day notice of cancellation of the policy to Union City,
who must be an additional insured on the policy. The owner shall furnish
the license inspector with evidence, satisfactory to Union City, that the
requirements of this provision have been met.
§ 386-3. Taxicab owner's license required; expiration date; fee.
§ 386-4. Application.
A. No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him/
her to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the City
without having first obtained a taxicab license from the License
Inspector.
B. No license shall be issued or renewed unless the holder thereof has
paid an annual license fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, for each
taxicab license for the right to engage in the taxicab business. The
license shall be for the year ending on December 31 and shall be in
addition to any other fees or charges established by proper authorities
and applicable to the holder for the vehicle or vehicles under his/her
operation and control.
A. Applications for a license shall be filed with the License Inspector upon
forms provided by the City. The application shall be verified under oath
and shall furnish the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant; where the applicant is not a natural
person, the name and address of all owners or participants in the
§ 386-1 UNION CITY CODE § 386-4
1:804
§ 386-5. Issuance of license; maximum number.
§ 386-6. Transfers.
No taxicab license may be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred without
the consent of the Director. Any license may be transferred to another, to
be used in the bona fide operation of a taxicab business, with the consent
of the Director upon the filing of an application as provided in § 386-4 of
this chapter and upon payment of a transfer fee as set forth in Chapter 155,
Fees, provided that no transfer may be made in the month of December.
No taxicab license shall be assigned, mortgaged, pledged or otherwise
transferred to secure a debt, loan, advance or other financing transaction.
§ 386-7. Suspension and revocation of license. [Amended
10-21-2003]
ownership of the legal entity and all officers, Directors or others of
like position by whatever their title.
(2) The year, type and model of vehicle for which the license is desired;
the number of persons the vehicle is capable of carrying.
(3) Such further information as the License Inspector of the City may
require.
B. The annual application for renewal of taxicab licenses shall be filed not
later than 30 days prior to the expiration date.
A. If the Director of the Department of Public Safety finds that the
applicant is fit, willing and able to provide public transportation in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules
promulgated by the Director, (s)he shall order the issuance of a license
stating the name and address of the applicant, the date of issuance and
the year, type and model of the vehicle; otherwise, the application shall
be denied.
B. In making the above findings, the Director shall take into consideration
the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant.
C. The number of taxicab licenses issued and in use at any one time shall
not exceed 125. Each current licensed taxicab company can maintain
the current number of licensed taxicabs. New taxicab companies shall
be able to apply for no more than 10 taxicab licenses each year.
[Amended 10-16-2007; 5-21-2013]
A. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Board of Commissioners for violation of any ordinance of
the City or of the laws of the United States or of the State of New Jersey
which demonstrates that the license holder is not fit to offer public
transportation.
§ 386-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-7
1:805
§ 386-8. Driver's license.
§ 386-9. Application for driver's license.
(1) A second violation of this chapter shall result in a one-year
suspension of the offender's license.
(2) A third violation of this chapter shall result in revocation of the
offender's license.
(3) Any violation of Chapter 261, Noise, shall result in a one-year
suspension of the offender's license.
(4) An second violation of Chapter 261, Noise, shall result in
revocation of the offender's license; or discontinued operation for
more than 60 consecutive days.
B. Prior to any license revocation or suspension pursuant to this section,
the holder shall be entitled to written notice of the charges and a
hearing before the Board of Commissioner to show cause why the
proposed action should not be taken.
A. No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the City
and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so
driven, and no taxicab licensed by the City shall be so driven at any time
for hire, unless the driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and
shall have then in force the taxicab driver's license under the provisions
of this chapter; and provided, further, that the driver shall be a holder
or servant, employee or agent of such holder.
B. Every person applying for a license to drive a taxicab must furnish
satisfactory evidence that (s)he has received a driver's license under
the New Jersey state motor vehicle law.77
C. Each applicant for a driver's license under the terms of this section,
must conform to the following regulations:
(1) Be 21 years of age or over and be a resident of the State of New
Jersey for one year or more.
(2) Be able to read and write the English language.
D. The fee for a taxicab driver's license shall be as set forth in Chapter
155, Fees, per year, or part thereof.
A. An application for a driver's license shall be filed with the License
Inspector on forms provided by the City. The application shall contain
the following:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant.
77.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:3-3 et seq.
§ 386-7 UNION CITY CODE § 386-9
1:806
§ 386-10. Police investigation of applicant, traffic and police record.
The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for
a driver's license, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic
and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application
for the consideration of the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 386-11. Consideration of application.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety, upon consideration of the
application and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto,
shall approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the
applicant may request a hearing to offer evidence why his/her application
should be reconsidered.
§ 386-12. Issuance of license.
Upon approval of the application for a driver's license by the Director
of the Department of Public Safety, drivers shall be photographed by the
Commissioner's office and a permit issued at the same time upon a payment
as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 386-13. Display of license and rate card.
Every driver licensed under this chapter shall post his/her driver's license,
together with a rate card as hereinafter provided, in such a place as to
be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab.
The display of the license and rate card shall be on the right side of the
dashboard or affixed to the back of the front seat and shall be properly
illuminated so that they are clearly visible at all times. Such card shall state
that no additional amount may be charged because of rain, snow, or other
weather or other conditions, or because of high demand.
(2) Places of residence for the preceding five years.
(3) Age, height, color of eyes and hair.
(4) Place of birth, whether married or single.
(5) Previous employment, whether (s)he has ever been convicted of a
high misdemeanor, misdemeanor, violation of the disorderly
persons act or a violation of this chapter.
(6) Whether a driver's license issued by any state or political
subdivision thereof ever held by him/her has been suspended or
revoked and, if so, for what cause.
(7) Four passport type photographs taken within 30 days of the
application, front view, size two inches by two inches.
B. At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the License
Inspector a sum as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 386-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-14
1:807
§ 386-14. Suspension and revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby given the
authority to suspend any driver's license issued under this chapter upon
justified complaint of any person, including a holder, for a driver failing or
refusing to comply with the provisions of this chapter, provided that such
suspension shall not exceed 20 days. The Director of the Department of
Public Safety is also given the authority to revoke any driver's license for
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, provided that a license
may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice and a copy of the
charges against him/her and has been given a hearing.
§ 386-15. Failure to comply with City, state or federal laws.
§ 386-16. Care, equipment and maintenance of vehicles.
§ 386-17. Designation of taxicabs; deceiving practices.
A. Every driver licensed under this chapter shall comply with all City, state
and federal laws, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the
fitness of such driver to engage in public transportation; failure to do so
will justify the Director of the Department of Public Safety in
suspending or, after hearing, revoking the license.
B. If at any time within the licensed year, a taxicab driver has been found
guilty of a high misdemeanor, misdemeanor or has permitted his/her
taxicab to be used for any illegal or immoral purpose, the Director of
the Department of Public Safety may immediately suspend or, after
hearing, revoke the driver's license.
A. No licensed shall be issued or renewed until the taxicab has been
thoroughly inspected by a designee of the Commissioner of Public
Safety and found to be in a safe and sanitary condition for the
transportation of passengers and of good appearance. [Amended
10-21-2003]
B. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically
inspected, at such intervals as the License Inspector may direct to
ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions.
C. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition in accordance with the rules and regulation
promulgated by the License Inspector.
D. Any vehicle on the streets of the City in violation of this section may be
removed from the streets by the Police Department. If the vehicle is not
returned to service in accordance with the provisions of this section
within 90 days, the Inspector of the Department of Public Safety may
suspend or, after hearing, revoke the taxicab license.
A. Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear or front door painted
letters not less than three inches, nor more than four inches, in height,
§ 386-14 UNION CITY CODE § 386-17
1:808
§ 386-18. Rates of fare.
in contrasting colors, the name of the owner, association of which the
owner is a member or registered trade name by which the owner
conducts his/her business, and in addition, may bear an identifying
design approved by the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
The assigned number of each taxicab shall appear on each taxicab and
in the rear in numerals not less than two inches in height and in clear
view. No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed
whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be
used thereon shall, in the opinion of the License Inspector, conflict with
or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia
used on a vehicle, or vehicle already operated under this chapter, in
such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the
public; and provided, further, that if, after a license has been issued for
a taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram
or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, in the opinion of the Director
of the Department of Public Safety, in conflict with or which imitates
any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any
other person, owner or operator in such a manner as to be misleading
or tend to deceive the public, the license covering such taxicab may be
suspended or, after hearing, revoked.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
operate any vehicle not licensed under this chapter in such a manner as
to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public into believing
the vehicle is a taxicab or is being operated as a taxicab.
A. It shall be unlawful for an owner or driver of a taxicab to charge or
cause to be charged, except as hereinafter provided, a greater or lesser
sum for the use of a taxicab than in accordance with the following rates:
(1) Zones. [Amended 2-17-2015]
(a) The City shall be divided into 3 zones as follows:
[1] Zone 1: Paterson Plank Road to 16th Street.
[2] Zone 2: 17th Street to 32nd Street.
[3] Zone 3: 33rd Street to 49th Street.
(b) The base fares to be charged for travel in these zones shall be
as follows:
[1] For all travel within one zone the base fare shall be $3, and
for travel through two zones, the base fare shall be $6, and
the total base fare shall be $9 if there is travel through all
three zones. The additional charges set forth in Subsection
A(2) through (6) of this section shall be added to the base
fares, when applicable. For example:
§ 386-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-18
1:809
§ 386-19. Rental of taxicab to driver for stipulated sum over definite
period of time.
It shall be lawful for the owner of any taxicab to hire out or rent such taxicab
to a taxicab driver for use within the City for a stipulated sum over a definite
period of time, provided that such hiring out or rental is made with a valid
lease agreement in writing.
§ 386-20. Receipts.
The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to
such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be the
[a] The base fare for traveling only within one zone would
be $3.
[b] The base fare for traveling from Zone 1 to Zone 2 (or
Zone 2 to Zone 1) or from Zone 2 to Zone 3 (or Zone 3
to Zone 2) shall be $6.
[c] The base fare for traveling from Zone 1 to Zone 3 (or
Zone 3 to Zone 1) will be $9.
(c) Rate card. Each taxicab shall post in the interior of the taxicab,
on a card at least five by eight inches and visible to passengers
in the back of the cab, a rate card. The card shall set forth the
designation of the street boundaries for each zone and the base
fares for travel in these zones as established by this subsection.
The rate card shall state as follows:
Zone 1: Paterson Plank Road to 16th Street
Zone 2: 17th Street to 32nd Street
Zone 3: 33rd Street to 59th Street
Base fare for travel within one zone is $3.
Base fare for travel within two zones is $6.
Base fare for travel within three zones is $9.
(2) For each additional drop off or stop of five minutes requested by
customer in addition to charge to final destination: $0.50.
(3) For each minute of waiting time: $0.15.
(4) For all trunks, footlockers, or their equivalent: $1.
(5) For all hand luggage in excess of two pieces: $0.40.
(6) For all supermarket calls where driver has to handle packages:
$0.40.
B. The above rates cover one to five passengers to a single destination.
§ 386-18 UNION CITY CODE § 386-20
1:810
name of the owner and driver, the taxicab license number, the amount of the
charge and the date and time of the transaction.
§ 386-21. Fare disputes.
All disputes as to the local rate of fare, upon request of the driver or a
passenger, shall be determined by the police officer in charge of the nearest
police station. Failure to comply with such determination shall subject the
offender to a charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 386-22. Side curtains.
Side curtains or shades shall not be permitted on any taxicab licensed in the
City.
§ 386-23. Use front seat restricted.
No person, other than the licensed driver of the taxicab, shall ride or sit
in the front seat of the taxicab unless the rear is fully occupied by the
passengers except when, for physical or health reasons, a passenger must
sit in the front seat.
§ 386-24. Use of taxicabs for illegal or immoral purposes.
No holder or driver shall knowingly permit his/her taxicab to be used for any
illegal or immoral purposes, under penalty of suspension or, after hearing,
revocation of holder's or driver's license, or both, and such other penalty as
may be provided.
§ 386-25. Solicitation of passengers by driver.
A. Soliciting patronage by driver. No driver shall solicit passengers for a
taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab
or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof at any
legal taxicab stand.
B. Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud tone
of voice, in any manner to annoy any person or obstruct the movement
of any person or by following any person.
C. Picking up and discharging of passengers on sidewalk. Drivers of
taxicabs shall not pick up or discharge passengers in the roadway, but
shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the
absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and
there pick up or discharge passengers. Upon one-way streets,
passengers may be discharged at either the right-hand or left-hand
sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.
D. Cruising. No driver shall cruise in search of passengers, except in such
areas and at such times as may be designated by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety. Such areas and times shall only be
§ 386-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-25
1:811
§ 386-26. Company stands.
designated when the Director finds that taxicab cruising would not
congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other vehicles.
E. Additional passengers.
(1) No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride a taxicab
unless the person or persons first employing a taxicab shall consent
to the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers;
provided, however, that an additional passenger or passengers
shall not be accepted if they are of a different sex than the
passenger first employing the taxicab.
(2) No charge shall be made for an additional passenger, except when
the additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's
destination and then for only the additional distance so traveled.
Upon reaching the original passenger's destination, the driver shall
collect the fare, and the passenger shall be charged as if the
additional distance traveled was a new trip.
F. Restrictions on the number of passengers. No driver shall permit more
than five persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers. A child under
six years of age shall not be counted as a passenger.
G. Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. No driver shall refuse
or neglect to carry any person or persons, upon their request, unless
previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this
chapter to do so.
H. Soliciting business for other establishments prohibited. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for
any hotels, motels, rooming houses, bars, taverns, restaurants, theaters
and the like, or to attempt to divert patronage from one such place to
another. Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating liquor
or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use the taxicab for any
purposes other than the transporting of passengers.
A. The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby empowered
to continue to authorize the company stands that were authorized as of
March 10, 1960. The company stand shall be used solely by the
company to whom the same is granted and its agents and servants. No
other company or holder of a taxicab license shall be permitted to use
the same No additional company stands shall be authorized.
B. Company stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first-comefirst-
served basis. The drivers shall pull to the company stand from the
rear and shall advance forward as the taxicabs pull off. The drivers shall
stay within five feet of their taxicabs and shall not engage in loud or
boisterous talk while at a company stand. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the taxicab of
his/her choice that is parked at a company stand.
§ 386-25 UNION CITY CODE § 386-26
1:812
§ 386-27. Taxicab service expectations.
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the City operating under
the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall service to the public
desiring to use taxicabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for
services inside the corporate limits of the City as soon as they can do so,
and if the services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall
then notify the prospective passenger how long it will be before the call can
be answered and give the reason therefor. Any licensee who shall refuse to
accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the City at any time when
such licensee has available taxicab(s), or who shall fail or refuse to give
overall service, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and the license
granted to such licensee, after a hearing, may be suspended or revoked,
and/or the licensee may be fined.
§ 386-28. Records to be kept by owners and drivers.
§ 386-29. Advertising on vehicles.
Subject to the rules and regulations of the Director of the Department of
Public Safety, it shall be lawful for any person owning or operating a taxicab
to permit advertising matter to be affixed or installed on the outside of such
taxicab, provided that such advertising matter shall not be of a political
nature and provided further that such advertising matter shall not be of
a lewd, lascivious or obscene nature, nor shall its location in the taxicab
interfere with the comfort of the passengers or the operation of the vehicle.
C. The parking of any vehicle, other than licensed taxicabs, shall be
prohibited at taxicab stands legally authorized by the Board of
Commissioners of the City, and such stands shall be considered tow
away zones for any vehicles illegally parked at the stands.
A. Every licensee shall require their drivers to keep a daily record,
identified by the taxicab number of the taxicab used that day and the
license number of the driver, of the time and place when and where
each passenger was accepted as well as the time and place of the
discharge of such passenger, together with the fare received for the
trip, which record the holder shall keep intact for 180 days from the
date thereof, and shall be kept open at all times for inspection by a duly
authorized representative of the Police Department or Division of
Licenses.
B. Every holder shall record in a book kept solely for such purpose the
time of departure from the garage or taxicab stand of every licensed
vehicle, giving the name and address of the driver thereof, his/her
license number and the license number of the vehicle and the time of
the return to be garage or taxicab stand of each such vehicle, which
book shall be kept open for inspection at all times to a duly authorized
representative of the Police Department or Division of Licenses.
§ 386-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-30
1:813
§ 386-30. Register to be kept by License Inspector.
The License Inspector shall keep a register of the name of each holder
licensed under this chapter, together with the license number and the
make and description of each vehicle licensed, with the date and record of
inspections made of it.
§ 386-31. Standing at curb in certain places prohibited.
Subject to the rules and regulations of the Director of the Department of
Public Safety, it shall be unlawful for any taxicab to stand in any restricted
area, in any area which is controlled by parking meters or at the curb within
15 feet of the entrance to any theater, hotel, restaurant or other public
place.
§ 386-32. Conduct of owners and drivers.
§ 386-33. Lost articles.
Every driver of a taxicab immediately after the termination of any hiring or
employment must carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or left
therein and any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the
owners, must be reported, in writing, by the driver or holder to the Division
of Licenses, with brief particulars and description of the property, within 24
hours after the finding thereof.
A. Parking and operation of taxicab. No taxicab, while waiting for
employment by passengers, shall be permitted to stand on any public
street or space other than at or upon a taxicab stand designated of
established in accordance with this chapter, nor shall any driver of such
taxicab seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his/her
taxicab to and fro in a short space before, or by otherwise interfering
with the proper and orderly access to or egress from, any theater, hall,
hotel public resort or other place of gathering.
B. Responsibility for operation of taxicab. Every licensee shall be
responsible for the operation of the vehicle for which the license has
been granted regardless of the legal relationship between such licensee
and the driver of vehicle.
C. Drivers to behave in polite manner. The driver, while engaged in the
operation of a taxicab, shall behave in a polite manner and shall not use
any indecent, profane or insulting language while engaged in such
operation.
D. Permitting unlicensed drivers to operate. It shall be unlawful for any
person owning or operating any taxicab in the City, licensed under the
provisions of this chapter, to permit such taxicab to be operated by any
person who does not hold a valid taxicab driver's license as required by
this chapter.
§ 386-30 UNION CITY CODE § 386-34
1:814
§ 386-34. Enforcement by Police Department.
The Police Department is hereby given the authority and is instructed to
watch and observe the condition of holders and drivers operating under this
chapter. Upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
Police Department shall report the same to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety who shall order or take appropriate action.
§ 386-35. Hearings.
All hearings under the chapter shall be conducted by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
§ 386-36. Promulgation, printing and distribution of rules and
regulations.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations to implement this chapter and to carry
out its intendments, which shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City.
The Director shall cause the rules and regulations as promulgated, together
with this chapter, and any amendments or additions thereto, to be printed
and distributed to the holders of taxicab licenses and taxicab drivers'
licenses and to all those, who in the future, shall obtain such license or
licenses.
§ 386-37. Limousines and livery service. [Amended 10-1-2013;
12-3-2013]
A. A limousine company/entity that has a principal place of business in
Union City shall obtain a license to operate that business.
B. The entity must complete the license application and submit the
following:
(1) A license fee of $50;
(2) A license fee of $10 per limousine;
(3) An insurance coverage certificate for $1,500,000 for loss due to
bodily injury, naming Union City as an additional insured;
(4) An application to be filed with the license inspector for a corporate
limousine license and payment of a fee of $50;
(5) Proof of ownership or lease of the licensed premises; and
(6) Proof that the premises can be used for a limousine business. A
certificate of occupancy or continuing certificate of occupancy or
zoning certificate shall be submitted.
(7) Administrative fee of $175, per limousine to be licensed. [Added
5-19-2015]
§ 386-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-37
1:815
§ 386-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-21-2003]
§ 386-39. Rules and regulations applicable to drivers and owners.
[Added 10-21-2003]
The following rules shall apply to all drivers and owners of taxicabs. Such
rules, numbered sequentially below, shall be referred to by Chapter, Section
and Rule number. They are set forth below as follows and violation of the
Rules shall subject the violator to the penalties of §§ 386-7 and 386-38:
No. Rule
101. A driver shall be clean and neat in dress and person. A driver must
wear hemmed or tailored trousers that are no higher than midthigh
and have no holes. A female driver must wear hemmed or tailored
trousers or skirt that is no higher than midthigh and that has no
holes. A driver must wear a shirt or blouse, without holes, which,
if it has buttons, must be buttoned except for the top two buttons.
The penalty for violating this section shall be a fine of $25.
102. A driver shall not smoke while carrying a passenger unless the
passenger verbally consents.
104. A driver shall not operate a taxicab for more than 12 consecutive
hours.
105. A driver shall, at all times, cooperate with all law enforcement
officers, authorized representatives of the Director and dispatchers
at public transportation terminals and authorized group-ride taxi
lines, and shall comply with all their reasonable requests,
including, but not limited to, providing his name and taxicab
operator's license number and exhibiting the rate card, trip record
and other documents required to be in his possession.
C. The annual application for renewal of the limousine license shall be
filed no later than 30 days prior to the expiration date.
D. Sections 386-7, 386-14, 386-15, 386-16, 386-24, 386-25, 386-27, and
386-32 through 386-39 of this chapter shall apply to limousine licenses.
A. In addition to suspension or revocation of a license as provided for by
§ 386-7 of this chapter, any person who shall violate or fail to comply
with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction by the
Municipal Court, be subject to a penalty of not less than $350 nor
greater than $1,250, to be determined by the Municipal Court, unless a
specific penalty is otherwise provided by this chapter.
B. In addition to its authority to revoke or suspend a license, the
Department of Public Safety is authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter by the filing of a complaint in the Municipal Court. This
chapter may also be enforced by any police officer of the City of Union
City.
§ 386-37 UNION CITY CODE § 386-39
1:816
No. Rule
106. a. A driver, who knows or should know that personal injury has
been caused to another person or that damage has been caused
to the property of another person due to an accident involving
the driver's taxicab shall, before leaving the place where the
damage or injury occurred, stop, exhibit to such other person
his taxicab operator's license, motor vehicle driver's license and
rate card, and give to such other person his name, residence
address, chauffeur's license number, taxicab driver's number,
and taxicab medallion number, as well as the name of the
taxicab's insurance carrier and the insurance policy number. A
driver, while operating a taxicab, shall, immediately report to
the owner of the vehicle any motor vehicle accident in which he
is involved.
107. A radio shall be turned on or off at the request of the passenger. The
passenger shall have the right to select the radio program. Whether
or not a taxicab is hired, a radio shall be played at normal volume
only and comply with all noise ordinances.
108. An air-conditioning and heating device in a taxicab shall be turned
on or off at the request of a passenger.
109. A driver, while performing his duties and responsibilities as a
driver, shall not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in concert
with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or larceny, or
perform any willful act of omission or commission which is against
the best interests of the public, even though not specifically
mentioned in these rules.
110. A driver shall not apply for or accept more than one taxicab
operator's license without the Director's written permission.
111. A driver shall not permit any other person to use the driver's
taxicab operator's license while such person is operating any
vehicle.
112. a. A driver shall not permit the taxicab to be operated for hire by
another person who is not currently licensed by the Director as
a taxicab driver.
b. During the work shift, a driver shall not allow another person
to operate the taxicab or occupy the driver's seat, except in the
event of an emergency.
113. a. A driver shall not use or permit any person to use his taxicab
for any unlawful purpose.
b. A driver shall not conceal any evidence of a crime nor
voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest.
c. A driver shall report immediately to the police any attempt to
use his taxicab to commit a crime or to escape from the scene
of a crime.
§ 386-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-39
1:817
No. Rule
114. A driver or any person acting on his behalf shall not offer or give
any gift, gratuity nor thing of value to any employee, representative
or member of the office of the Director, or any public servant or any
dispatcher employed at a public transportation facility.
115. A driver shall immediately report to the Director and the Union City
Police Department any request or demand for a gift, gratuity, free
service or any thing of value by any employee or representative of
the Director, by any employee or representative of the Director, any
member of the Board of Commissioners of Union City, any police,
dispatcher or any public servant.
116. A driver shall notify the Director in writing of the driver's conviction
of a crime or motor vehicle offense, excluding parking violations for
vehicles other than a taxicab, within 15 days of such conviction, and
he/she shall deliver to the Director a certified copy of the certificate
of disposition issued by the Administrator of the Court within 15
days of sentencing.
117. A driver shall not permit more than four passengers to ride in his
taxicab.
118. A handicapped passenger, unable to enter or ride in the rear
passenger part of the taxicab, must be permitted to occupy the
front seat alongside the driver. If a passenger's luggage occupies
the rear passengers part of the taxicab, a passenger must be
permitted to occupy the front seat alongside the driver.
119. A driver shall comply with all the reasonable request of a
passenger, including but not limited to, providing, upon request,
his name, his taxicab operator's license number and the medallion
number.
120. A driver shall not threaten, harass or abuse any passenger,
governmental officer, representative of the Director, public servant
or any other person while performing his duties as a driver.
121. A driver shall not use or attempt to use any physical force against
any passenger, governmental officer, representative of the Director,
public servant or any other person while performing his duties as a
driver.
122. A driver shall solicit passengers only while sitting in the driver's
seat of his taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the
curb side of his taxicab, and only with the words "Taxi" or "Cab" or
"Taxicab." This rule shall not be construed to allow any solicitation
or conduct otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
123. A driver may not use another person, other than a dispatcher at an
authorized group ride taxi line, to solicit a passenger, nor suggest to
a passenger that an additional person be accepted as a passenger.
124. A driver shall not solicit passengers within 50 feet of any bus stop,
nor stop there unless hailed.
§ 386-39 UNION CITY CODE § 386-39
1:818
No. Rule
125. A driver shall not pick up additional fares while the taxi continues
to be employed.
126. A driver may not, in omnibus fashion, pick up passengers at one or
more locations.
127. A driver shall not seek to ascertain the destination of a passenger
before such passenger is seated in the taxicab.
128. A driver shall not refuse by words, gestures or any other means
to take any orderly and lawful passenger to any destination within
the City of Union City and a twenty-five-mile radius thereof. This
includes a person who is handicapped and any guide dog or other
service animal accompanying such person.
129. A driver shall not induce the hire of his taxicab by giving misleading
information including but not limited to, the times of arrival and
departure of trains, buses, ships, ferries, planes or other scheduled
forms of transportation, the location of a building or place or the
distance between two points.
130. a. A driver shall not refuse to transport a passenger's luggage,
wheelchair, crutches or other property.
b. Upon request of a passenger, the driver shall load or unload
such property in or from the taxicab's interior or trunk
compartment and shall secure such compartment.
131. A driver shall not sell, advertise or recommend any service or
merchandise to any passenger without prior written approval from
the Director.
132. A driver shall comply with any request of a passenger during the
trip to change his destination or terminate the trip, unless it is
impossible or illegal for the driver to comply with such request.
133. A driver shall take a passenger to his destination by the shortest
reasonable route unless the passenger requests a different route,
or unless the driver proposes a faster alternative route to which the
passengers agrees. The driver shall comply with all reasonable and
lawful routing requests of the passenger.
134. A driver shall be required to accept United States currency.
135. A driver shall give the correct change to a passenger who has paid
the fare.
136. A driver shall give a passenger a receipt for payment of the fare
when requested to do so by the passenger; such a receipt shall state
the date, time, medallion number, fare paid, any other charge.
137. A driver shall not ask a passenger for a tip nor indicate that a tip is
expected or required.
§ 386-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-39
1:819
No. Rule
138. If a passenger refuses to pay the metered fare, the driver, with
the passenger's consent may place the meter in the off or "vacant"
position, illuminate the "off-duty" light, enter on the trip record the
words "off duty" and the amount of fare on the taximeter, proceed
directly to the nearest police station, present the facts to the police
and follow their instructions for resolving the dispute.
139. A driver shall promptly answer and comply as directed with all
questions, communications, directives and summonses from the
Director or his representative. A driver shall produce his taxicab
operator's license and DMV license, trip record or other documents
whenever the Director or his representative requires him to do so.
140. A driver shall not knowingly operate a vehicle for hire unless such
vehicle is properly licensed by the Director.
141. A driver shall comply with all restrictions endorsed by the Director
upon his taxicab operator's license.
142. a. A driver shall not operate a taxicab in the City of Union City
while his taxicab operator's license or his motor vehicle
driver's license is revoked, suspended, or expired.
b. A driver shall immediately surrender his taxicab operator's
license to the Director upon the suspension or revocation of
his chauffeur's license.
143. A driver shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard his taxicab
operator's license.
144. A driver shall notify the Director in writing of the loss or theft of his
taxicab operator's license within 72 hours, exclusive of weekends
and holidays.
145. A driver shall not alter, deface, mutilate or obliterate any portion
of his taxicab operator's license or the attached photograph so
as to cause it to present false information, make it unreadable or
unrecognizable.
146. A driver shall immediately surrender for replacement any
unreadable or unrecognizable taxicab operator's license.
147. A driver shall submit four prints of a new photograph to the
Director whenever his physical appearance has substantially
changed. Substantial change shall include, but not be limited to,
the growth or removal of facial hair.
148. A driver shall report any change of mailing address to the Director
either in person or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, within seven days, exclusive of weekends and holidays.
Any notice from the Director shall be deemed sufficient if sent to
the mailing address furnished by the driver.
149. A driver, while operating a taxicab, shall not carry a weapon.
§ 386-39 UNION CITY CODE § 386-39
1:820
No. Rule
150. a. A driver shall keep a trip record in the taxicab, make all
entries legibly in ink, and include the following information:
1. The taxicab's medallion number.
2. His name and taxicab operator's license number.
3. The license plate number.
4. The taximeter's readings at the start and finish of his work
shift.
5. At the start of each trip: the destination, the starting time.
6. On completion of the trip: the date, time, specific location,
the amount of fare and all other entries required by these
rules.
b. A driver shall not make erasures or obliterations or white-out
on a trip record. The driver shall correct any wrong entry only
by drawing a single line through the incorrect entry. A driver
shall not leave blank lines between entries.
c. A driver shall not rewrite a trip record either in whole or in
part, unless authorized by the Director.
151. A driver shall not operate a taxicab unless all of the following are
present in the taxicab:
a. The trip record also known as a "trip sheet."
b. His taxicab operator's license in an appropriate frame on the
right side of the dashboard.
c. The rate card assigned to the taxicab.
d. Receipts for passengers.
e. All notices required to be posted in the taxicab.
152. A driver shall not obstruct a passenger's view of any of the items
required to be posted in a taxicab by these rules.
153. A driver shall not operate a taxicab having any equipment, devices
or signs not specifically specified in these rules unless authorized
in writing by the Director.
154. A driver shall not operate a taxicab without continual personal
inspections and the reasonable determination that all equipment,
including brakes, tires, lights and signals, are in good working
order.
155. A driver shall not operate a taxicab unless both he and the owner or
his agent if the driver's vehicle is not owned by the driver shall, at
the beginning of each work shift, sign and certify on the trip record
that the taxicab and its equipment are in good working order and
the items required in the taxicab are present. One entry for a driver
who owns the vehicle he drives is sufficient for that vehicle.
§ 386-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-39
1:821
No. Rule
156. When a taxicab taken out of service for repair has been repaired
and if the repairs were made by the driver, he shall immediately
make a trip record entry showing the work that was completed, the
shop name and the time the work was finished. The driver shall
carry the work order or receipt with him while on his work shift and
deliver it to the owner at the end of that shift.
157. A driver, during his work shift, shall keep the taxicab's exterior and
interior clean.
158. A driver has the right to take a position on any taxi stand having a
vacancy, and no other taxicab driver may interfere with that right.
159. A driver may not occupy a taxi stand for the purpose of rest or
repairing his taxicab except for minor emergency repairs.
160. A driver shall not overcrowd, back into a front position on a taxi
stand or otherwise cut the line. A driver shall take the rear position
on the line formed at such a stand, unless it is a relief stand that
has a vacancy.
161. A driver may occupy a taxi stand only when he is on duty.
162. The driver of each of the first two taxicabs on a taxi stand, other
than a relief stand, shall remain in the driver's seat ready to accept
passengers. Any other driver on such a stand shall be no more than
15 feet from his taxicab unless he is off duty and the required "offduty"
light or "relief time" sign is visibly displayed.
163. The rules regarding taxi stands also apply to special taxi stands and
feed lines at air, rail, bus and ship terminals.
164. A driver shall immediately report to the Director any taxi license
holder who instructs any driver to violate any section of this
chapter.
165. A driver shall not charge a fare in excess of that provided for by this
chapter.
166. No driver shall permit his car when not in operation, to be parked
on a street within the City of Union City.
§ 386-40. Rules and regulations applicable to owners. [Added
10-21-2003]
The following rules shall apply to all owners of taxicabs. Such rules,
numbered sequentially below, shall be referred to by chapter, section and
rule number. They are set forth below as follows:
§ 386-39 UNION CITY CODE § 386-40
1:822
No. Rule
201. An owner shall not dispatch a taxicab or for-hire vehicle not
currently licensed by the City.
202. An owner who is not currently licensed shall not advertise or hold
himself out as doing business as a "taxi" or "taxicab" or any name
that would tend to confuse the public as to the owner's license
status.
203. An owner shall not cause to be dispatched a taxicab or for-hire
vehicle unless the driver thereof has a current taxi operator's
license.
204. An owner, while performing his duties and responsibilities as a
taxicab or for-hire vehicle owner, shall not commit or attempt to
commit, alone or in concert with another, any fraud,
misrepresentation or larceny, or perform any willful act or omission
which is against the best interests of the public, although not
specifically prohibited in these rules.
205. An owner shall not use or permit any other person to use any of his
taxicab(s) or for-hire vehicles, his garage, or his office of record for
any unlawful purpose.
206. An owner shall not conceal any evidence of crime connected with
his taxicab(s) or for-hire vehicles, garage or office of record.
207. An owner shall report immediately to the police any attempt to use
any of his taxicabs or for-hire vehicles to commit a crime or flee
from the scene of a crime.
208. The owner shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the interior of
the taxicab or for-hire vehicle immediately after the termination of
each work shift.
209. Property found shall be taken without delay to the Police
Department unless it can be returned to its rightful owner sooner
than being brought to the Police Department.
210. An owner shall not dispatch or cause to be dispatched any taxicab
or for-hire vehicle from a public street or other public area if such
dispatch will prevent the flow of pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic
or cause inconvenience or annoyance to the public.
211. No owner of a vehicle shall permit a person to operate that vehicle
as a livery or a limousine who does not possess a valid limousine or
livery operator's license issued by the City of Union City.
212. No owner shall aid, assist, counsel, require, order, mandate,
suggest or in any other way knowingly cause a driver to violate any
rule or rules of this chapter.
213. No owner shall permit his vehicle, when not in operation, to be
placed on any street within the City of Union City.
214. No taxicab may be parked on any street in the City unless waiting
for a passenger.
§ 386-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-40
1:823
Chapter 391
TELEPHONES
§ 386-40 UNION CITY CODE § 386-40
1:824
ARTICLE I
Public Telephones
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3821-22 (§ 8-5 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 391-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a pay
telephone in a public way, hereinafter defined.
PAY TELEPHONE — A self-service or coin-operated telephone.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicle travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways; alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 391-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or operate any pay
telephones in the City without having first obtained a permit from the
Building Department specifying the exact location of such telephone. One
permit may be issued to include any number of telephones and shall be
signed by the applicant.
§ 391-3. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Building
Department, and approved by the Department of Public Safety, upon such
form as shall be provided by them and shall contain the name and address
of the applicant, the proposed specific location of each telephone, and shall
be signed by the applicant.
§ 391-4. Permit conditions.
A. Inspection of location. Permits may be issued for the installation of a
pay telephone after inspection of the location.
B. Removal or relocation of telephone; notice to City. The Building
Department must be informed before any person shall remove or
relocate a telephone.
C. Indemnification of City.
(1) No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the
applicant, and any other persons on whose behalf the application is
made, represents, stipulates, contracts and agrees that they will
§ 391-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-4
1:825
jointly and severally defend, indemnify and hold the City harmless
against liability for any and all claims for damage to property or
injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the
issuance of the permit or the control, maintenance, ownership or
use of such pay telephone.
(2) Before the Department may issue a pay telephone permit to any
person, that person must execute an indemnification agreement
substantially as follows:
The applicant and any other persons on whose behalf the
application is made represents, stipulates, contracts and agrees
that they will jointly and severally defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Union City against liability for any and all
claims for damage to property, or injury to or death of persons,
arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit, or
the control, maintenance, ownership or use of each such pay
telephone.
D. Insurance policy. Before the Department may issue a telephone permit
to any person, that person shall file with the Building Department an
insurance policy from a company duly licensed to transact business
under the laws of the State of New Jersey in the sum of $100,000 for
one person and $1,000,000 for more than one person, insuring against
loss from liability imposed by law upon the distributor for damages on
account of bodily injury or death suffered, and in the sum of $50,000
against loss on account of property damage suffered by any person or
persons as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
control, or maintenance of the telephone permitted, and no license shall
continue effective unless such insurance shall remain in full force
during the entire term of the license. Such insurance policy shall
provide for the payment of any final judgment recovered by any person
on account of the ownership, maintenance and control of such
telephones, or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit
of any person suffering loss damage or injury as aforesaid.
E. Advertising 911 number. No person may advertise a 911 number unless
and until the City provides for such a number in an emergency.
F. Emergency calls.
(1) Any calls for operator assistance by any individual identifying
himself/herself as a member of the City Police or Fire Department
shall immediately have such call put through to the Police of Fire
Department as requested without charge.
(2) Any person calling for operator assistance identifying the call as an
emergency shall immediately have such call put through to the
Police of Fire Department as requested without charge.
G. Posted rates. Current telephone rates must be posted on the telephone
or on the telephone booth.
§ 391-4 UNION CITY CODE § 391-5
1:826
§ 391-5. Fees.
Fees for initial and annual renewal permits shall be as set forth in Chapter
155, Fees, and shall be paid before any permit is issued.
§ 391-6. Standards for maintenance and installation.
Any telephone which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk, roadway or street shall comply with the following standards:
A. No booth surrounding the telephone shall exceed eight feet in height,
four feet in width or four feet in thickness.
B. No telephone shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
telephone services located therein.
C. Each telephone shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure the immediate refund in
the event (s)he is unable to receive the service paid for. The coin
mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each telephone shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by everyone using the telephone, a notice setting forth the
name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a
working telephone service, to report a malfunction or to secure a
refund in the event of malfunction of the coin operated return
mechanism. These signs shall be displayed in both English and Spanish.
E. Each telephone shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, and without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each telephone shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
telephone located therein is viewed, are unbroken and reasonably
free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
(6) The telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
F. Each telephone shall contain a telephone book serving North Hudson
County, secured in such a manner as to prevent it from being scattered
§ 391-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-6
1:827
§ 391-7. Location and placement of telephones.
Any telephone which rests, in whole or in part, on any portion of a public
street, or projects onto, into or over any part of a public street or sidewalk,
shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this section.
about the area, or provide local directory or information assistance
without charge.
A. No telephone shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests wholly,
or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property; or
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
or
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near such location.
C. Telephones shall be placed, or otherwise secured, so as to prevent their
being blown down or around the public street or sidewalk, but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants or mailboxes.
D. No telephones shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within three feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalks.
(3) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
(5) Within three feet of any public area improved with a lawn, flowers
shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(6) At any location whereby the clear space for the passage way of
pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet.
(7) Within three feet of any building, unless written permission is
secured from the property owner and filed with the application.
§ 391-6 UNION CITY CODE § 391-8
1:828
§ 391-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, General Penalty. Each noncomplying pay
telephone violation shall constitute a separate violation. Each day of such
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 391-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-8
1:829

ARTICLE II
Illegal Activity Near Public Telephones
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3895-96 (§ 8-6 of the 1996 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 391-9. Findings of fact.
§ 391-10. Removal of telephone with no permit.
If the Building Department or any other party reports a complaint about
a telephone which does not have a current permit, that telephone shall be
subject to removal by the City in accordance with § 391-16.
§ 391-11. Reporting of income from telephones.
All income derived by landlords for pay telephones located on public
property or public sidewalks shall be reported as income for rent control
income reporting purposes. Failure of a permit holder to report this income
on all income reporting forms for rent control purposes, including, but not
limited to, hardship applications, shall be deemed to be a violation of the
rent control provisions.
A. Privately owned public telephones have recently begun to appear in
mass on public sidewalks.
B. The Mayor and Commissioners have found that criminal activity in the
form of drug transactions is occurring on a regular basis near many of
the public pay telephones and are used to facilitate such transactions.
C. Under New Jersey law, public sidewalks are held in trust by the City for
the primary use of pedestrians.
D. The Mayor and Commissioners of the City have found as a fact that pay
telephones on the sidewalks in many areas of the City have attracted
persons who loiter in the area of the pay telephones for inordinately
long periods of time.
E. Various property owners within the City have suffered or permitted the
installation of public pay telephones and other projections upon their
premises which encroach upon the public streets and sidewalks.
F. Such encroachments may obstruct or interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians and right of the public upon such streets and sidewalks.
G. These encroachments have been installed without the permission of the
Commissioners.
H. The tremendous proliferation of telephones has become an unsightly
condition on the sidewalks of the City.
§ 391-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-12
1:831
§ 391-12. Rejection or revocation of permit.
The City, through its subcode official or his/her designate, may reject any
application for a permit, revoke a permit or require the removal of the
existing outdoor public telephones or restrictions to outgoing calls only if
it has reason to believe that such telephone has the potential to and has
illustrated a propensity to create or contribute to illegal or illicit activities
or otherwise infringes on the use and access to the public sidewalk. The
subcode official can consider, among other items, three complaints of
possible illegal activity about the same address within a month period as
"illicit activity" or more than 12 reported criminal incidents in a year prior
to the date of the application, which incidents have resulted in convictions.
§ 391-13. Outgoing calls restriction.
Each public telephone, upon the written request of the Chief of Police for
reasons of public safety, shall be capable of being restricted or limited to
service allowing outgoing calls only, within 10 days of the request unless
emergency circumstances which threaten the health, safety and welfare of
the public would dictate a more expeditious change.
§ 391-14. Revocation of permit.
Upon receipt of a complaint by a citizen or an authorized representative of
the Police Department to the Building Department that the location and use
of a pay telephone constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the community, the subcode official shall conduct a hearing after providing
written notice of same at least 10 days in advance thereof to all parties
to ascertain whether the location and use of the telephone interferes with
the public safety and whether the location or use of the public telephone
constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
If the subcode official finds by preponderance of the evidence presented
that the location and the use of the public telephone constitutes a threat
to the health, safety and welfare of the community, the subcode official
shall revoke any permit issued for use of such public telephone immediately
thereafter and require the telephone to be removed. In the event that the
Construction Code Official does not find that the location or the use of
the telephone constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
community but does create a nuisance to the public which needs to be
abated, then the Construction Code Official may order such other relief
as (s)he deems fair under the circumstances, including, but not limited to,
requiring the telephone to be restricted to outgoing calls only. A "threat to
health, safety and welfare" shall include, but not be limited to, the activity
referred to in §§ 391-11 and 391-15 establishing the location and placement
of the telephone.
§ 391-15. Applicability to existing pay telephones.
The owners or lessees of nonpermitted existing pay telephones located on
or over public sidewalks will have a period of 60 days after March 16, 1993,
§ 391-12 UNION CITY CODE § 391-15
1:832
to obtain the permits required by this article. The City reserves the right
to reject any and all locations submitted for approval if such location and
installation is not in conformance with this article.
§ 391-16. Location of telephones.
Pay telephones located on public sidewalks shall be located 500 feet apart
from each other. The 500 feet shall be measured by a radius from the
telephone. This location provision shall not apply to properly permitted
telephones which are currently located on City sidewalks. Any telephone for
which the permit expires and is not renewed within 30 days of its expiration
shall be subject to removal and subject to the location requirements of this
section. Telephones which are impounded or removed shall not be replaced
except in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 391-17. Removal of telephones; charges.
A. If the City removes a pay telephone pursuant to the provisions of this
article, then the telephone shall be impounded by the City. Such
telephone shall not be released until proper ownership and permits are
presented and/or permit fee and fines are paid, together with a
removal/storage charge as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees. [Amended
5-21-2013]
B. If no person files a claim for the return of the telephone or complies
with the requirements to obtain the return of the telephone seized
under this article within six months from the date of seizure then that
telephone may be disposed of pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157.
§ 391-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-17
1:833
Chapter 397
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 16.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 412.
Impoundment of vehicles — See Ch. 418.
§ 397-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle so designated by the Police
Department.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Safety of the City.
LICENSE — The license issued to a licensee pursuant to this chapter.
LICENSE INSPECTOR — An individual in the office of the City Clerk who
shall process the license.
LICENSEE — The individual or entity obtaining a license pursuant to this
chapter.
OWNER — An individual or entity who or which owns or leases and/or
operates, parks or abandons a vehicle within the City.
POLICE — Officers of the Union City Police Department.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the City.
STORAGE SERVICE — The storage of vehicles by a towing operator.
TOWING OPERATOR — An individual or entity engaged in the business of
providing towing services and storage services.
TOWING SERVICE — The towing service rendered by a towing operator
to a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, an automobile, truck,
motorcycle, van, scooter, tractor trailer or bus, together with any other
heavy equipment, at the request of the City which is not regulated by
N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1 et seq.78
VEHICLE — Any powered or nonpowered object operated or intended to be
operated in a City street.
WRECKER — A motor vehicle equipped and employed for the purpose of
towing, transporting, conveying or removing any other vehicle which is
abandoned, disabled and/or in violation of any state or local laws, for which
a service fee or charges are exacted.
78.Editor's Note: Repealed by R. 1999, effective 1-4-1999.
§ 391-17 UNION CITY CODE § 397-2
1:834
§ 397-2. License required.
§ 397-3. Exemptions.
§ 397-4. Term of license. [Amended 5-21-2013]
A license shall be issued for one calendar year commencing January 1, or
for any shorter period when the license is issued after January 1, and shall
expire on December 31 of the year issued. Licenses not renewed by January
1 shall be deemed expired. There are no "hold over" licenses.
§ 397-5. Application for license.
§ 397-6. Qualifications of licensee.
A. No towing operator shall operate within the City for police-requested
towing service and/or storage services unless the towing operator has
obtained a license issued by the City.
B. No towing operator licensed by the City shall apply for two or more
licenses which operate from the same location. [Added 5-21-2013]
A. Owner-requested service. No license shall be required for the on-site
repair and/or towing or storage of any vehicle when the request is
received by the operator from the owner prior to a police request.
B. Towing from private property. No licensee shall be required by the
police to tow any vehicle from private property without the consent of
the owner except on the express instruction of the police in the event of
an emergency.
A. Information required on form. An application for a license shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain all information
necessary to evidence the applicant's identity and legal address,
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and ability to perform
the towing services and storage services contemplated by this chapter.
B. Filing. Applications shall be filed with the License Inspector, together
with a certified check for the application fee set forth in Chapter 155,
Fees. The City Clerk shall give 15 days' public notice in an official
newspaper of the City of the date on which the license applications are
to be received pursuant to this chapter.
A. Any licensee must have at least three years' experience as sole
proprietor, partner or as an employee in the towing of vehicles in order
to be considered for the issuance of a license.
B. The licensee must be of good business character and reputation.
C. The licensee must provide a list of all towing contracts for which
performance thereunder is or may be required, in each case listing the
§ 397-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-6
1:835
§ 397-7. Review of application.
Applications received by the License Inspector shall be referred within 10
business days to the Director of his/her designee for review.
§ 397-8. Issuance of license.
§ 397-9. License fees.
The schedule of nonrefundable fees for the obtaining of a license is set forth
in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 397-10. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended
10-21-2003]
The Director shall have the right to suspend any license issued under this
chapter upon determination that there is probable cause for revocation or
suspension based upon any violation of this chapter. Written notice of the
basis of the violation shall be issued to the licensee, and the licensee shall
be entitled to a hearing before the Director or his or her designee within two
weeks of receipt of that notice. In the event that the Director determines
that a violation has occurred, he or she may:
name of the individual or entity with whom or with which the contract
is made and the date of expiration thereof.
D. The licensee shall submit proof of ownership by record title of the
required number of wreckers, the make, model, year, license plate
number and registration number of each truck, a copy of the
registration for each truck and copies of current and valid insurance
policies and cards satisfactory to the Director.
A. Authorization. The Director shall authorize the issuance of a license or
licenses after consideration of the applications and a determination is
made that all of the requirements have been met for the license.
B. Issuance. The authorized license or licenses shall be issued by the
License Inspector, in writing, upon payment by the towing operator of
the license fee set forth in Chapter 155, Fees.
C. Towing list. The licensee shall be placed on the rotating tow list in the
order of receipt of completed application and fulfillment of all of the
requirements for the license.
A. Revoke the license;
B. Continue the suspension until compliance by the licensee;
C. Reinstate the license if the licensee has complied with the requirements
of this chapter and of the license; or
D. Suspend the license for a period of time, to be determined by the
Director.
§ 397-6 UNION CITY CODE § 397-11
1:836
§ 397-11. Equipment.
A. Required equipment. A towing operator, when filing an application for
and at all times while holding a license under this chapter, shall own or
lease and have available for use in performing the services required by
the license the following items of equipment:
(1) One flatbed.
(2) Three light-duty wreckers.
(3) Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include:
(a) Universal towing sling, except flatbeds.
(b) "J" hooks and chains.
(c) Snatch block for cable 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch.
(d) Two high-test safety chains.
(e) Auxiliary safety light kit to place on the rear of towed vehicles.
(f) Four-lamp or three-lamp revolving amber light or light bar.
(g) Tool box with an assortment of hand tools.
(h) Rear working lights, rear marker lights, cab lights and bodyclearing
lights located to clear towed vehicle.
(i) Safety cones, shovel and broom.
(j) Steering wheel lock or tie-down.
(k) Two-way radio communication system.
(l) Necessary equipment to remove disabled or locked vehicles
upon the signing of the proper waiver form.
(4) Each wrecker shall include one set of dollies.
(5) Chassis requirement for wreckers must be a minimum of 10,000
pounds gross weight.
B. Tow truck lettering. All tow trucks shall be properly lettered on both
sides in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
C. Maintenance. All equipment used by a licensee in performing its
obligation under the license shall be maintained in good and safe
conditions and may be inspected for such condition by the police at any
time, wherever located. Any deficiency in such condition reported by
the police to the licensee shall be promptly corrected, and any failure to
correct may be cited as grounds for suspension or revocation of the
license pursuant to this chapter.
§ 397-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-11
1:837
§ 397-12. Storage and garage facilities.
D. Equipment. Every heavy-duty tow truck licensee shall have one heavyduty
vehicle of 30,000 gross vehicle pounds minimum. [Amended
5-21-2013]
E. Equipment for snow and heavy rain. All tow truck licensees, whether
light or heavy, shall have all necessary equipment to be able to provide
the same towing services as required by this chapter in all severe
weather-related occasions, including snow or heavy rain.
A. Indoor secured storage. Each licensee shall have an indoor secured
area for storage of one vehicle with a separate stall to accommodate a
full-size car or van and a door to which the Police Department can
attach its own padlock.
B. General storage. Each licensee, in addition to Subsection A above, shall
have a minimum of 7,500 square feet secured and fenced area for
storage of at least 20 vehicles.
C. Equipment facility. Each licensee shall have an area and facility
adequate for the storage and servicing of the required equipment
specified in § 397-11 when not in use.
D. Location; hours; condition of facilities.
(1) The required storage and equipment facilities shall be located
within two miles of the City limits. The hours of recovery of vehicles
from storage shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight every day.
The facilities shall be kept clean and in good order to accommodate
persons who may enter the facilities with respect to any vehicles
stored therein. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(2) All land to be utilized by the licensee for vehicle storage must be
level.
E. Zoning. The storage area must be in an area which permits the towing
and storage of vehicles.
F. Proof of permission to use lot. Each licensee must furnish evidence that
(s)he has proper and lawful permission to use the lot(s) where vehicles
are to be stored. Such evidence must include the deed(s) to the
property or the lease to the same, thoroughly describing the property
as to its location. The lease must encompass the entire license period.
G. Use restrictions. The land shall not be used for the storage of vehicles
owned by the licensee with the exception of towing equipment owned
by the licensee.
H. Storage. All vehicles must be stored to prevent damage and so arranged
as to permit inspection and subsequent removal when released or
disposed of in accordance with the chapter.
§ 397-11 UNION CITY CODE § 397-12
1:838
§ 397-13. Licensee's personnel.
§ 397-14. Rules and regulations for towing and storage.
Towing and storage services shall be governed by the following provisions:
I. Identification number for towed vehicle. The licensee shall affix an
identification number, as directed by the Police Department, to each
towed vehicle in order to more easily locate the vehicle when it arrives
at the storage area.
A. Each tow truck driver must have an appropriate valid New Jersey
driver's license with no restrictions or conditional endorsements,
except conditions requiring glasses. Each driver shall be of good moral
character, mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times.
B. It shall be mandatory that each vehicle has been issued registration and
insurance as required by law.
C. The licensee, all tow truck drivers and other personnel of the licensee
shall be fully trained and knowledgeable in tow truck and storage
operation and equipment, and be subject to background investigation
by the police. All of the foregoing individuals shall personally register at
the Police Department. The cost of such background investigation shall
be borne by the licensee.
D. A license may be disqualified for criminal convictions unless waived by
the Director.
E. No licensee shall employ, directly or indirectly, any officers of the Police
Department.
A. There shall be two rotating lists of licensed towers. The first list is for
light-duty tows, including, but not limited to, cars or motorcycles. The
second list shall be for heavy-duty tows, including, but not limited to,
buses or heavy trucks. Every licensee who applied to the City shall
request to be placed on either or both of the light- and/or heavy-duty
tow list. If the licensee wants to be on both lists, it must maintain all of
the equipment as set forth for both lists. The police shall determine if a
light- or heavy-duty tow service is required. Once the determination has
been made, the police shall call the next licensee on the rotating list to
provide service.
B. Licensees, in the order on the rotating list, shall be called by the police
desk officer or other officer expressly authorized to communicate such
request to dispatch one or more tow trucks to arrive at the scene to
which dispatched within a reasonable time. For normal circumstances
such reasonable time shall be deemed to be within 15 minutes. If the
licensee cannot arrive at the scene within 15 minutes, the police shall
call the next licensee on the list until it can find one capable of
responding in a timely fashion. If the police desk officer shall not find
any tower on the appropriate list to provide the required service, the
§ 397-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-14
1:839
police shall contact any other tower to perform this service for this
instance.
C. A licensee shall immediately notify the police it is wholly or partially not
operational due to failure of any equipment or any personnel
insufficiency, and shall furnish such details thereof as may be required
by the police.
D. The tow trucks of a licensee will not cruise and will not respond to any
scene where towing may be required except upon police request or as
permitted herein.
E. No flashing lights or sirens shall be used on a tow truck except as
permitted by the Police Department under applicable law.
F. All tow trucks shall be operated in accordance with all existing traffic
regulations and in a safe and prudent manner. Tow truck drivers will
request police assistance during the course of services when they find it
necessary to turn around and back up, tow in a direction opposite to
normal traffic, to cross a median or other required help.
G. Each licensee will be responsible for all vehicles, and the visible
contents in their custody, that are towed off the roads under direction of
the police.
H. No vehicle will be removed from City streets or highways traversing the
City without the proper authorization from the police at the scene or
owner, as the case may be.
I. The police officer investigating the incident is in complete charge of the
incident scene, excluding actual towing operations, and all drivers shall
comply with the officer's instructions.
J. Each licensee, prior to departure from the scene of towing services,
shall clean and clear the streets of any debris resulting from any
accidents at such scene, and at all times carry the necessary equipment
to perform such cleaning services.
K. In the event a licensee refuses to tow at the scene of the incident or
refuses to tow when requested by the owner, the police officer assigned
to the incident shall report the refusal to his/her superior with all
pertinent details. The report of the refusal shall be furnished to the
Director as soon as practicable for evaluation of the licensee's
performance of its obligation under the license. No licensee shall be
required to tow any vehicle in an unsafe manner or in such a way as to
cause further damage to the vehicle towed or the towing vehicle.
L. At 12:00 noon every Friday each licensee shall provide the Police
Department with a list of unclaimed vehicles in its custody. In addition,
a copy of every bill issued for a tow along with the method of payment
shall be provided to the police once a week.
§ 397-14 UNION CITY CODE § 397-14
1:840
§ 397-15. Supplementary rules and regulations.
The Director may issue rules and regulations from time to time on the
operation of towing services and storage facilities to implement, but not
exceed, the purpose of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be
issued by publication in a newspaper in the City. Copies shall be maintained
in the office of the City Clerk and mailed to each licensee by the City.
§ 397-16. Removal by licensee of all abandoned vehicles.
The licensee must handle the removal of all abandoned vehicles without
expense to the City. The Director, or his/her designee, reserves the right to
assign City-wide removal of abandoned vehicles to a single licensee.
§ 397-17. Proceeds from sale of vehicles at auction.
All proceeds received from an auction or sale of vehicles in storage,
pursuant to this chapter, shall be deposited with the City Treasurer. In the
event the proceeds from such auction or sale shall be insufficient to pay
the accrued towing and storage charges, the City shall not be liable. The
licensee shall accept such limited proceeds as full payment.
§ 397-18. Nonliability of City for charges.
The City and its police shall not be liable to a licensee with respect to
service rendered to any owner pursuant to the license or otherwise. The
licensee shall look only to the owner of such vehicle for payment of service
charges or any other compensation.
§ 397-19. Insurance.
M. Vehicles impounded or confiscated by the police and stored by the
licensee shall not be released by the licensee without written
authorization by the police.
N. The licensee shall make the necessary provisions to release a vehicle to
the owner between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight every
day. [Amended 5-21-2013]
O. The licensee must post, in a conspicuous place, fees set by the City for
tow and other services as set forth by this chapter or by the State of
New Jersey.
P. The licensee shall not interrupt the police radio transmission with
regard to the towing services.
A. The licensee shall have in effect, prior to application and at all times
during the term of the license, the following insurances:
(1) Automobile (bodily injury, liability, property damage), combined
single limit: $500,000.
§ 397-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-19
1:841
§ 397-20. Indemnification of City.
The application of any towing operator for a license pursuant to this chapter
shall include an agreement by the towing operator that, upon the issuance
of a license, the licensee shall indemnify the City against all claims of third
parties relating to towing services and storage service.
§ 397-21. Motor vehicle information.
The Police Department shall provide, when requested, licensees with
Department of Motor Vehicles information regarding registered owners and
lien holders. The information requested and given shall be in conformance
with N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq., and shall not in any way violate the
confidentiality that is reposed in the Police Department.
§ 397-22. Transfer of license; change of domicile.
The license shall not be transferred or assigned, nor shall the domicile
of any licensee licensed hereunder be changed without the prior written
consent of the Director.
§ 397-23. Rates.
(2) Premises liability (bodily injury, liability, property damage),
combined single limit: $500,000.
(3) Umbrella (excess third-party liability): $1,000,000.
(4) Garage keeper/legal liability, per location: $200,000.
(5) Garage keeper liability which may be substituted for items in
Subsection A(1) and (2) above, in the amount of combined single
limit: $1,000,000.
(6) Worker's compensation: in accordance with New Jersey state
requirements.
B. The licensee shall supply a certificate of insurance to the City Clerk
describing each of the foregoing insurance policies along with a copy of
the insurance policies identifying the City as an additional insured.
Each such certificate of insurance shall contain a provision that no
cancellation of the policy shall become effective until after the
expiration of 30 days' written notice of such proposed cancellation
forwarded by the insurance company to the Director.
C. The insurance certificate submitted to Union City must include a thirtyday
notice to Union City of cancellation or nonrenewal of the insurance.
There must be a ten-day notice clause for cancellation or nonrenewal of
the insurance due to nonpayment of the insurance premium.
Cancellation or nonrenewal of the insurance during the license term
shall be grounds for immediate suspension or termination of the towing
license. [Added 10-1-2013]
§ 397-19 UNION CITY CODE § 397-23
1:842
A. The rates a licensee may charge for towing and storage services are
regulated in part by the New Jersey Department of Insurance, pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1 et seq.79 Under those circumstances in which the
regulations are not applicable, the rate schedule listed herein shall
apply.
B. No licensee may charge in excess of the following rates for services,
including towing, conveying, repairing, servicing or storage of the
vehicles:
(1) Service charge.
(a) Road service:
[1] Automobile: $25.
[2] Truck and heavy equipment: $35.
(b) Fuel delivery: road service charge plus current fuel costs per
gallon.
(c) Changing tire. Removing and replacing damaged tire with
spare: road service charge, plus, after the first 15 minutes, an
hourly rate as follows:
[1] Automobiles and trucks under one-ton capacity: $15.
[2] Trucks over one-ton but under five-ton capacity: $15.
[3] All other heavy equipment: $35.
(d) Repair charges: road service charge, plus, after the first 15
minutes, an hourly rate as follows:
[1] 8:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m., weekdays: $22.
[2] All other times: $30.
(2) Towing charges. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(a) All vehicles five tons and under: $125.
(b) All vehicles over five tons: $250 per hour with a two-hour
minimum charge.
(3) Storage charges. [Amended 5-21-2013]
(a) Per day:
[1] All vehicles five tons and under: $35.
[2] All vehicles over five tons: $75.
79.Editor's Note: Repealed R. 1991, effective 1-4-1991.
§ 397-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-23
1:843
§ 397-24. Posting of regulations and fee schedule.
The regulations and fee schedule for licenses established herein shall be
made available to the public during the normal business hours of the City
in the office of the City Clerk. The regulations and fee schedules shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at the licensee's place of business.
§ 397-25. Uniform rates.
Any towing operator responding to a request for towing or storage services
by a private party shall not exceed the maximum rates listed in § 397-23.
§ 397-26. Availability of towing operator.
The towing operator shall be available to communicate with the necessary
police or other City personnel by telephone or beeper number. No
communication shall be permitted via the police radios.
§ 397-27. Filing of complaint. [Added 10-21-2003]
The Director, Licensing Inspector, Code Enforcement Official, or any private
person is hereby authorized to file a complaint with the Director and/or
Municipal Court to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 397-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-21-2003]
Violation of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250 per
violation with the maximum penalty not exceeding $1,250 and/or
imprisonment of 90 days and/or community service of 90 days. Any
additional fine imposed by the court for a repeat violation of this chapter
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum penalty fixed
for such violation.
Chapter 402
[3] Abandoned or disabled vehicles: See Subsection B(1)
through (3), as applicable.
(b) The licensee shall charge only one-day storage for each twentyfour-
hour period to commence from the time on the ticket tow
sheet.
(4) Service charge. A service charge, as applicable herein, shall be
charged if the subject vehicle has been hooked up to tow, but has
not left the scene.
(5) Sales tax. The above charges are subject to the New Jersey state
tax.
(6) Charges for snow emergency. A towing operator can charge 25%
more than the rates set forth in this rates schedule if the City
declares a snow emergency.
§ 397-23 UNION CITY CODE § 397-28
1:844
TRAFFIC SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 16.
§ 402-1. Installation.
§ 402-2. Issuance of the summons.
The Police Department of the City of Union City shall review the recorded
images produced by the system to determine whether sufficient evidence
exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has occurred and
shall issue a summons when appropriate in accordance with the rules of the
court.
§ 402-3. Use of recorded images.
A. The City of Union City hereby determines to install and utilize a traffic
control signal monitoring system (the "system") at various intersections
within the City as approved by the Commissioner of Transportation
pursuant to the Act.80
B. The system to be installed shall be approved by the Board of
Commissioners of the City of Union City by resolution.
C. The City of Union City shall have the authority to enter into a contract,
following a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the
system. Any contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the Act
shall not be deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to the Act.
D. The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be
approved by an engineer designated by the City and shall be placed on
each street converging into the affected intersection as required by the
Act.
E. The engineer designated by the City shall inspect and certify the system
at least once every six months from the date of its installation.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the recorded images
produced by the system shall be available for the exclusive use of the
Police Department for the purpose of discharging his or her duties
under P.L. 2007, c. 348 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.14 et seq.).
B. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the
system shall not be deemed a public record in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.,
or common law. The recorded images shall not be:
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.14 et seq.
§ 397-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-3
1:845
§ 402-4. Owner's liability.
The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic control
signal violation summons pursuant to the system shall be joint subject to
provisions of the Act.
Chapter 407
USED CAR DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of businesses and
occupations — See Ch. 234.
§ 407-1. Applications.
All applications for licenses for used car dealers must be accompanied by
current photographs and fingerprints of the applicants, and if the applicant
is a corporation, current photographs and fingerprints of its stockholders
owning more than a ten-percent interest in the corporation and of its
officers and directors shall accompany the application, with a sworn
statement as to the names and addresses of all its stockholders, stating
the percentage of shares owned by each and its directors and officers.
Any proposed transfer in stockholding of more than 10% of the corporate
shares, or in its directors or officers, during the license term shall be
reported to the License Inspector and shall be accompanied by the
fingerprints and a current photograph of each such proposed substitute
stockholder, director or officer. The License Inspector shall determine the
eligibility of such person to act for the licensee.
(1) Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter; or
(2) Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not
directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
C. Any recorded image or information collected with a traffic control
signal violation shall not be retained after 60 days following the
collection of any fine or penalty.
D. If a summons is not issued within 40 business days following the traffic
control signal violation, all recorded images and any information
collected with respect to the traffic control signal violation shall be
removed by the Police Department within two business days.
E. The City of Union City shall certify compliance with this section by filing
a report to and with the Commissioner of Transportation in accordance
with the Act.
§ 402-3 UNION CITY CODE § 407-2
1:846
§ 407-2. Fingerprinting. [Amended 5-21-2013]
Fingerprints shall be taken by a private vendor who shall submit the
fingerprints to the State Police Department for review for any possible
police record. The State Police Department shall report the result of the
investigation to the License Inspector for his/her consideration.
Chapter 412
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Towing — See Ch. 397.
Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 418.
§ 412-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
§ 412-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon a vehicle within the City, and no person shall leave
a vehicle at any place within the City for such a period of time as to cause
the vehicle to reasonably appear to be abandoned.
§ 412-3. Wrecked vehicles on street prohibited.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, wrecked or junked vehicle
on a street or highway within the City.
§ 412-4. Wrecked vehicles off-street prohibited.
No person in charge or control of property within the City, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles to remain
on the property longer than 48 hours; and no person shall leave such
vehicles on any property within the City for a longer time than 48 hours.
This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on
the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner
when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise; or to a vehicle
in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place
and manner by the City.
§ 407-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-5
1:847
§ 412-5. Grounds for impounding of vehicles.
Whenever any member of the Police Department finds a vehicle in the City
which is illegally parked in violation of any section of this Code or of any
statute of the State of New Jersey, and the police officer has reasonable
grounds to believe that the vehicle has been abandoned, the vehicle shall be
subject to the provisions of § 412-6.
§ 412-6. Impoundment procedures; sale of unclaimed vehicles.
A police officer may remove or secure the removal of a vehicle, as defined
in § 412-4 of this chapter, to a place as may be designated by the Director
for the impounding of vehicles and be retained there and impounded until
the person owning the vehicle shall pay the cost of removal together with a
garage charge as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees. Immediately after a vehicle
is so removed, the Chief of Police, or member acting for him/her, shall notify
the registered owner, in writing, by personal service or by registered mail,
at the last known address of the owner, of the removal of his/her vehicle and
the reason for the same and the location of the vehicle. After the vehicle
has been in the possession of the Police Department for six months and the
owner is unknown, cannot be found or refuses to retrieve the vehicle, the
Director may proceed to sell the vehicle in accordance with the provisions
of the laws of the state.
§ 412-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of $38.
Chapter 418
VEHICLES, IMPOUNDMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 16.
Towing — See Ch. 397.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 412.
§ 418-1. Authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.13, the governing body of any municipality
may enact an ordinance authorizing the impoundment or immobilization
of a vehicle within the municipality if there are any outstanding warrants
against the vehicle.
§ 418-2. Impoundment or immobilization.
§ 412-5 UNION CITY CODE § 418-2
1:848
§ 418-3. Sale of vehicle.
§ 418-4. Reclamation of vehicle.
§ 418-5. Proceeds of sale.
Any proceeds obtained from the sale of the vehicle at public auction in
excess of the amount owed to the City for the reasonable cost of removal
and storage of the motor vehicle, any fines or penalties and court costs
assessed for violations that gave rise to the impoundment or immobilization
of the motor vehicle and any outstanding warrants against the vehicle shall
be returned to the owner of the vehicle, if his/her name and address are
known.
A. Police officers or their designee shall impound or immobilize any
vehicle found within the City where there are outstanding warrants
against such vehicle.
B. Subsection A above shall not apply to vehicles which are leased and for
which the lessor provides the name and address of the lessee and
provides proof to the City that the outstanding warrants are not against
the lessor and do not involve the condition of the vehicle when it was in
control of the lessor.
A. If the outstanding warrants are not paid by midnight on the 30th day
following the day on which the vehicle is impounded or immobilized, the
vehicle may be sold at public auction held by the City.
B. Prior to the sale of such vehicle, the City shall give notice, by certified
mail, to the owner, if his/her name and address are known, and to the
holder of any security interest filed with the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles, and by publication in a newspaper, published in the
state and circulated in the City of Union City, once at least five days
before the date of the sale.
A. At any time prior to the sale of the vehicle, the owner of such vehicle, or
other person entitled to the motor vehicle, may reclaim possession of
the motor vehicle upon payment of the reasonable cost of removal and
storage of the motor vehicle and any fine or penalty and court costs
assessed against him/her for the violation that gave rise to the
impoundment or immobilization of the motor vehicle and any
outstanding warrants against the vehicle.
B. The owner/lessor of an impounded motor vehicle who has complied
with the provisions set forth in § 418-2B shall be entitled to reclaim
possession of the vehicle without payment, and the lessee shall be liable
for any fine, penalty, court costs or outstanding warrants against the
vehicle.
§ 418-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-6
1:849
§ 418-6. Contract for enforcement services.
The City, at its option, may enter into a contract with a public agency or
private organization for services to be rendered in the processing of parking
offenses under this chapter. If the City exercises this option to contract with
a public agency or private organization for their services, it shall submit a
plan to the Supreme Court describing the services to be provided and the
procedures to be used. The Supreme Court shall approve such plan prior to
its implementation.
Chapter 425
WATER POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 342.
§ 425-1. Findings and declaration of policy.
A. It is hereby declared that pollution of the waters in and about the City of
Union City presents serious problems of health and safety to the
citizens of the City. For the purpose of controlling and reducing these
health and safety hazards, it is declared to be the policy of this City to
minimize water pollution and, in furtherance of this policy, to
coordinate these efforts with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
B. The waters bordering the City and other area municipalities are
polluted or threatened by pollution from sewage, industrial and other
wastes.
C. The United States Environmental Protection Agency and New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to law have
mandated substantial upgrading of the treatment of sewage originating
within the City and other area municipalities.
D. The most effective and cost efficient means of complying with this
mandate is for the City to pump and transmit portions of its sewage to
the Hoboken, Union City, Weehawkin Sewerage Authority wastewater
treatment facilities and the Jersey City Sewerage Authority, hereinafter
referred to as the "treatment facilities."
E. The treatment facilities are willing to accept and treat the City's sewage
on the condition that the City agrees to comply with and enforce the
applicable rules and regulations as they now exist or may be amended.
§ 418-6 UNION CITY CODE § 425-2
1:850
§ 425-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE — An intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of a pollutant into the waters of the state or onto the land or into
wells from which the pollutants might flow or drain into such waters or into
waters or onto lands outside the jurisdiction of the state, which pollutant
enters the water of the state.
GARBAGE — Improperly shredded garbage, except domestic wastewater
discharge from garbage disposal units in private dwellings, that has not
been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles float or
carry freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevalent in the
treatment facilities.
NATURAL OUTLET — An outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewers, overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or groundwater, including the Passaic River or any of its tributaries.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY WASTE — Waste derived principally from dwellings, office
buildings and sanitary conveniences. When segregated from industrial
wastes, sanitary waste may come from industrial plants or commercial
enterprises.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes called STORM SEWER) — A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from
any source.
§ 425-3. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or
discharged, into any body of water within the City or into any public sewer,
drain or laterals connected therewith, or on or about any street or public
place, or upon any private property in such a manner that it may run into
any street, sewer, drain, lateral or public place or onto any other private
property, any substance which causes or contains the following:
A. Explosive wastes. Wastes in such quantity that may create a fire or
explosion hazard either alone or by interaction with other substances.
B. Corrosive wastes. Wastes in such quantity that will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the treatment facilities' system.
§ 425-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-3
1:851
C. Solids or viscous wastes. Wastes in amounts which will cause
obstruction to the flow in a sever or otherwise interfere with proper
operation of the treatment facilities' system.
D. Oils and grease. Wastes containing floatable fats, wax, grease or oils in
excess of 100 milligrams per liter.
E. Noxious materials. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases
sufficient in quantity, either alone or by interaction with other wastes,
capable of creating a public nuisance or health hazard.
F. Radioactive wastes. Wastes in such quantity that may cause damage or
hazards to the treatment facilities' system or personnel operating the
system.
G. Unpolluted water. Any water, such as cooling water and stormwater,
which will increase the hydraulic load on the treatment facilities'
system.
H. Dilution water. Wastes which cause the treatment facilities' system shall
not be discharged to the sanitary sewer in any concentrations.
I. Interference. Any waste released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
polluted concentration which the discharger knows or has reason to
know will interfere with the treatment facilities' system.
J. Excessive discharge rate. Wastes discharged in a slug or such volume
or strength so as to cause a treatment process upset and subsequent
loss of treatment efficiency.
K. Heat. Any discharge in excess of 150° F. or in amounts that will inhibit
biological activity resulting in treatment process upset and subsequent
loss of treatment efficiency.
L. Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage, not sufficiently ground or
comminuted to such a degree that all particles float or carry freely in
suspension under normal flow conditions.
M. Discolored materials. Materials that may cause the treatment facilities
to exceed appropriate color criteria.
N. Medical waste. Any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis,
treatment (for example, provision of medical services) or immunization
of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the
production or testing of biologicals. The term does not include any
hazardous waste identified or listed under 40 CFR Part 61 or any
household waste generated from home self-care.
O. Hazardous substances and wastes. Any hazardous substance,
hazardous wastes, or both, as such terms may be designated by federal
and/or state law, including but not limited to the Spill Compensation
and Control Act, and the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act, unless the discharge of such
§ 425-3 UNION CITY CODE § 425-3
1:852
§ 425-4. Discharge into natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the City
any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided and where a National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System permit has been obtained from the appropriate governmental
authority, where required.
§ 425-5. Connection of downspouts and drains to sewer.
No person shall make connection on roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to
a public sanitary sewer unless approved by the City for purposes of disposal
of polluted surface drainage.
§ 425-6. Compliance with rules and regulations required.
All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements of
the written rules and regulations of all of the treatment facilities which have
been adopted and which from time to time shall have been amended, which
regulations shall become effective upon filing of certified copies in the office
of the City Clerk after the effective date of this chapter. Copies of all such
regulations shall be available for inspection in the office of the City Clerk
during business hours.
§ 425-7. Exceptions.
The only exceptions to the prohibitions contained in § 425-3 shall be
discharges for which the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
the NJDEP and formally delegated utility authority, as authorized by NJDEP
or other authorized agent, has issued a permit under either the federal or
New Jersey water pollution control statutes, provided that such discharges
do not exceed the limitation set forth in any such permit.
substances and/or wastes are in compliance with the terms and
conditions of a valid NJPDES permit.
P. Petroleum products. Any bituminous liquid that is essentially a complex
mixture of hydrocarbons of different types with small amounts of other
substances, such as compounds of oxygen, sulfur or nitrogen, or
metallic compounds, or any of the useful liquid products obtained from
such a liquid by various refining processes, such as fractional
distillation, cracking, catalytic reforming, alkylation and
polymerization. This term shall include, but not be limited, gasoline,
kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes and
crude oils.
Q. Other. Any other material specifically prohibited by the rules and
regulations of the treatment facilities as they now exist or may be
amended.
§ 425-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-8
1:853
§ 425-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 426
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 261.
A. The governing body shall appoint or designate some suitable person or
agency to administer this chapter on or before its effective date.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate
violation. This provision shall not preclude the right of the City to
pursue an enforcement action for violation of any applicable federal or
state water pollution control statute and or regulation.
C. Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued
under the authority of this chapter may result in the termination of the
permit or the termination of the authority to discharge into the system.
§ 425-8 UNION CITY CODE § 425-8
1:854
ARTICLE I
Limitation on Construction Hours
[Adopted 11-4-2015]
§ 426-1. Construction prohibited certain hours.
All construction shall be prohibited, except during the following hours:
8:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday and 9:30 a.m. to 2:30
p.m. on Saturdays. Construction shall be prohibited at all other times on
Monday through Saturday and shall be entirely prohibited on Sunday and
legal holidays, except: for emergency work which has been previously
determined and authorized by the Construction Code Official and City
Engineer.
§ 426-2. Violations and penalties.
§ 426-3. Effect on other provisions.
The terms of this chapter shall not be deemed and are not intended to
impair the provisions and enforcement of Chapter 261 of this Code, which
shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a Municipal
Court summons to be issued by the Police Department, Code
Enforcement Official, Health Officer, or any member of the general
public who is affected by excessive noise.
B. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General Penalty,
except that with each violation there shall be a minimum fine of $250
payable through the Municipal Court Violations Bureau.
§ 426-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 426-3
1:855
Appendix
Chapter A440
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A440-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated,81 and the following additional terms shall have
the following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the City's office and is incorporated
herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as modified, changed,
limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
CITY — The governing body of the City of in the County of Hudson and the
State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Cablevision of Hudson County, LLC, d/b/a Cablevision of
Hudson ("Cablevision"), the grantee of rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
81.Editor's Note: The "terms defined above" refer to "City" and "Cablevision" or "company,"
all of which are also defined in § A440-1.
§ 426-3 UNION CITY CODE § A440-2
1:856
§ A440-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of
the Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and
the municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications
of Cablevision to receive this consent, the City hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A440-3. Grant of authority.
The City hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place in,
upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City
of a cable television system, and for the provision of any communication
service over the such system as may be authorized by federal or state
regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant to said consent,
is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A440-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years from the date of the issuance of the certificate of approval by the
Board of Public Utilities.
§ A440-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16, and applicable
state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall also seek
approval from the Board authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein, and until such a time
that a decision is made by the City and the Board relative to the renewal of
said consent.
§ A440-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the City and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A440-7. Primary service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence located in the franchise
territory at tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
Commercial properties shall be provided service in accordance with
Cablevision's commercial line extension policy.
§ A440-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A440-8
1:857
§ A440-8. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the City, as an annual franchise fee, a sum equal
to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring charges in
the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable television
reception services in the City. In the event applicable law hereinafter
permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix the amount
thereof, then the City and Cablevision shall negotiate in good faith with
respect to the amount thereof.
§ A440-9. Free service.
§ A440-10. Construction; system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the City:
A. Upon written request from the City, the company shall provide, free of
charge, one standard installation and monthly basic cable television
service to all state or locally accredited public schools and all municipal
buildings used for governmental purposes within the City.
B. Upon written request from the City, the company shall provide to a
municipal building, without charge, the following: 1) one standard
installation; 2) one cable modem; and 3) basic cable modem service for
the term of this ordinance. The City shall be permitted to network, at its
own cost, four personal computers terminals to the cable modem
provided by the Cablevision. This offer shall be subject to the terms,
conditions and use policies of the company as those policies may exist
from time to time.
C. Upon written request from the City, the company shall provide to state
and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and municipal
public libraries in the City, without charge, the following: 1) one
standard installation per school or library; 2) one cable modem per
installation; and 3) basic cable modem service for the term of this
ordinance for each installation. Each school and library shall be
permitted, at its own cost, to network up to 25 computers to the cable
modem provided by Cablevision. This offer shall be subject to the terms,
conditions and use policies of the company, as those policies may exist
from time to time.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall at its sole expense restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
§ A440-8 UNION CITY CODE § A440-10
1:858
§ A440-11. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A440-12. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A440-13. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the City pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All complaints
shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
§ A440-14. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the City as an additional insured and insuring against loss by any
such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum amounts of
$500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person and $1,000,000 for bodily
B. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove or relocate
its equipment, at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the City, the company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate
parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection of buildings
or for the performance of other work. The expense of any such
temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires,
cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming shall be
only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for the
company's facilities.
§ A440-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A440-14
1:859
injury or death resulting from any one accident or occurrence stemming
from or arising out of the company's exercise of its rights hereunder.
§ A440-15. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this ordinance, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A440-16. Rates.
A. The rates of the company for cable television service shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
25% off the monthly broadcast basic level of cable television service
rate to any person 62 years of age or older, who subscribes to cable
television services provided by the company, subject to the following:
(1) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age; and
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21; and
(3) The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature, or equipment offered by the company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services; and
(4) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or perchannel
a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount; and
(5) The company shall have no further obligation to provide the senior
discount herein in the event that a) the company converts the
municipal consent granted herein to a system-wide franchise in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1; or b) upon Board approval of a
certification that another cable television service provider offering
services to residents of the City files, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:5A-30d, is capable of serving 60% or more of the households
within the Township. In the event the company does cease
providing a senior discount pursuant to this provision, it shall
comply with all notice requirements of applicable law.
§ A440-14 UNION CITY CODE § A440-17
1:860
§ A440-17. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the City pursuant to state and federal requirements. The
company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
City or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason the
municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein. The City shall utilize the state-approved procedures
for such emergency uses.
§ A440-18. Equitable terms.
§ A440-19. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
A. In the event that the City approves or permits a cable system to operate
in the community on terms more favorable or less burdensome than
those contained in this ordinance, such more favorable or less
burdensome terms shall be applicable in this consent, subject to a
petition to the Board of Public Utilities as provided for in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. In the event that a nonfranchised multichannel video programmer
provides service to residents of the City, Cablevision shall have a right
to request franchise amendments to this ordinance that relieve
Cablevision of regulatory burdens that create a competitive
disadvantage to the company. In requesting amendments, Cablevision
shall file with the Board of Public Utilities a petition for approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 seeking to
amend the ordinance. Such petition shall: i) indicate the presence of a
nonfranchised competitor(s); ii) identify the basis for Cablevision's
belief that certain provisions of this franchise place it at a competitive
disadvantage; and iii) identify the regulatory burdens to the amended
or repealed in order to eliminate the competitive disadvantage. The City
shall not unreasonably withhold or object to granting the company's
petition and so amending the ordinance, subject to a petition to the
Board of Public Utilities as provided for in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the City shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the City's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, the City agrees to support the company's petition
to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:5A-47 and NJAC 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of competitive
disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
§ A440-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A440-19
1:861
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A440-20. Public, educational, and governmental access.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent.
B. The City agrees that the company shall retain the right to use the PEG
access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access programming,
during times when the City is not utilizing the channel for purposes of
providing PEG access programming. In the event that the company uses
said PEG access channel for the presentation of such other
programming, the PEG programming shall remain the priority use, and
the company's rights with respect to using the channel for non-PEG
programming shall be subordinate to the City provision of PEG access
programming on such channel.
C. Cablevision shall continue to provide and maintain the access return
line at Union Hill High School, for use by the City in the production of
noncommercial educational and governmental access programming on
the cable system. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the
format and method of transmission of the PEG access programming
provided for in this § A440-21.
D. In consideration for the rights granted by this ordinance, Cablevision
shall provide the City with an initial grant in the amount of $11,000.
Such amount shall be paid within 90 days following the grant of the
certificate from the Board. In addition, beginning in the second year of
the municipal consent and annually thereafter through the ten-year
term of the franchise, Cablevision shall pay a grant to the City in the
amount of $6,000 in each of the following years of the term of the
ordinance (the "annual grant"). The annual grant may be used by the
City for any cable and/or other telecommunications-related purpose as
the City, in its discretion, may deem appropriate. Cablevision shall not
be obligated to make any additional payments beyond year 10 of the
franchise. The annual grant shall be payable to the City within 60 days
from receipt of the City's written request. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, should Cablevision apply for a system-wide certification or
otherwise convert its municipal consent to a system-wide certification
in accordance with applicable law, it shall be relieved of any payments
due and owing after the date of such conversion or award of a systemwide
franchise.
E. The company shall have no further obligation to provide any PEG grant
payments due and payable after the date upon which:
§ A440-19 UNION CITY CODE § A440-20
1:862
§ A440-21. Programming.
Although nothing herein shall require Cablevision to carry or transmit any
particular programming source, Cablevision shall provide subscribers in
the City with a similar mix, and, at a minimum, the same level of video
programming as is now provided to the City of Union City subscribers and
which appears in the company's application. The company shall provide the
City of Union City subscribers with at least the same broad categories of
programming in approximately the same quantity as are now provided and
which appear in the company's application.
§ A440-22. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the City by the company except as modified
herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of this
consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance or to the extent that
they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A440-23. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.
§ A440-24. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A440-25. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
(1) The company converts the municipal consent granted herein to a
system-wide franchise in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1; or
(2) Board approval of a certification of another cable television service
provider offering services to residents of the City files, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30d, that the provider is capable of
serving 60% or more of the households within the City.
F. All PEG access support provided by the Cablevision shall be for the
exclusive use and benefit of company's customers within the City.
§ A440-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A440-25
1:863
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1996 Code to 2013 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1996 Code Location in 2013 Code
Ch. I, General Ch. 1
1-1, Short Title Omitted
1-2 and 1-3 Ch. 1, Art. II
1-4, Severability Omitted
1-5, Administrative Enforcement
Proceedings
Ch. 1, Art. III
1-6, Violations and Penalties Ch. 1, Art. IV
Ch. II, Administration Ch. 4
Ch. III, Schedule of Fees Ch. 155
Ch. IV, Police Regulations
4-1, Litter Ch. 239
4-2, Noise Ch. 261
4-3, Smoking in Public Buildings Ch. 351, Art. I
4-4, Removal of Grass, Weeds, Brush and
Other Debris
Ch. 87, Art. I
4-5, Removal of Snow and Ice Ch. 366, Art. I
4-6, Abandoned Motor Vehicles Ch. 412
4-7, Impoundment of Vehicles for Payment
of Fines
Ch. 418
4-8, Foot-Propelled Bicycles, Tricycles, etc. Ch. 81
4-9, Parades and Processions Ch. 278
4-10, Unlawful for Pedestrians to Solicit
Rides or Business
Ch. 301, Art. I
4-11, Curfew Repealed 5-18-2004; see
Ch. 137
4-12, Parking Prohibited in Specified Places Ch. 284, Art. I
4-13, Obstruction of Streets Ch. 366, Art. II
§ A440-25 UNION CITY CODE § DT-1
1:864
Chapter/Title From 1996 Code Location in 2013 Code
4-14, Closing of Streets Ch. 366, Art. III
4-15, Collection of Garbage Ch. 359, Art. I
4-16, Mandatory Recycling Ch. 359, Art. II
4-17, Drug Free School Zone Ch. 145
4-18, Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
in Public Places
Ch. 58, Art. I
4-19, Massage Parlor Ch. 254
4-20, Opening of Fire Hydrants and Valves
Prohibited
Ch. 296, Art. I
4-21, Sale of Spray Paint, etc. Ch. 203
4-22, Parking Space for Handicapped Ch. 284, Art. II
4-23, Street Fairs, Carnivals, Festivals, etc. Ch. 113
4-24, Motion Picture, Television and
Commercial Film, etc.
Ch. 166
4-25, Lewd and Indecent Behavior Ch. 296, Art. II
Ch. V, Parks and Recreation Facilities Ch. 290
Ch. VI, Health Regulations
6-1, Abatement of Nuisances Ch. 266
6-2, Violation and Penalties Various chapters
6-3 (Reserved) Omitted
6-4, Air Pollution Control Code Ch. 46
6-5, Retail Food Establishment Code Ch. 185, Art. I
6-6, Food and Beverage Vending Machine
Code
Ch. 185, Art. II
6-7, Weed Control Code Ch. 87, Art. II
6-8, Public Health Nuisance Code REP
6-9, Sale, etc., of Lead Paint Ch. 273
6-10, Keeping of Birds Ch. 70, Art. II
6-11, Fencing of Vacant Lots Ch. 244
6-12, Water Pollution Control Code Ch. 425
6-13, Food Vendors at Street Fairs, etc. Ch. 185, Art. III
Chapter VII, Alarm Systems Ch. 52
Chapter VIII, Licensing - General
8-1, General Powers Ch. 234
8-2, Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors Ch. 301, Art. II
8-3, Soliciting and Canvassing Ch. 301, Art. III
8-4, Handbills Ch. 208
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:865
Chapter/Title From 1996 Code Location in 2013 Code
8-5, Public Telephones Ch. 391, Art. I
8-6, Pay Telephones on Public Sidewalks Ch. 391, Art. II
8-7, Pool and Billiard Rooms Ch. 306
8-8, Operation of Self-Service
Laundromats, etc.
REP
8-9, Games of Chance, Bingo and Raffles Ch. 196
8-10, Used Car Dealers Ch. 407
8-11, Retail Florists Ch. 180
8-12, Tattooing and Body Piercing Ch. 376
8-13, Mechanical Amusement Devices Ch. 64, Art. I
8-14, Towing and Storage Services Ch. 397
8-15, Communication Systems Installation Ch. 160
Ch. IX, Licensing of Taxicabs Ch. 386
Ch. X, Alcoholic Beverage Control Ch. 58, Art. II
Ch. XI, CATV Superseded 6-20-2006; see
Ch. A440
Ch. XII, Licensing and Regulation of Dogs Ch. 70, Art. I
Ch. XIII, Uniform Construction Code;
Buildings and Housing
13-1 to 13-6A (Uniform Construction
Code)
Ch. 122
13-7, Home Improvements; Tax Exemption REP
13-8, Moving Structures Ch. 97
13-9, Hotels; Lodging, Boarding and
Rooming Houses
Ch. 219
13-10, Regulation of Multi-Family
Dwellings
13-10.1, Registration of Multi-Family
Dwellings
Ch. 329, Art. I
13-10.2, Boiler Certification Ch. 329, Art. II
13-10.3 to 13.10.12, (Nuisances) Ch. 329, Art. III
13-10.13 to 13-15, (Registration of
Tenants)
Ch. 329, Art. IV
13-10.16 to 13-10.17 (Management
Office)
Ch. 329, Art. V
13-10.18, Security Funds Ch. 329, Art. VI
13-11, Registration of Building
Contractors, etc.
Ch. 126
§ DT-1 UNION CITY CODE § DT-1
1:866
Chapter/Title From 1996 Code Location in 2013 Code
13-12, Property Maintenance Ch. 311, Art. I
13-13, Condemnation of Building Unfit for
Human Occupancy
Ch. 107
13-14, Conversion of Fuel Generators and
Furnaces
REP
13-15, Fire Prevention Ch. 171, Art. I
13-16, Preventive Building Safety
Measures
Repealed 2-2-2010
13-17, Security Gates Ch. 92, Art. I
13-18, Relocation Assistance Ch. 323
13-19, Adoption of Uniform Construction
Code
Ch. 122
Ch. XIV, Rent Stabilization Ch. 334
Ch. XV, Sewage and Wastewater Disposal Ch. 342
Ch. XVI, Traffic Ch. 16
Ch. XVII, Parking Meters Ch. 284, Art. III
Ch. XVIII, Streets, Sidewalks and House
Numbers
18-1, Street Excavations Ch. 366, Art. IV
18-2, Voluntary Sidewalk Construction and
Removal
Ch. 366, Art. V
18-3, House Numbers Ch. 102
18-4, Violation and Penalty Ch. 102; Ch. 366, Arts. IV
and V
Ch. XIX, Land Use Procedures Superseded 3-20-2012; see
now Ch. 223
Ch. XX, Land Subdivision Ch. 370
Ch. XXI, Flood Damage Control Ch. 175
Ch. XXII, Zoning Superseded 3-20-2012
Ch. XXIII, Preservation of Historic Landmarks Ch. 214
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:867
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance 5-7-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 5-21-2013 General Provisions:
Adoption of Code
Ch. 1, Art. I
Ordinance 5-21-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ord. No.
11-2013
5-21-2013 Bond NCM
Ordinance 5-21-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
16-2013
7-1-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 7-1-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 155
Ordinance 7-1-2013 Rent stabilization
amendment
Ch. 334 (footnote
only)
Ordinance 9-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 9-17-2013 Streets and sidewalks:
public utility poles
amendment
Ch. 366, Art. VI
Ordinance 9-17-2013 Taxation: five-year
incentive for residential
improvements amendment
Ch. 381, Art. I
Ordinance 10-1-2013 Tattoo and body-piercing
establishments
amendment; taxicabs
amendment; towing
amendment
Chs. 376; 386;
397
Ordinance 10-1-2013 Employee vacation and
sick time accrual policy
NCM
Ordinance 10-1-2013 Independent contractor
vacation and sick time
accrual policy
NCM
Ordinance 11-6-2013 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 386
Ordinance 11-6-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ordinance 12-3-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 12-3-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
§ DL-1 UNION CITY CODE § DL-1
1:868
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
29-2013
12-3-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ordinance 12-3-2013 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 386
Ordinance 12-3-2013 Authorization of billboard
rental
NCM
Ordinance 12-3-2013 Deputy Records Custodian NCM
Ordinance 12-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 12-17-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ord. No.
33-2013
12-17-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
1-2014
1-7-2014 Property maintenance:
registration requirements
for vacant and abandoned
properties
Ch. 311, Art. V
Ord. No.
2-2014
1-7-2014 Stay of enforcement for
restricted residential
permit parking program
Ch. 16 (footnote
only)
Ord. No.
3-2014
2-18-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 155
Ordinance 3-18-2014 Residency requirements Ch. 14
Ordinance 3-18-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ordinance 3-24-2014 Lease of property for
police precinct
NCM
Ordinance 5-6-2014 Noise amendment Ch. 261
Ordinance 5-6-2014 Foreclosure, acquisition
and sale of St. Michael's
Monastery property
NCM
Ordinance 6-17-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
Ordinance 6-17-2014 Rent stabilization
amendment
Ch. 334
Ordinance 7-1-2014 Residency requirements Ch. 14
Ordinance 7-15-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
Ordinance 8-5-2014 Vacant buildings: baiting
for mice and rats
Ch. 108, Art. I
Ordinance 10-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:869
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance 10-21-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ordinance 10-21-2014 Bond NCM
Ordinance 11-5-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ordinance 11-5-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 11-18-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
Ordinance 11-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 11-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 11-18-2014 Littering amendment Ch. 239
Ordinance 12-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 12-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 12-16-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 155
Ordinance 12-16-2014 Solid waste: recycling
amendment
Ch. 359, Art. II
Ordinance 1-6-2015 Affordable housing:
development fees
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. I
Ordinance 1-6-2015 Rent stabilization
amendment
Ch. 334
Ordinance 1-6-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 366, Art. I
Ord. No.
012015
1-20-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ordinance 2-3-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
Ordinance 2-17-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 386
Ordinance 3-3-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 155
Ordinance 3-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 4-7-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16 (footnote
only)
§ DL-1 UNION CITY CODE § DL-1
1:870
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance 4-7-2015 Lease of wall area for
public service notice
billboard
NCM
Ordinance 5-5-2015 Notification of gas leaks NCM
Ordinance 5-19-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 386
Ordinance 6-30-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 366, Art. I
Ordinance 6-30-2015 Appropriation NCM
Ordinance 6-30-2015 Redevelopment plan NCM
Ordinance 7-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 7-14-2015 Peddling and soliciting:
peddlers, hawkers and
vendors amendment
Ch. 301, Art. II
Ord. No.
2015-7
7-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
Ordinance 8-18-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ordinance 9-1-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 9-1-2015 Smoking: sale of tobacco
products to minors
amendment
Ch. 351, Art. III
Ordinance 9-1-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 386
Ordinance 10-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 10-6-2015 Peace and good order:
nuisances prohibited
Ch. 296, Art. IV
Ordinance 10-6-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
excavations and openings
amendment
Ch. 366, Art. IV
Ordinance 11-4-2015 Building construction
standards: limitation on
construction hours
Ch. 426, Art. I
Ord. No.
2015-11
11-4-2015 Appropriation NCM
Ordinance 11-4-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ordinance 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:871
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 16
Ordinance 12-15-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ordinance 12-15-2015 Land development
amendment; streets and
sidewalks: public utility
poles and other utility
equipment and
installations amendment
Ch. 223; Ch. 366,
Art. VI
Ordinance 12-15-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ordinance 12-15-2015 Peace and good order:
short-term vacation
rentals
Ch. 296, Art. V
Ordinance 1-5-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 223
Ordinance 1-5-2016 Rent stabilization
amendment
Ch. 334
Ordinance 2-2-2016 Brush, grass, weeds and
trees: preservation of
trees
Ch. 87, Art. III
Ordinance 2-2-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk construction
amendment
Ch. 366, Art. V
Ordinance 2-2-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
underground fuel tanks
Ch. 366, Art. VII
Ordinance 2-16-2016 General provisions:
general penalty
amendment; Property
Maintenance Code
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. IV; Ch.
311, Art. I
Ordinance 2-16-2016 Licensing of businesses
and occupations
amendment
Ch. 234
Ordinance 2-16-2016 Noise repealer; peace and
good order: nuisances
prohibited amendment
Ch. 261 (reference
only); Ch. 296,
Art. IV
Ordinance 3-1-2016 Peace and good order:
short-term vacation
rentals amendment
Ch. 296, Art. V
§ DL-1 UNION CITY CODE § DL-1
1:872
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance 3-1-2016 Rent stabilization
amendment
Ch. 334
Ordinance 3-15-2016 Appropriation NCM
Ordinance 4-5-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 155
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:873